                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WHO ARE THE HAND-TO-MOUTH?

                                        Mark A. Aguiar
                                          Mark Bils
                                         Corina Boar

                                      Working Paper 26643
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26643


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We thank Nataliya Gimpelson, Stephan Gordeev, and Federico Kochen for excellent research
assistance on this project. We also thank Martin Blomhoff Holm, Matthew Knowles, Gianluca
Violante, and Ivan Werning for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Mark A. Aguiar, Mark Bils, and Corina Boar. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Who Are the Hand-to-Mouth?
Mark A. Aguiar, Mark Bils, and Corina Boar
NBER Working Paper No. 26643
January 2020
JEL No. E21

                                          ABSTRACT

Many households hold little wealth, especially liquid wealth. In precautionary savings models,
absent preference heterogeneity, these households should display not only higher marginal
propensities to consume (MPCs), but also lower average propensities to consume (APCs) and
higher future consumption growth. We see from the PSID that such "hand-to-mouth" households
actually display higher APCs and no faster spending growth. They also adjust spending to a
greater extent through the number of categories consumed. Consistent with a role for preference
heterogeneity, the panel data show that it is the propensity to be hand-to-mouth, not current
assets, that predicts high APC, low consumption growth, and other spending differences for the
hand-to-mouth. To identify the extent of preference heterogeneity, we consider the model of
Kaplan and Violante (2014) with both liquid and illiquid assets, but allow heterogeneity in
preferences. To match the data, the vast majority of poor hand-to-mouth must be impatient and
have a high intertemporal elasticity of substitution (IES). The richer, but illiquid, hand-to-mouth
are disproportionately high IES, though not impatient. Thus a high IES is a key determinant of
assets for households typically viewed as hand-to-mouth. The model additionally shows that
preferences play a prominent role in differences in MPCs across consumers.

Mark A. Aguiar                                   Corina Boar
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Princeton University                             New York University
Fisher Hall                                      19 West 4th Street
Princeton, NJ 08544-1021                         New York, NY 10003
and NBER                                         and NBER
mark@markaguiar.com                              corina.boar@gmail.com

Mark Bils
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
mark.bils@rochester.edu
1       Introduction
This paper explores why some agents hold low levels of wealth relative to income. The
question is of interest in its own right, as the answer deepens our understanding of micro
consumer behavior. Moreover, it also sheds light on an important component in the design
of optimal macro-policy. These so-called "hand-to-mouth" agents are often thought to have
a relatively large response to transfers and a muted response to changes in interest rates, and
thus feature prominently in the discussion of tax and transfer schemes to boost aggregate
output as well as the efficacy of monetary policy.1 To the extent that macro-policy analysis
relies on "getting the micro foundations right," it is crucial to correctly understand why so
many consumers find themselves with limited net worth or liquidity relative to income.
    The core paradigm of both the micro and macro literatures is the incomplete-markets
precautionary saving model in which consumers self-insure against idiosyncratic income risk
by saving in a non-contingent asset subject to a borrowing constraint.2 This model has
some key predictions that will guide our empirical work: (i) the consumption policy func-
tion is strictly concave in wealth, and hence the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) is
strictly decreasing; (ii) the average propensity to consume (APC), which is defined as current
consumption over total current income, is increasing in wealth, as low-wealth agents are ac-
tively saving away from the constraint; and (iii) expected consumption growth is decreasing
in wealth, as low-wealth agents are either constrained or in the process of building up their
buffer stock of savings.
    These predictions are comparative statics for fixed preferences as well as a given income
process and rate of return. If one allows the possibility of preference heterogeneity across
households, then these empirical predictions may be obscured, as a household's asset position
will reflect its preferences as well history of shocks. Using a simple numerical parameter-
ization, we show that, all else equal (including wealth), MPCs and APCs are decreasing
in the discount factor and increasing in the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution (IES).
In particular, a relatively impatient consumer at a given level of wealth consumes a larger
fraction of income (higher APC) and consumes more of any added income (higher MPC).
Similarly, given a discount factor that is less than the inverse gross interest rate, a con-
    1
     Many papers have modeled low-asset households as responding more to fiscal policies. Recent examples
include Kaplan and Violante (2014), Jappelli and Pistaferri (2014), Farhi and Werning (2017), McKay
and Reis (2016), Carroll, Slacalek, Tokuoka and White (2017), Kaplan, Moll and Violante (2018), and
Auclert (2019). A number of these papers also make clear that hand-to-mouth agents will display a smaller
direct intertemporal substitution response to interest rates, though they may respond more through indirect
channels, such as the income and wealth effects, resulting from interest rate changes (e.g., Auclert (2019),
Kaplan et al. (2018)).
   2
     Just a few of the many papers in this vein are Schechtman and Escudero (1977), Imrohoroglu (1989),
Deaton (1991), Carroll (1992), Huggett (1993), and Aiyagari (1994).


                                                     2
sumer with a larger IES has a greater propensity to front-load consumption, and thus also
has higher marginal and average propensities to consume. Moreover, all else equal, expected
consumption growth is increasing in the discount factor and decreasing in the IES. Therefore,
for data composed of consumers with heterogeneous preferences, the relationship between
wealth and consumption behavior is muddied. Using the standard model, we argue that
measures beyond the household's current asset position, including its measured APC and
especially its longer-term propensity to be at low assets, are useful for identifying the role of
preference heterogeneity.
    Guided by these predictions, we explore empirical consumption behavior using the Panel
Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Our first order of business is to identify in the data
those consumers that are likely to behave like the low-wealth agents in the model. Following
Zeldes (1989), we define low-net worth households as potentially "hand-to-mouth," denoted
H 2MN W . An alternative subsample of interest are higher net worth individuals that have
negligible or negative liquid assets, the group Kaplan, Violante and Weidner (2014) refer to
as the "wealthy hand-to-mouth," which we denote H 2MLIQ . On average, we label about 40
percent of households as hand-to-mouth based on either low net worth or low liquid wealth,
with a little over half of these classified as low net-worth.
    We employ nine waves of the PSID, following households' income, assets, and spending for
a period of up seventeen years. In particular, we can track how a household's hand-to-mouth
status evolves over time. That allows us to relate a household's spending behavior separately
to its current hand-to-mouth status as well as its propensity to appear hand-to-mouth in
other surveys.
    Controlling for demographics, we find that the hand-to-mouth, by either measure, do not
have higher realized future consumption growth than those with higher net worth or liquidity,
despite having higher future income growth and potentially being financially constrained.
However, once we include a fixed effect, the low-net-worth display a significantly higher rate
of consumption growth going forward, consistent with the basic model.
    The importance of including a fixed effect appears throughout the empirical work, speak-
ing to the importance of underlying heterogeneity. To get a sense of why the fixed effect plays
a significant role, we measure the fraction of waves in the PSID sample in which each house-
hold is H 2MN W or H 2MLIQ . Dropping the fixed effect and adding this frequency control
yields estimates that are close to the fixed-effects estimates, suggesting that the heterogeneity
that is important for consumption growth projects on the frequency of the hand-to-mouth
status. Accordingly, conditional on current H 2M status, those that are frequently hand-to-
mouth have significantly lower consumption growth on average, while conditional on type
(as measured by frequency), current H 2M status predicts faster consumption growth.


                                               3
    Viewed through the lens of the standard model, the heterogeneity in consumption growth
rates could reflect preference heterogeneity, differences in income risk, or differences in rates of
return on financial assets. We find that a large majority of H 2M households, especially those
H 2MN W have considerable liquid debt such as credit card debt. The return on discharging
such debts should be quite high. For this reason, we view a low marginal return on savings
as the least promising avenue for explaining the low savings rates for low-asset households.
    To explore differences in income and consumption volatility, we regress the absolute value
of the change in log income and log consumption on lagged hand-to-mouth status. We find
that the those households prone to being hand-to-mouth actually exhibit higher income and
consumption volatility. Going further, we show more precisely that the frequently H 2M
exhibit greater transitory income risk. Such risk calls for greater precautionary saving,
behavior opposite to what we see in our data.
    The standard model's prediction that low-wealth agents have a higher rate of savings is
also not present in the data. Specifically, the H 2MN W have a higher average propensity to
consume out of income. We show this is a persistent trait of those prone to hand-to-mouth
status, indicating that the low net-worth households (relative to income) are not temporally
in that state due to bad luck, but rather appear to have a low target wealth-to-income level.
    Perhaps the most relevant prediction of the standard model for macro policy is that the
hand-to-mouth have a higher marginal propensity to consume. We regress the growth in
expenditures on the growth in income (and demographic controls) to estimate a marginal
propensity to consume out of income (MPCY); the MPCY is the standard MPC plus the
impact of current income changes on anticipated future income draws. We estimate a higher
MPCY for low-wealth households. Most striking, it is a household's long-run propensity to be
hand-to-mouth, not its current status that drives the differences in MPCYs. Household that
are frequently hand-to-mouth, either based on net worth or liquid wealth, display higher
MPCYs. By contrast, conditioning on those frequencies, currently being hand-to-mouth
does not predict a higher MPCY. These findings are consistent with the standard model's
prediction that households with either a low discount factor or a high IES will exhibit higher
marginal propensities to consume, even if their assets are not below their target level.
    The preceding results focused on the aggregate basket of consumption expenditures. The
PSID and the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE) collect expenditure on disaggregated
components of expenditure. Using this data, we explore whether hand-to-mouth households
allocate their nondurable expenditures differently across categories. We find that, controlling
for total expenditures, the hand-to-mouth consume fewer categories. However, in response
to a change in expenditure, the hand-to-mouth are much more prone to adjust the number
of goods consumed. That is, the hand-to-mouth are much more elastic on the extensive


                                                 4
margin than the non-hand-to-mouth. As with the other spending regularities, it is a house-
hold's propensity for being hand-to-mouth, not its current status, that predicts this greater
responsiveness in the number of categories.
    The fact that the extensive margin is the relevant margin of adjustment for the hand-to-
mouth is consistent with a relatively elastic response of total expenditure to movements in
inter-temporal prices; that is, a higher IES. We show this formally in a simple example in
the appendix, but the intuition is familiar from the role the extensive margin plays in labor
supply elasticities (Rogerson, 1988) or risk-preferences in portfolio choice (Grossman and
Laroque, 1990, Chetty and Szeidl, 2007). A high IES is also theoretically consistent with the
low target net-worth of the hand-to-mouth and the excess volatility of consumption relative
to income found in the data.
    The empirical facts documented in the paper make a compelling case that preference
heterogeneity plays a role in determining hand-to-mouth status. A natural assumption is
that those prone to low assets are relatively impatient. However, we show that in the
standard one-asset model, a high IES can lead to very similar policy functions as impatience.
Moreover, the extensive margin analysis suggests differences that potentially relate to the
IES rather than discount rates. To identify these parameters separately, we consider the
two-asset framework of Kaplan and Violante (2014) (KV) in which agents allocate wealth
between liquid and illiquid assets. As a higher IES implies a willingness to adjust the timing
of consumption, more elastic consumers have a lower demand for liquidity all else equal.
Using Epstein-Zin preferences, we distinguish this from risk aversion.
    We allow for four types of agents, defined by two discount factors (0.90 and 0.95 on an
annualized basis) and two magnitudes for the IES. (0.5 and 1.5). We calibrate the respective
shares of each type to match the average ratios of net-worth to income and illiquid assets to
income, as well as the share of consumers that have low net worth or low liquidity. To match
these targets, the model requires three-quarters of the population to have the higher discount
factor and a low IES. However, the vast majority of the low-net-worth hand-to-mouth are
both relatively impatient and have the higher IES. That this type constitutes over two-thirds
of low net-worth individuals is striking, given their calibrated share of the overall population
is only one-sixth. Patient but elastic consumers are rare in the overall population, but
comprise a quarter of the wealthy but illiquid sub-population. A key takeaway is therefore
that the hand-to-mouth (defined by either net worth or liquidity) tend to be relatively
elastic with respect to inter-temporal substitution. We also find no role for impatient and
inelastic agents; that is, the poor hand-to-mouth almost exclusively reflects the combination
of impatience and high inter-temporal elasticity, while a high IES, not a low discount factor
(or risk aversion), is most important for generating wealthier households without liquidity.


                                               5
    We find that preference heterogeneity plays a major role in differences in MPCs across
consumers for our calibrated model. The poor hand-to-mouth in our two-asset KV model
have a high MPC, not only because they have low wealth, but also because they are much
more likely to be low-discount-factor/high-IES consumers. The wealthy hand-to-mouth are
also relatively high-IES consumers, contributing to a higher MPC. Moreover, their high IES
implies that these agents are willing to bear the volatility associated with extreme illiquidity,
and therefore have a high MPC for the familiar reason of being hard up against a constraint
(or at a kink) in their borrowing.
    Finally, we show that the effective IES of hand-to-mouth households can be as high
as for other households. While the hand-to-mouth are disproportionately at a borrowing
constraint (or kink) muting the intertemporal response, those not literally at a constraint
will be especially responsive. This is a compositional effect­being hand-to-mouth largely
reflects having a high IES. Thus, except when they are literally at a constraint, these agents
will be more sensitive to the intertemporal terms-of-trade implications of monetary policy as
well as such policies as cash-for-clunkers or sales-tax holidays. It also implies that delaying
insurance, such as until social security eligibility, may not be as costly for the hand-to-mouth.
    Our paper intersects with an enormous empirical literature on how spending responds to
income. Havranek and Sokolova (2019) reference many of these studies, as they perform a
meta analysis of 144 such studies. Our estimates of spending responses to income perhaps
most parallel results in Fisher, Johnson, Smeeding and Thompson (2019), who also examine
spending responses to income stratifying PSID households by their assets. Our empirical
work differs from the many papers in this literature, in that we focus on a much broader set
of empirical regularities, including the spending growth, spending volatility, and spending
allocation of low-asset households. More importantly, we stress from the panel data that the
key predictor for a household's spending is not its current assets, but rather the longer-run
positioning of its assets.
    Our work also intersects with a large literature identifying preference heterogeneity. Re-
cent examples include Parker (2017), Gelman (2019), Athreya, Mustre-del-R´          io and S´
                                                                                            anchez
(2019), and Calvet, Campbell, Gomes and Sodini (2019). Our work is especially comple-
mentary to Calvet et al. (2019), who also find support for heterogenity in both the IES and
discount factors across a sample of Swedish households.3
  3
    They draw this conclusion from the heterogeneity in how households reduce savings as the need for
precautionary savings decline.




                                                 6
2    H2M in the Canonical IM Model
To motivate our empirical exploration of the hand-to-mouth, we review the canonical savings
model in which agents use a non-contingent asset to smooth idiosyncratic income fluctua-
tions. In Section 5, we extend the model to include both liquid and illiquid assets along the
lines of Kaplan and Violante (2014); for the current motivational section, we present the
standard single-asset environment.
    Specifically, suppose agents are infinitely lived and receive a stochastic endowment yt
that follows a first-order Markov chain on support {y1 , ..., yN }, with 0 < y1 < ... < yN < .
Preferences over consumption streams are given by:
                                               
                                           E          t u(ct ),
                                               t=0


where   (0, 1) and the expectation is conditional on some initial state. We assume u takes
the CRRA form:
                                       
                                        c1- if  = 1
                                u(c) = 1-
                                       ln c if  = 1.

The parameter   1/ is the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution (IES). The IES and
discount factor will be the focus of the comparative statics below. With power utility, the
IES and the coefficient of relative risk aversion are reciprocal pairs. Our language emphasizes
the IES, as the extension presented in Section 5 with Epstein-Zin preferences and liquid and
illiquid assets indicates that the IES is a key determinant of liquid wealth holdings.
     The agent has access to a non-contingent savings vehicle that has gross return R = 1+ r <
 -1 . The environment is partial equilibrium and we take R to be a primitive of the model.
The level of assets is restricted to be above some threshold a  0. At the start of period t,
the agent has resources ("cash on hand") xt  Rat + yt to allocate to consumption and next
period's assets at+1 . The agent's problem can be expressed in recursive form by:

                        V (x, y ) = max u(c) +  E [V (Ra + y , y ) | y ]
                                   c,a a

                                        subject to a + c  x.

Let C (x, y ) denote the associated optimal consumption function. Letting ct = C (xt , yt ),




                                                     7
consumption satisfies the usual Euler Equation:
                                                        1
                                                       -
                                                ct+1
                                     Et R                     1,                                   (1)
                                                 ct

with equality when at+1 > a.
    We define the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) as  C /x. As is well known (see
Carroll and Kimball, 1996), in this environment C is a strictly increasing and concave function
of x. Hence, the MPC is well-defined almost everywhere and decreasing in the level of assets.
    A voluminous literature uses this fact to proxy MPC with some measure of wealth (or
liquid wealth). A complication is that the consumption function is defined for a particular
utility function, borrowing constraint, and process for income. It is not generally the case
that the MPC is monotonic in assets when comparing across people with distinct preferences
at a point in time, or, if the process for income changes, across time for the same person.
    More generally, consider an individual with relatively low assets compared to the popu-
lation average. Such a low asset position may be a consequence of a string of low income
realizations. Alternatively, the individual may have preferences that imply a low target level
of assets. A potentially useful concept to sort between these forces is the average propensity
to consume (APC) out of income:

                                                       C (x, y )
                                       AP C (x, y )              ,
                                                       ra + y

which is well defined whenever ra + y > 0.4
   To understand the mapping between APC and resources, we can rewrite the flow budget
constraint as:

                                        a -a
                                               = 1 - AP C,
                                        ra + y

where a is start-of-period assets and a is next period's asset position. Hence, assets are
accumulating when AP C < 1. That is, whether AP C  1 is a signal that the agent's asset
position is above or below their "target".
    If asset dynamics are monotone (that is, a - a is decreasing in a given y ) and r  0, then
APC is increasing in a for a given level of income. That is, APC is monotonically related
to x conditional on income, and hence to MPC. In many datasets that include consumption
  4
    In the simulations below, we assume ra + y > 0, so the APC is always well defined. In the empirical
work, we do encounter negative denominators, but not zero. However, only very few households have a
negative APC and we exclude them from the sample.



                                                  8
expenditures, we have arguably more reliable measures of income than wealth; so APC,
being normalized by flow income, is a useful empirical proxy for x and MPC.
    Given R < 1, the stationary process for yt , and the specification of preferences, there
exists a unique ergodic distribution for (at , yt ), denoted (a, y ).5 Integrating the budget
constraint over the distribution , we define the target wealth a by:

                                      1
                                a =          C (Ra + y, y )d - 1 .
                                      r

That is, a is the mean of the ergodic distribution for assets, integrating the ergodic distri-
bution over both assets and income. Similarly, we can let x  Ra + y      ¯ denote the ergodic
mean of xt , where y
                   ¯ is the ergodic mean of the endowment process.
   To present the key predictions of the model used in the empirical analysis, we solve the
model numerically. Specifically, following Krueger, Mitman and Perri (2016), we postulate
that income evolves according to:

                                       ln yt = zt + t
                                          zt = zt-1 + t ,

                   2               2
where t  N (0,       ), t  N 0,        and we set  = 0.97,  = 0.20 and  = 0.23.
    We set R = 1.04 and consider two alternative values for   {0.90, 0.95}. We also let the
IES take on two possible values   {0.5, 1.5}.6 Note that for a given individual, preferences
are fixed, but, given the two-dimensional heterogeneity, there are four possible preference
configurations. We load the heterogeneity on preference parameters, but the alternative
discount factors can also proxy for (permanent) differences in financial returns. That is, if
an individual has access to a high-return savings vehicle that another individual with the
same preferences lacks, then R will differ across the two in the same fashion as a difference
in discount factors. A separate issue is if returns vary by scale, say, due to a fixed cost of
access. In this case, the level of assets will also reflect variation in returns, mitigating the
negative impact of wealth on expected consumption growth described below. We discuss
this point in more detail in the empirical section.
    In Figure 1 Panel (a), we plot C (., y
                                         ¯) against x, where y
                                                             ¯ is the ergodic mean of the income
process. The fact that y is held constant implies that a is varying as we move along the
horizontal axis. The four lines represent the four alternative preference parameterizations.
The large dot represents the ergodic mean x for each set of preferences.
  5
   See A¸cikg¨
             oz (2016).
  6
   Havrnek (2015) conducts a meta-study of IES estimates in the literature, reporting a median of 0.5.
Kaplan and Violante (2014), citing the asset-pricing literature, choose an IES of 1.5.


                                                  9
                         Figure 1: The Consumption Policy Function
           (a) Consumption Policy                         (b) Marginal Propensity to Consume




    (c) Average Propensity to Consume                     (d) Expected Consumption Growth




Note: Panel (a) depicts C (·, y ) as a function of x, with y set to its mean value in all panels. Panel
(b) depicts  C (x, y )/x as a function of x. Panel (c) depicts C (x, y )/(y + ra) as a function of x.
                         C (x ,y )
Panel (d) depicts E ln    C (x,y )   as a function of x, where the expectation is over y conditional on
y = y with x = Ra + y and a = x - C (x, a).




                                                    10
     The consumption functions are strictly increasing and concave. For a given level of
resources, consumption is decreasing in  and increasing in the IES. The reason that con-
sumption is increasing in the IES is that R < 1 in all specifications. Hence, there is an
incentive to front-load consumption, and this incentive increases with the inter-temporal
elasticity of substitution.
     Note that two alternative preference specifications yield very similar consumption func-
tions and associated target assets. Specifically, the case of ( = 0.9,  = 0.5) and ( =
0.95,  = 1.5) track each other closely. This highlights that relative impatience and a high
elasticity both push towards a low target level of assets.
     This analysis suggests (at least) four possibilities for why an individual has low levels of
assets. One is the traditional model of uniform preferences, in which a low-wealth agent, due
to a sequence of low income draws, is temporarily below their target wealth. The second,
also familiar from the literature, is that the agent is relatively impatient. The third, which
is perhaps less familiar, is that the agent has a high elasticity of inter-temporal substitution
(assuming that R < 1). A fourth possibility is differences in the income process, particularly
a high anticipated growth rate or low volatility, which reduces the demand for precautionary
savings. The latter three generate low wealth positions due to low target wealth, while the
first is due to "bad luck." Identifying these four forces in the data will be one focus of the
empirical work.
     In Panel (b), we plot M P C (., y¯) against x. As already discussed, for each preference
specification, the MPC is strictly decreasing in x, reflecting the concavity of C . Looking
across preferences at a given level of resources, the MPC is decreasing in  and increasing
in the IES.
     For an intuition for why MPC is so sensitive to preferences, consider an increase of x
in period t holding constant y . To map out the response of consumption, consider the
unconstrained Euler Equation Et (R)k (ct+k /ct )- = 1 for k  1. A small increase in x
given y can be accommodated by increasing ct+k proportionally at all k  0. While this new
allocation satisfies the Euler Equation wherever it holds, it is not a true optimal response as
it ignores the fact that in some states the Euler Equation may not be satisfied with equality.
Nevertheless, it is a useful thought exercise to provide some intuition. As the increase is
proportional in every period, the initial level change in consumption (the discrete version of
the MPC) is increasing in the initial level of consumption. For a given x, the more front
loaded is consumption, the greater the MPC. Hence, for a given x, the MPC is increasing in
the IES and decreasing in  , as depicted in the figure.
     Interestingly, for low  preferences, the IES has a fairly big impact on the MPC for
asset levels near the target. For the relatively patient specifications, the impact on MPC is


                                               11
primarily intermediated through the large difference in target wealth. This reflects that as
R  1, there is less of an incentive to inter-temporally substitute consumption, and the
IES becomes less relevant in determining steady state assets.
    Panel (c) of Figure 1 depicts the APC as a function of x. For fixed preferences, this
relationship is monotonic.7 However, for a given x, there is substantial variation across
preference specifications. Recall that an APC of one implies stationary assets given an
income level; hence, the APCs at the respective mean assets are clustered near one (it is not
exact as APC is a nonlinear function of x, and also because x is integrated over the ergodic
distribution of y as well as x). We will use the fact that comparing individuals across wealth
positions for a given APC identifies variation due to preferences.
    Panel (d) plots the expected consumption growth as a function of x, still for y = y .8
Expected log consumption is computed by integrating over the policy function for each
possible draw of next period's earnings, with transition probabilities conditional on mean
y today and next period assets governed by the policy function associated with (x, y ). For
intuition, if consumption growth is approximately log-normally distributed, we can log-
linearize the Euler Equation (1) as:

                                                           1
                            Et  ln ct+1      ln(R) +         V art ( ln ct+1 ).                         (2)
                                                          2

This suggests that a consumer will have relatively large expected consumption growth if
(i) they are constrained; (ii) they are relatively patient (high R); (iii) they have a relatively
low IES (low  , assuming R < 1); and/or (iv) they have a relatively large demand for
precautionary savings (a large conditional variance of consumption growth scaled by risk
aversion 1/ ).
    Taking stock, the standard model predicts that, for a given set of preferences, low-wealth
households should exhibit higher MPCs, higher expected rates of consumption growth, and
lower APCs. But, these predictions are sensitive to preference heterogeneity. The usual
approach is to assume ex ante identical individuals. In that environment, low wealth is
due to the idiosyncratic history of income realizations. Moreover, there is a tight mapping
between resources on hand and MPC. Allowing for preference heterogeneity muddies the
picture. In the remainder of the paper, we present a series of empirical exercises to elucidate
what determines who has low wealth.
   7
     The relationship is monotonic for the mean income level, which is the case depicted. However, for the
lowest income states we do find that the APC eventually declines in a as a becomes very large. This reflects
the presence of a in the denominator of the APC.
   8
     By definition, the average consumption growth integrated over the ergodic distribution of x and y is
zero. Integrated over income states, the average expected consumption growth at x is much closer to zero.



                                                    12
3    Data
Our empirical work is primarily conducted on the PSID, employing its biennial surveys from
1999 to 2015. 1999 was the onset of the PSID measuring wealth in each survey. It also
initiated the PSID including spending more broadly than on food and housing. The data
appendix discusses our variable constructions and sample restrictions in detail. Here we
highlight the key variables for our analysis of earnings, income, wealth, and expenditures.
    In the next section we identify households as hand-to-mouth, following Zeldes (1989) and
Kaplan et al. (2014), by assets relative to a measure of earnings. Our earnings measure equals
labor income, net of payroll taxes, plus government transfers received. We also consider a
broader measure of after-tax income, for instance for calculating a household's APC. After-
tax income is the sum of earnings and transfer income, net profits from business or farm, and
net income from assets, minus the family's federal and state income tax liabilities calculated
by TAXSIM. For homeowners we include 6 percent of the home value as implicit rent, while
subtracting associated property taxes, mortgage interest, and home insurance. Our division
of assets by liquidity largely follows Kaplan et al. (2014). For liquid net worth we sum
checking and savings balances, money market funds, certificates of deposit, treasury bills,
and stocks outside of pension funds, while subtracting debts in the forms of credit and store
cards, student loans, medical or legal debt, and debt owed to family. Illiquid assets reflect
home and other real estate equity, IRA/pension holding, non-government bonds, insurance
equity, and the net value of any business, farm, or vehicles. All nominal variables are
converted to 2009 CPI-deflated dollars.
    Measured expenditures include shelter, utilities, food, gasoline, health insurance and
medical expenses, education, child care, public transportation, and vehicles spending for pur-
chases, repairs, insurance and parking. Spending on shelter equals rent payments for renters;
for homeowners we set it to 6 percent of respondent's valuation of the home. Summing cat-
egories, expenditures average 58.3 percent of after-tax income for our sample. Unless stated
otherwise, our results reflect spending on all these categories. But our results are robust if
we exclude spending on the durable categories of vehicle purchases and repair.
    Our sample reflects only the PSID's nationally representative core sample, including
its "split-off" families and PSID sample extensions to better represent dynasties of recent
immigrants. (All results reflect PSID longitudinal family weights.) We restrict our sample to
households with heads ages 25 to 64 and for which we can measure hand-to-mouth status from
wealth and earnings for at least three surveys. We exclude households with less than $2,000
in annual earnings plus transfers, after-tax income, or expenditures. The data appendix
details the impact of these sample restrictions.


                                             13
4       Empirical Results
4.1     Identifying the Hand-to-Mouth
As depicted in Figure 1, consumption in the standard model is highly non-linear at low
levels of resources, with the MPC quickly declining in wealth and then "flattening out" at
higher asset positions. Various measures have been introduced to identify which individuals
in the data are likely to be on their highly non-linear regions of their consumption functions.
The early and influential paper by Zeldes (1989) distinguished individuals by net worth.
Specifically, Zeldes considered an individual "constrained" if their net worth was less than
two months of labor earnings. Following Zeldes, we therefore define an agent as hand-to-
mouth based on net worth (denoted H 2MN W ) if their net worth is less than two months
labor earnings.
    Kaplan et al. (2014) (henceforth KVW) pursue an alternative measure of constraints.
These authors focus on liquidity rather than wealth. In particular, they divide assets into
net illiquid wealth versus net liquid wealth. They define an individual as constrained if
liquid wealth is close to a borrowing limit or if liquid wealth is close to zero. Specifically,
they define the borrowing limit of an individual to be 18.5% of annual earnings. An individual
is considered constrained if they have a negative liquid net worth position within one week of
earnings of the borrowing limit, or if they have positive liquid wealth but the position is less
than one week of earnings. The latter criteria is designed to identify individuals at a "kink"
in the budget set near zero liquid assets due to the difference between borrowing and saving
interest rates. Note that KVW's definition focuses only on liquid net worth, and is designed
to include agents with high levels of total net worth (the "wealthy hand-to-mouth"). We
therefore assign an individual to be wealthy hand-to-mouth (denoted H 2MLIQ ) if they are
not H 2MN W , but have liquid net worth that satisfies the KVW criteria.
    In our PSID sample, an average of 40.2% of the households (pooling across waves) are
hand-to-mouth, with 22.7% denoted H 2MN W and 17.5% denoted H 2MLIQ . That is, 17.5%
of the sample is liquidity constrained according to the KVW definition, but have sufficient
total net worth to be considered unconstrained by the Zeldes measure. As Table 1 shows,
16.6% of the sample is both net worth and liquidity constrained, which we assign to the low-
net-worth H 2MN W category; that is, 74% of the H 2MN W group would also satisfy the KVW
liquidity-constrained definition.9 We also constructed these shares for the seven waves of the
    9
    For comparison, Zeldes classified 29% of his (earlier) PSID sample as hand-to-mouth using his net-worth
definition. KVW classify roughly 31% of their Survey of Consumer Finance sample as liquidity constrained,
compared to 34.1% in our PSID sample (spread over both measures). KVW classify 20% percent as "wealthy
hand-to-mouth," compared to 17.5% of our PSID sample.



                                                    14
Survey of Consumer Finance (SCF) from 1998 to 2016. The respective household shares for
not hand-to-mouth, H 2MN W , and H 2MLIQ are 62.5%, 25.0%, and 12.5%, similar to our
counts from the PSID.
                               Table 1: Hand-to-Mouth Groups

                                  Not H 2M         H 2MN W     H 2MLIQ

                      Shares        59.7%           22.7%       17.5%



                                                   By LIQ (KVW)
                         By NW (Zeldes)        Not H 2M        H 2M

                         Not H 2M                  59.7%       17.5%

                         H 2M                      6.1%        16.6%




4.2    Characteristics of the H2M
Table 2 provides some summary statistics for the hand-to-mouth. Specifically, we compute
statistics based on whether a household is designated as one of our H2M measures in a given
year. This implies that the same household may be represented in multiple columns, albeit
in different waves of the survey.
    First compare the hand-to-mouth based on net worth (H 2MN W ) in the second column to
those not hand-to-mouth in the first column. These hand-to-mouth are younger on average
by 7 years, their earnings and incomes are only half as much, and of course their wealth,
both liquid and illiquid is much lower. Turning to the wealthy hand-to-mouth (H 2MLIQ ),
we see they are not really so wealthy. In particular their median net worth is less than 30
percent of that of the households classified as not hand-to-mouth by either measure. In all
other variables they are intermediate to the groups in columns 1 and 2. They more closely
resemble those not hand-to-mouth in age, but better resemble the poor hand-to-mouth in
terms of earnings and income.
    One possible source of differences in consumption growth rates is heterogeneity in ex-
pected rates of return. In particular, if low-asset households face a lower marginal return
on savings, this could push them towards lower expected consumption growth. The variable
High Liquid Debt in Table 2 reports the fraction of households, by group, that have balances
on credit cards, store credit, student loans, medical or legal bills, or loans from family that

                                              15
sum to at least one month of household earnings. A large share of H 2M households exhibit
such high debts. More exactly, two-thirds of H 2MN W and over half of H 2MLIQ households
do, compared to only a fourth for those not hand-to-mouth. The bulk of such debts, espe-
cially credit card debt provide a high return to such households.10 For this reason, we do not
explicitly pursue a low marginal return as an explanation for lower expected consumption
growth for low-asset households. But we note that the heterogeneity in preference discount
factors we entertain below could alternatively be interpreted as combined heterogeneity in
discount factors and market rates of return.

                    Table 2: Summary Characteristics of the Hand-to-Mouth

                                               Not H 2M          H 2MN W         H 2MLIQ

                 Age                               46.6             39.8           44.5
                 Income                          96,660           46,781          64,058
                 Earnings                        88,908           44,664          55,695
                 Liq Wealth (median)             13,918           - 7,719         - 2,731
                 Net Worth (median)              175,823          - 2,498         50,389
                 High Liquid Debt                 24.7%            66.1%          54.4%
                 Sample Shares                    59.7%            22.7%           17.5%
              Note: All figures in 2009 dollars. Sample is PSID 1999-2015, with H2M status
              observed at least three times. High Liquid Debt equals one for households with
              credit card, store credit, student loans, medical or legal bills, or loans from
              family that sum to a month's or more of earnings, zero otherwise.


    Table 3 reports transition probabilities into and out of the H2M categories. As the
PSID waves are two years apart, we report two-year and four-year transition rates. The
large diagonal elements reflect significant persistence in H2M status. This persistence is
particularly striking given that reporting errors for household income and wealth no doubt
create spurious transitions. In particular Panel A shows that those classified as H2M by net
worth in a given year have a 65% chance of remaining in that status and a 16% chance of
transitioning to the liquidity based measure of H 2M status; this leaves only a 19% chance
that after two years an individual has become "unconstrained" by either definition. From
Panel B we see that, even four years out, H 2MN W households exhibit a 58% probability
of retaining that status, and only a 24% probability of being not hand-to-mouth by either
  10
     PSID surveys for 2011 and later allow us to separately identify credit card debt. Households categorized
as hand-to-mouth are twice as likely to have credit card debt of a month's earnings or more. The incidence
is 29.2% and 30.6% respectively for H 2MN W and H 2MLIQ , compared to 14.5% for households not hand-
to-mouth by net worth or liquid wealth.

                                                     16
measure. By contrast, for those households unconstrained at t by either measure, these
probabilities are respectively 6% and 81%. This persistence is consistent with findings in
Athreya et al. (2019) that less than 10 percent of households, those with repeat episodes
of delinquent loans, account for half of all experiences of such financial distress. For the
wealthier H 2MLIQ , there is a 42% chance of transiting out of H2M status altogether at t + 2
and a 48% chance of doing so by t + 4. While higher than the corresponding probability for
the poor H 2MN W , these are still quite low given that, at the median, these households have
net worth exceeding $50, 000 (as reported in Table 2).

                      Table 3: Transition Probabilities of H2M Status

                                    Not H 2M (t)        H 2MN W (t)       H 2MLIQ (t)
                                                          Panel A
            Not H 2M (t + 2)             .823               .194              .424

            H 2MN W (t + 2)              .059               .648              .176

            H 2MLIQ (t + 2)              .119               .158              .400
                                                          Panel B
            Not H 2M (t + 4)             .808               .236              .480

            H 2MN W (t + 4)              .064               .584              .181

            H 2MLIQ (t + 4)              .128               .180              .339
           Note: Sample is PSID 1999-2015, with H2M status observed at least three times.




4.3    Income and Consumption Growth
Standard consumption smoothing arguments suggest that an individual who expects their
income to be higher in the future should draw down assets or increase debt today. Hence,
low-wealth individuals may anticipate relative faster income growth compared to their higher
wealth counterparts. Similarly, in the model of Section 2, an individual that is constrained
will have an Euler equation that holds with an inequality. All else equal, this suggests a
relatively higher anticipated growth in consumption. As shown in Figure 1 Panel (d), even
when the borrowing constraint is not binding and the Euler equation holds with equality, a
low-wealth individual has relatively high growth in consumption going forward, as the agent
rebuilds its target level of assets.

                                                17
    With this logic in mind, we turn to the empirical relationship between H 2M status
and the growth of income and consumption. We regress the (annualized) log growth in
income (earnings plus financial income) and the log growth in consumption (durables plus
nondurables) on dummies indicating hand-to-mouth status (one each for our two H 2M
measures), as well as demographic controls described below. Specifically, growth rates are
the log difference between year t and the subsequent wave in year t + 2, where we divide
the log difference by two to compute the annualized growth rate. Hand-to-mouth status is
defined as of year t. Hence, the specification asks whether on average the hand-to-mouth
have relatively higher income or consumption growth over the subsequent two years.
    In our baseline specification, we do not include individual fixed effects. Throughout the
paper, our baseline demographic controls for specifications in which the dependent variable
is in levels consist of a cubic in age, three race dummies, a marital status dummy, and
five family size dummies. In the specifications that include fixed effects, we drop the race
dummies. If the dependent variable is a change or growth rate, the demographic controls
are a quadratic in age, two dummies for the change in marital status, and the change in the
number of family members. All regressions include dummies for the year of the survey.
    The results are reported in Table 4. The first three columns report estimates for income
growth and the final three columns report consumption growth. In each panel, Column (1)
does not include fixed effects, while Column (2) does. We postpone discussing Column (3)'s
specification.
    For income growth, the specification without fixed effects suggests that both the H 2MN W
and the H 2MLIQ each have about a one percentage point higher growth rate than the non-
H2M. Adding the fixed effect increases the differences by a factor of two to three.
    Turning to consumption growth, absent fixed effects there is little difference between the
H 2MN W and those with higher net worth, while the wealthier hand-to-mouth (H 2MLIQ )
show about a one percentage point lower consumption growth than the other groups. But
these effects are significantly different controlling for household fixed effects. Controlling
for fixed effects, low-net-worth households have a significantly higher rate of consumption
growth; in particular, the coefficient on H 2MN W is 2.5 log points. Including a fixed effect
controls for (permanent) differences between households, including differences in preferences
or rates of return. Including fixed effects, the point estimate on H 2MLIQ is essentially zero,
suggesting that the wealthier hand-to-mouth do not have different consumption growth going
forward than wealthy households with more liquid wealth. One interpretation of the latter
fact is that the wealthy hand-to-mouth do not need to reduce consumption in order to build
up a buffer stock of precautionary saving, as they have the option of converting illiquid to
liquid wealth in response to large shocks to income.


                                              18
    The respective third columns in each panel of Table (4) provide a sense of why including
a fixed effect has a large impact on the baseline estimates. We drop the fixed effect and
add controls for how frequently a household is denoted hand-to-mouth in the sample. This
captures whether a household tends to have low net worth or liquidity on average. Those
with a relatively frequent rate of hand-to-mouth status are interpreted as having a low
target for net worth or liquidity; however, given the relatively short time sample, some
of the average undoubtedly reflects realized shocks as well as ex ante targets. Including
the frequency of hand-to-mouth status brings the baseline coefficients in line with the fixed-
effects estimates. Moreover, conditional on current hand-to-mouth status, an individual that
frequently finds itself designated as H 2MN W or H 2MLIQ tends to have significantly lower
income and consumption growth. The relatively low rate of consumption growth is consistent
with H 2M individuals having a lower discount factor (relative to return on savings) or a
higher IES. Interestingly, households that tend (on average) to have low net worth or liquidity
do not have a steeper income profile, as suggested by consumption smoothing logic; in fact,
the opposite is true.

            Table 4: Consumption and Income Growth for the Hand-to-Mouth

                                    Income Growth               Consumption Growth
                                  (1)       (2)         (3)       (1)      (2)       (3)
             H 2MN W             .012      .033     .038         .003      .025     .025
                                (.004)    (.007)   (.008)       (.004)    (.006)   (.007)

             H 2MLIQ             .010      .025     .028         -.009     .003     .002
                                (.004)    (.006)   (.006)       (.004)    (.005)   (.005)

             Fraction                               -.045                           -.038
             time H 2MN W                          (.009)                          (.009)

             Fraction                               -.043                           -.025
             time H 2MLIQ                          (.008)                          (.007)

             Fixed Effects        No       Yes          No        No       Yes       No
            Note: Sample size is 19,105. Growth rates are annualized. Not H2M group is
            omitted in all regressions. Sample is PSID 1999-2015, with H2M status observed
            at least three times. Regressions include controls for changes in family size or
            marital status, age, and year. Standard errors are clustered at household level.


   From Table 2, households that are frequently hand-to-mouth are on average younger
and have lower earnings. In Appendix A2.1 we examine rates of spending growth dividing


                                                   19
the sample between households with heads ages 25 to 39 versus age 40 to 64. (Note, the
regressions reported in the text tables also include age controls.) Households frequently hand-
to-mouth continue to display notably lower spending growth; but for H 2MLIQ households
this effect is more pronounced for younger households. In the appendix we also examine
spending growth after dividing households with respect to long-term earnings.11 Of course,
there is no presumption that differences in preferences are orthogonal to earnings.12 But it is
useful to examine high and low-earnings households separately because it partially controls
for: (a) the possibility of scale effects in savings returns, and (b) a differential importance
of government savings (e.g., Social Security) in discouraging savings. Separating by long-
term income, we continue to see lower rates of spending growth for households that are
frequently hand-to-mouth; but this effect is smaller and not statistically significant for the
higher-income households that are hand-are-mouth only due to low liquid assets.
    An additional control that is implied by the standard model is the volatility of income
growth. That is, from (2), if H2M households face less risk, all else equal, their consumption
growth rates will be lower. However, it is not the case that hand-to-mouth agents face less
risk, a point we document in the next subsection.


4.4     Income and Consumption Volatility
In the model of Section 2, low-wealth individuals are subject to higher anticipated consump-
tion volatility given the absence of a buffer stock of savings. An alternative not considered
in Section 2 is that low-wealth individuals have a lower volatility of income and therefore
do not desire a large amount of precautionary savings. Finally, if the hand-to-mouth are
up against a hard constraint in contiguous periods, their consumption will necessarily track
income; that is, if a household is literally "hand to mouth," then c = y + ra. This suggests
that an interesting moment is the volatility of the difference in consumption growth from
income growth as a function of hand-to-mouth status.
    To explore these relationships in our PSID sample, we regress the absolute value of
income growth | ln (y + ra) |, consumption growth | ln c|, and the absolute value of the
difference | ln c -  ln (y + ra) | on lagged hand-to-mouth status. Specifically, if the growth
rate is calculated between waves t and t + 2 of the survey, the hand-to-mouth indicator
is computed using the period t data. This specification is designed to capture whether a
hand-to-mouth household today faces greater or lesser uncertainty about the future than a
  11
     Long-term earnings is defined a household's average natural log of earnings after removing a cubic
function of the head's age and year dummies.
  12
     In fact, Dynan, Skinner and Zeldes (2004) argue that an important reason that lower-income households
save less may reflect a lower demand for precautionary savings. This aligns with our conclusions, and those
of Calvet et al. (2019) that the behavior of hand-to-mouth households is consistent with a high IES.


                                                    20
non-H2M household. All regressions also include a quadratic in age and dummies for change
in family size, change in marital status, and year.
    The results are reported in Table 5. The first column reports that both the poor and
wealthy hand-to-mouth face greater uncertainty regarding future income growth. This differ-
ence is reduced substantially once we include individual fixed effects (Column 2). Similarly,
hand-to-mouth households face greater consumption uncertainty over the subsequent two
years, but this difference becomes negligible with the inclusion of fixed effects (Columns 3-4).
The final two columns concern volatility over the consumption-to-income ratio. The hand-to-
mouth exhibit significantly more volatility in this ratio. Including fixed effects again reduces
the coefficients by more than half. For quantitative context, the mean of the dependent
variables are 0.139, 0.146, and 0.190 for | ln (y + ra) |, | ln c|, and | ln c -  ln (y + ra) |,
respectively. Thus a coefficient on the H 2M dummies of 2.5% represents roughly an increase
of 13-18% of the mean level.

                 Table 5: The Volatility of Income and Consumption Part I

                        | ln (y + ra)|             | ln c|           | ln c -  ln (y + ra)|
                        No FE       FE        No FE       FE         No FE           FE
        H 2MN W          .021      .005         .027      .010        .025           .011
                        (.004)    (.004)       (.004)    (.004)      (.004)         (.005)

        H 2MLIQ          .025      .013         .010      -.002       .020           .009
                        (.004)    (.004)       (.003)    (.003)      (.005)         (.004)
       Note: Sample size is 19,351. Not H2M group is omitted in all regressions. Sample is PSID
       1999-2015, with H2M status observed at least three times. Regressions include controls for
       changes in family size or marital status, age, and year. Standard errors are clustered at
       household level.


   In Table 6, we replace the fixed effects with the fraction of time spent as hand-to-mouth.
We see that households that are frequently in hand-to-mouth status tend to have more
volatility in consumption, income, and the ratio of consumption-to-income. Conditional on
the fraction of time spent as hand-to-mouth, current hand-to-mouth status has no predictive
power regarding subsequent volatility.
   One caveat with the volatility measures is that they also capture error in the mea-
sures of consumption and income. Such error is undoubtedly significant (see, for example,
Bound, Brown, Duncan and Rodgers, 1994, Aguiar and Bils, 2015, and Carroll, Crossley
and Sabelhaus, 2015). However, it is less clear that the magnitude of the error varies with
hand-to-mouth status, which is relevant for the exercises performed above. To explore this,
we posit that measurement error is iid over different waves of the survey. If the persistence of

                                                  21
                 Table 6: The Volatility of Income and Consumption Part II

                          | ln (y + ra)|               | ln c|       | ln c -  ln (y + ra)|
        H 2MN W                 .003                     .009                  .008
                               (.006)                   (.005)                (.006)

        H 2MLIQ                 .009                     -.002                 .006
                               (.005)                   (.004)                (.006)

        Frac. time              .030                     .031                  .029
        H 2MN W                (.009)                   (.007)                (.009)

        Frac. time              .040                     .027                  .036
        H 2MLIQ                (.010)                   (.008)                (.012)
       Note: Sample size is 19,351. Not H2M group is omitted in all regressions. Sample is PSID
       1999-2015, with H2M status observed at least three times. Regressions include controls for
       changes in family size or marital status, age, and year. Standard errors are clustered at
       household level.


the true variable is similar across hand-to-mouth status, then the observed autocorrelation
will be lower for the group with the greater mis-measurement.
    Table 7 reports the estimated auto-regressive coefficient for the growth of income and
consumption for each hand-to-mouth status. Specifically, we compute the correlation of
growth between years t - 4 and t - 2 and the growth between t - 2 and t for each group
defined by period t - 2 hand-to-mouth status. Looking across the rows, there is little ev-
idence that the hand-to-mouth have a significantly lower autocorrelation for either income
or consumption. Under the assumption that the true process is the same for all groups,
this suggests that classical measurement error (in logs) is not more or less severe for the
hand-to-mouth households.


4.5    More on Income Processes
A natural hypothesis is that some agents face less idiosyncratic income risk and in response
hold less precautionary savings. Similarly, some could face a steeper life-cycle profile of
earnings, and therefore desire to borrow rather than save. Both points suggest differences in
income processes as a potential explanation for the persistent hand-to-mouth. However, the
preceding analysis indicates that the frequently hand-to-mouth have lower income growth
and more volatility. Given the plausibility of the income-difference hypothesis, a closer
study is warranted. Hence, in this subsection we explore in greater detail the relative income
processes for the frequently hand-to-mouth.

                                                  22
                  Table 7: Autocorrelation of Income and Spending Growth

                                                 Not H 2M           H 2MN W    H 2MLIQ
                           d        d
                     ( ln yt ,  ln yt -1 )         -.336               -.251     -.390
                                                  (.022)              (.023)    (.031)

                     ( ln ct ,  ln ct-1 )          -.372               -.380     -.348
                                                  (.012)              (.021)    (.025)
                    Note: Sample is PSID for 1999-2015, with seeing H2M status at
                    least 3 times. Regressions include usual controls. Standard errors
                    are clustered at household level. For brevity of exposition, we
                    denote y d  y + ra.


    To this end, we divide the PSID sample in half based on the frequency of hand-to-mouth
status over the sample. The median household finds itself in either H2M status 2 times. We
therefore group the 55.6 percent of the sample that are H 2M 2 times or less in the "Below
Median" category, and the remaining 44.4 percent in the "Above Median."13
    For each subsample we estimate a standard specification of the process for household
earnings. Specifically, we estimate the following specification:

                                     ln yijt = t + Xijt  + y
                                                           ~ijt ,

where yijt is total after-tax labor earnings for household i in wave t with a head of age j , t
is a year fixed effect, X is a vector of demographic controls, and y    ~ijt is the residual income
that we analyze below in a second stage. The vector X includes a cubic in age (normalized
to zero at 25), as well as dummy controls for educational attainment (for less than high
school, high school, some college, and college degree), the number of earners (0, 1 or 2),
family size (1, 2, 3, 4, or 5+), and three race categories. We estimate the specification for
each subsample separately. The results are reported in Table 8. The coefficients are similar
across the two groups. The frequently hand-to-mouth have a slightly shallower age profile,
in line with Table 4, but the difference is small relative to the standard errors.
    We now study the residual income process y     ~ijt . Specifically, we estimate the standard
specification:

                                          y
                                          ~ij = i +          ij   + ij
                                            ij   =   ij -1   + ij ,
  13
    We have also performed the analysis splitting only on the frequency of just H 2MN W status and found
similar patterns.



                                                     23
                         Table 8: First-Stage Income Process Parameters

                                           Rarely H 2M       Frequently H 2M
                         Age-25                 .057                .046
                                               (.005)              (.005)

                         (Age-25)2             -.002               -.002
                                              (<.001)             (<.001)

                         (Age-25)3            (<.001)             (<.001)
                                              (<.001)             (<.001)

                         Observations          14,438              11,515
                       Note: Not reported are controls for education, household
                       status, number of earners, family size and time.

                                                                               2
where i is a mean-zero household fixed effect with cross-sectional variance      ; is a persis-
                                                                                              2
tent AR(1) process with parameter ; and  and  are mean-zero iid shocks with variances 
      2
and     , respectively. All shocks are assumed to be orthogonal. We estimate the parameter
vector {, k }, where k = , ,  by method of moments. We follow Tonetti (2011) and use
the (available) covariances between agents of ages j and j as moments.14 The results are
reported in Table 9, along with bootstrapped 95% confidence intervals.
    We see that households frequently hand-to-mouth have less volatile innovations to the
AR(1) coefficient, but with slightly more persistence. Together the estimates indicate an
unconditional variance of is 0.26 for the rarely H 2M compared to 0.20 for the frequently
H 2M . Thus the frequently H 2M have slightly less long-run uncertainty. On the other hand,
the iid component of earnings is over five times as volatile for the frequently H 2M .
    To put these differences in perspective, we simulated the standard model under each
of the residual income processes, that estimated for households infrequently hand-to-mouth
and that estimated for those frequently so, separately for each of our four preference specifi-
cations. This reveals whether frequent hand-to-mouth status reflects the differential income
process for these households. To focus on the differences in uncertainty, we normalized both
income processes to have an unconditional mean of one and set the borrowing constraint
at zero for each exercise. The fixed effect is set equal to zero. In Table 10, we report the
frequency of H 2MN W status (computed as a < y/6, as in the data) and average wealth
divided by average income.
  14
    See Tonetti (2011) for details. We are grateful to Chris Tonetti for sharing the Matlab code to compute
the estimates.



                                                    24
           Table 9: Residual Income Process Parameters

                      Rarely H 2M         Frequently H 2M
                           .909                 .948
                       [.484 .958]          [.781 .961]

                 2
                           .045                 .020
                       [.017 .141]          [.016 .067]

                 2
                           .022                 .131
                       [.000 .127]          [.077 .144]

                 2
                           .161                 .063
                       [.082 .214]          [.035 .101]
                Note: The table reports point estimates of the
                parameters of the income process and the 95%
                confidence interval in brackets.




Table 10: Simulated Moments for Alternative Income Specifications

                             Frequency H2M           Wealth/Earnings
                              (1)         (2)          (1)        (2)

     = 0.95,  = 0.5          .016       .008         9.647       8.137

     = 0.95,  = 1.5          .260       .126         1.885       1.447

     = 0.90,  = 0.5          .271       .135          .148        .925

     = 0.90,  = 1.5          .955       .616          .058        .207
   Note: The columns labelled (1) use the residual income process parame-
   ters estimated for the Rarely Hand-to-Mouth reported in Table 9, setting
    2
      = 0; the columns labelled (2) use the income parameters estimated for
   the Frequently Hand-to-Mouth. H 2M status in the model is whether
   the agent has assets a less than two months of annual earnings, y/6.
   Wealth/Earnings is the ergodic mean of a, where the mean of income
   has been normalized to one in each simulation.




                                     25
    In all simulations, the model's predictions for frequency of H 2M status is opposite the
data. That is, the empirical income process for the frequently hand-to-mouth predicts less
frequent H 2M status in the model. There is no clear pattern with respect to average wealth.
Recall that the frequently hand-to-mouth income process has significantly more transitory
risk. This generates a large incentive to save near the borrowing constraint and quickly
exit the low-asset region. This explains the infrequent hand-to-mouth status. Far from the
constraint, however, the fact that the empirical hand-to-mouth income process has slightly
less persistent risk plays a role, making the prediction for the long-run mean of wealth depend
on the preference specification.
    The evidence presented in this and the preceding subsection indicates that differences in
income processes is not a compelling explanation for why some agents are frequently hand-
to-mouth. The frequently H 2M have greater transitory income risk that calls for greater
precautionary saving, all else equal. This predicted pattern of behavior is the opposite of
what we observe in our data.


4.6     The Average Propensity to Consume
For a given set of preferences, and assuming monotonic dynamics, the average propensity to
consume is a useful guide to the distance to target wealth. In particular, agents below their
target wealth should have a low APC. In Table 11, we report the results of regressing APC
at time t in the PSID on lagged t - 2 measures of hand-to-mouth status. The measures and
specifications are the same as in Table 4.
    In Column (1), we find that the average propensity to consume is higher for hand-to-
mouth than for non-H 2M households. That is, the hand-to-mouth are not actively building
up their buffer stock of liquid savings relative to their wealthier or more liquid counterparts.
This is counter to the model of Section 2 if preferences across agents are identical. Controlling
for fixed effects, reported in Column (2), essentially eliminates any difference between the
groups. Column (3) documents that households that frequently find themselves as hand-
to-mouth (and controlling for current H 2M status) have a relatively high APC. This is
consistent with the hypothesis that the average hand-to-mouth individual has a significantly
lower target level of assets or liquidity (relative to income).15
  15
    In Appendix A2.1 we examine APCs by hand-to-mouth status dividing households by age and by long-
term earnings. The results from Table 11 hold across age groups. Separating by long-term income, we
continue to see much higher APCs for households that are frequently hand-to-mouth, though the magnitudes
are not as large as in Table 11 pooling all households.




                                                  26
                           Table 11: The Average Propensity to Consume

                                                    (1)      (2)       (3)
                               H 2MN W             .065      -.007    -.022
                                                  (.010)    (.010)   (.015)

                               H 2MLIQ             .077      .005     .005
                                                  (.012)    (.009)   (.011)

                               Fraction                               .157
                               time H 2MN W                          (.022)

                               Fraction                               .191
                               time H 2MLIQ                          (.025)

                               Fixed effects        No       Yes       No
                              Note: Sample is PSID for 1999-2015, with seeing
                              H2M status at least 3 times. Regressions include
                              usual controls. Standard errors are clustered at
                              household level.


4.7       The Marginal Propensity to Consume out of Income
Conditional on preferences, the model of Section 2 clearly predicts the MPC is declining in
cash on hand. The empirical evidence on the relationship is mixed.16 As noted in Section 2,
with preference heterogeneity, there is no clear predicted relationship in pooled data.
    Consider estimating the response of consumption to a change in income. Suppose we ob-
serve ct  ct - ct-1 . From the consumption function, we have ct = C (xt , yt ) -C (xt-1 , yt-1 ).
Approximating the consumption function around (xt-1 , yt-1 ), we have

                      C (xt , yt ) - C (xt-1 , yt-1 )  Cx xt + Cy yt
                                                 = M P C  Rat + M P CY yt ,                   (3)

where Cx and Cy are evaluated at (xt-1 , yt-1 ), the second line uses xt = Rat +yt , and we define
M P CY  M P C + Cy as the marginal propensity to consume out of a change in income.
Recall that holding x constant, Cy captures consumption responses due to anticipated future
income following today's y realization. If y is iid, Cy = 0, while if y is persistent and the
individual is not constrained, then Cy > 0. Hence, we expect M P CY  M P C to hold in
the data.
 16
      See Havranek and Sokolova (2019) for a recent meta-study.



                                                    27
   To scale the responses, divide (3) through by yt-1 + rat-1 to obtain:

                      ct                Rat                    yt
                                MP C              + M P CY              ,                      (4)
                  yt-1 + rat-1       yt-1 + rat-1          yt-1 + rat-1

where MPC and MPCY are evaluated at (xt-1 , yt-1 ). Recalling that at denotes start of
period t assets, we have at = rat-1 + yt-1 - ct-1 . Hence, at is in the individual's t - 1
information set. If the growth rate of income is iid (that is, log income is a random walk),
then the first term on the right of (4) is orthogonal to yt /(yt-1 + rat-1 ).
    Under the random walk assumption, a regression of consumption growth on income
growth, within a sample of individuals of similar (xt-1 , yt-1 ) and consumption functions,
provides an estimate of MPCY. In the model of Section 2, this is monotonically decreasing
in assets a for a given set of preferences.
    To explore this prediction empirically, we begin by simply regressing the (normalized)
change in consumption on the (normalized) change in income separately for each of our three
groups: the non-H 2M , H 2MN W , and H 2MLIQ . All regressions also include year dummies
and controls for age and the changes in family size and marital status. In the regressions,
the normalization factor is the average of total income in wave t and the previous wave
of the PSID. We first estimate the MPCY using OLS. One concern is that the change in
earnings (which is a right-hand side variable) is measured with error. To address this, we
also run a separate specification in which we instrument for changes in income using lagged
employment status, changes in weeks worked and in annual hours for both the head and the
spouse. This will help correct for errors in variables, but it must also be kept in mind that
this source of variation may have different implications for the persistence of the income
change, thus changing the true coefficient.
    The results using OLS are reported in Table 12. The point estimates in Column (1)
suggest a considerably higher MPCY for low net-worth individuals compared to those not
hand-to-mouth, but only modestly higher for the low-liquidity. The estimated MPCYs are
actually fairly low for all households, as anticipated by the empirical literature (e.g., Blundell,
Pistaferri and Preston, 2008, Straub, 2019, Fisher et al., 2019). Column (2) includes our
measures for frequency of hand-to-mouth status. With these controls, current hand-to-
mouth status no longer predicts MPCY; rather, conditional on current status, those that are
frequently hand-to-mouth tend to have higher MPCYs. The final column implies that those
with a higher APC tend to have a lower MPCY. In our benchmark model, a high APC is
associated with a level of assets above one's target, which should imply a lower MPC.
    The IV results reported in Table 13 tell a similar story to the OLS, but the baseline
magnitudes are higher. This is consistent with attenuation bias in the OLS specification.


                                                28
Nevertheless, the point estimates are quite small; specifically, a one percent increase in
income implies only an 0.08% increase in spending relative to income for the non-H 2M .
Moreover, if income is persistent, then the MPCY estimated in these regressions should be
an upper bound on the MPC out of a transfer.

             Table 12: Marginal Propensity to Consume out of Income (OLS)

                              Dependent variable is c/(y + ra)

                                                         (1)      (2)       (3)
                    y/(y + ra)                          .039      .019     .069
                                                       (.008)    (.009)   (.014)

                    y/(y + ra) × H 2MN W                .046      -.017    -.032
                                                       (.019)    (.025)   (.025)

                    y/(y + ra) × H 2MLIQ                .012      -.030    -.034
                                                       (.020)    (.022)   (.022)

                    y/(y + ra)                                    .119     .156
                    ×Fraction time H 2MN W                       (.039)   (.035)

                    y/(y + ra)                                    .093     .119
                    ×Fraction time H 2MLIQ                       (.041)   (.039)

                    y/(y + ra)× APC                                        -.076
                                                                          (.018)
                  Note: H2M's are lagged (t-2) values, APC is Tornqvist of current
                  and lagged APCs, income is Tornqvist of current and lagged in-
                  come. Regressions include controls for age, changes in family size
                  and marital status, and year. HtM status observed at least three
                  times.




4.8    Consumption Baskets: The Extensive Margin of Expenditure
The framework of Section 2 suggests that an individual may have low wealth because of
poor luck or because of preference heterogeneity. Moreover, the latter can also be due to
differences in time preference versus differences in the IES. In this subsection, we look at
detailed consumption behavior of low-wealth individuals to shed some light on this question.
One complication is that if agents are truly constrained in terms of borrowing, then it is
difficult to obtain an estimate of time preference or the IES. For this reason, we shall pursue
an indirect route.

                                                 29
                Table 13: Marginal Propensity to Consume out of Income (IV)

                                 Dependent variable is c/(y + ra)

                                                            (1)       (2)       (3)
                       y/(y + ra)                          .082      .045      .102
                                                          (.020)    (.022)    (.042)

                       y/(y + ra) × H 2MN W                .038      -.076     -.059
                                                          (.039)    (.062)    (.061)

                       y/(y + ra) × H 2MLIQ                .066      -.023     -.027
                                                          (.047)    (.052)    (.052)

                       y/(y + ra)                                    .188      .184
                       ×Fraction time H 2MN W                       (.087)    (.087)

                       y/(y + ra)                                    .211      .190
                       ×Fraction time H 2MLIQ                       (.101)    (.100)

                       y/(y + ra)× APC                                         -.076
                                                                              (.060)
                     Note: H2M's are lagged (t-2) values, APC is Tornqvist of cur-
                     rent and lagged APCs, income is Tornqvist of current and lagged
                     after-tax income. Instruments are employment status at (t-2) and
                     changes in weeks worked and annual hours for each of head and
                     for spouse. Regressions include controls for age, changes in family
                     size and marital status, and year. HtM status observed at least
                     three times.


    This route focuses on the "extensive" margin for various consumption categories; that is,
whether a broad category is consumed at all.17 Those close to adjustment on the extensive
margin may exhibit a highly elastic response of total expenditure to changes in inter-temporal
prices. The fact that adjustment on the extensive margin may alter the price elasticity is
a familiar concept in economics. This idea has been applied to macro-labor markets by
Rogerson (1988) and to portfolio choice by Grossman and Laroque (1990). Chetty and
Szeidl (2007) make a related argument in the context of risk preference in the presence of
consumption commitments. In the appendix, we provide a simple example of how the results
presented in this subsection may shed light on the relative IES of those prone to adjusting
expenditure on the extensive margin.
    Consider nondurable expenditure at two adjacent dates, ct-1 and ct . Suppose expenditure
  17
    See Michelacci, Paciello and Pozzi (2019) for an analysis of the extensive margin of expenditure in the
Kilts-Nielsen Consumer Panel.

                                                     30
                             Table 14: Nondurable Expenditure Categories

                          Category                 Share     Positive    Add     Drop
                          Food at home             0.346       1.00      0.00     0.00
                          Food away                0.154       0.95      0.03     0.03
                          Gasoline                 0.138       0.93      0.03     0.03
                          Car insurance            0.106       0.93      0.03     0.02
                          Health insurance         0.076       0.73      0.09     0.09
                          Education                0.055       0.30      0.11     0.13
                          Doctors                  0.034       0.80      0.09     0.09
                          Prescription drugs       0.022       0.80      0.09     0.09
                          Childcare                0.019       0.12      0.04     0.05
                          Hospital                 0.015       0.28      0.15     0.16
                          Other transport          0.015       0.30      0.17     0.18
                          Other utilities          0.009       0.17      0.08     0.11
                          Bus & train              0.005       0.08      0.03     0.03
                          Parking                  0.003       0.09      0.05     0.04
                          Taxi                     0.002       0.05      0.03     0.02


in period t is divided among Nt discrete goods: ct = N       t
                                                           n=1 xn,t , where xn,t is the amount
devoted to good n in period t. A similar decomposition can be done for period t - 1.
    In this spirit, we divide non-durable expenditure into the categories listed in Table 14.18
For each category, we list the share of total non-durable expenditure as well as the average
fraction of individuals that spend a strictly positive amount on that category in a given two-
year time frame. The final two columns are the average probability of addition or deletion of
that category, respectively. We can have a finer decomposition of expenditure into distinct
categories using the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE). In the appendix we report the CE
counterpart of Table 14.
    Our first exercise explores whether the hand-to-mouth consume a different number of
distinct categories conditional on total expenditure. That is, do the hand-to-mouth allo-
cate a given level of expenditure differently between the number of goods versus average
spending per good? To explore this, we regress the log number of categories with positive
expenditure on log total expenditure as well as our H 2M dummies, adding year dummies
and demographic controls. Note that under time-separability, the number of goods is a static
decision conditional on total expenditure, and is therefore independent of time preference
and borrowing constraints.
    The results are reported in Table 15. Columns one and two use the PSID and our
 18
      We exclude basic utilities like water, heat, and electricity as these may be included in rental contracts.



                                                       31
benchmark measures of H 2M status. The CE does not have as detailed wealth data as
the PSID, so we cannot construct identical measures of hand-to-mouth status in the CE.
Instead, we construct a measure that uses only liquid assets, which is denoted in the table as
H 2MKV W , and is defined as having liquid assets within one week of earnings of the borrowing
limit or a positive position less than one week of earnings.19 The final column estimates the
impact of H 2MKV W on the log number of categories in our CE sample. For comparison, we
construct the same measure in the PSID sample and report the CE regression implemented
in the PSID sample in the third column.

                              Table 15: Number of Categories Consumed
                                      Dependent variable is ln Nt
                                             PSID      PSID         PSID        CE
                       ln c                   .204      .201         .202       .456
                                             (.006)    (.006)       (.006)     (.002)

                       H 2MN W                -.051     -.028
                                             (.008)    (.006)

                       H 2MLIQ                -.036     -.007
                                             (.006)    (.005)

                       Fraction                         -.043
                       time H 2MN W                    (.014)

                       Fraction                         -.080
                       time H 2MLIQ                    (.017)

                       H 2MKV W                                      -.043      -.115
                                                                    (.005)     (.002)

                       Observ.              26,178 26,178           26,178    192,299
                     Note: Categories restricted to nondurables and services. Households
                     on average spend on 8.9 of 17 categories in PSID data, on 12.1 of 27
                     categories in the CE. Have to see H2M status at least three times in
                     PSID.

    The estimates show a clear pattern that low-wealth and low-liquidity households consume
fewer categories of goods conditional on a given level of total expenditure. This pattern is
established for both measures of H 2M status, as well as for H 2MKV W status in the PSID
and in the CE. The effect is also economically significant. For instance, comparing the
 19
      This is exactly the hand-to-mouth measure in Kaplan et al. (2014).

                                                      32
coefficients for total expenditure and for being hand-to-mouth based on net worth, we see
that the H 2MN W coefficient is opposite in sign and one-fourth the magnitude of that for
ln c. That implies that being the status of H 2MN W predicts the same impact on number of
categories as a 25% reduction in total spending.
    The second column of the table includes the frequency that we see a household to be hand-
to-mouth in the PSID. Households that are frequently hand-to-mouth, by either measure,
are the ones who consume fewer categories of goods, conditional on total expenditure. Once
we include a household's fraction of time as H 2M , the current hand-to-mouth status is
much less relevant, especially being hand-to-mouth based only on liquidity, which becomes
statistically insignificant. Thus, as with the results above detailing consumption growth,
consumption volatility, and APCs, it is a household's propensity to be hand-to-mouth, not
its current hand-to-mouth status, that is key to predicting household spending behavior.
    Our next set of results concern the elasticity of the number of goods to a change in total
expenditure. To explore this, we regress  ln Nt on  ln ct , interacting the growth of total
expenditure with our H 2M indicators. The regressions also include the H 2M dummies as
well as the usual demographic controls. This specification tests whether at the margin of
changing total nondurable expenditure, the hand-to-mouth allocate additional expenditure
differently than the non-hand-to-mouth along the extensive versus intensive margins.
    The results are reported in Table 16. The benchmark results reported in Column (1)
indicate that the category elasticity is higher for the low-net-worth hand-to-mouth.20 The
second column of Table 16 includes the frequency with which a household is hand-to-mouth.
We see that those who are prone to being hand-to-mouth, by either measure, are much
more likely to adjust on the extensive margin in response to a change in total expenditure.
Moreover, once we include the fraction of time as H 2M , the current hand-to-mouth status
is no longer relevant.
    The results of Tables 15 and 16 are therefore consistent with heterogeneity across con-
sumers in the relevance of the extensive margin of consumption, and this heterogeneity is
correlated with the target level of assets. As noted above, the elasticity of total expenditure
to a relative price (or interest rate) change may be sensitive to whether the adjustment is
primarily occurring along the extensive or intensive margins. The empirical results therefore
suggest that differences in the effective IES are a plausible candidate for explaining why
some households are prone to hand-to-mouth status. In the next section, we will allow for
such differences in calibrating preference heterogeneity.
  20
     In Appendix A2.2 we explore this further by decomposing the growth in nondurable consumption between
t - 1 and t into an intensive change, reflecting the change in spending on goods consumed in both periods,
and an extensive margin reflecting the adding and dropping goods. There we see that the extensive margin
is about twenty percent more important for H 2MN W households.


                                                   33
                         Table 16: Regression of  ln Nt on  ln ct
                                Dependent variable is  ln Nt
                                                             (1)         (2)
                     ln c                                   .132        .116
                                                           (.006)      (.007)

                     ln c × H 2MN W                         .036        -.019
                                                           (.012)      (.019)

                     ln c × H 2MLIQ                         .013        -.022
                                                           (.013)      (.016)

                     ln c× Fraction time H 2MN W                        .089
                                                                       (.025)

                     ln c× Fraction time H 2MLIQ                        .074
                                                                       (.027)
                  Note: H2M status at least three times. HtM status and controls
                  included.


5    Calibrating Preference Heterogeneity
The facts documented above make a compelling case that preference heterogeneity plays a
role in determining hand-to-mouth status. In this section, we allow for preference hetero-
geneity in a model of savings, calibrating the shares of each "type" of agent. We can then
address how preference heterogeneity affects the wealth distribution, focusing on why some
agents have low wealth or liquidity as well as key related outcomes, such as the distribution
of effective MPCs and IESs. The latter are crucial for the proper understanding and design
of fiscal and monetary policies.
     As noted in Section 2, it is difficult to distinguish impatience ( ) from a high IES ( )
when the interest rate is less than the discount rate. Moreover, the extensive margin anal-
ysis suggests differences that potentially relate to the IES, but not discount factor; so it is
important to include this potential source of heterogeneity.
     One approach would be to introduce interest rate "shocks" to the standard model of
Section 2 and try to match the responses to the corresponding empirical moments. As is
well known, such an exercise is difficult empirically, particularly when consumers are not
necessarily on their Euler equation. Even if they are, it is not obvious which interest rate is
the empirically relevant rate for consumption-savings decisions of the hand-to-mouth.
     An alternative is to move to a two-asset model, using portfolio choices to distinguish

                                               34
the IES from the discount factor. A consumer with a high IES is sensitive to interest rate
differences across assets. Moreover, a high-IES consumer has a lower need for liquidity. That
is, a high-IES agent cares less about when in time consumption takes place, and therefore is
less concerned if assets are tied up in illiquid investments. It is also useful to separate a high
IES from a low coefficient of relative risk aversion, as achieved by Epstein-Zin preferences.
The model of Kaplan and Violante (2014) (henceforth KV) uses Epstein-Zin preferences and
includes a meaningful liquidity decision; so we therefore employ their model.


5.1       Model Environment
In this section, we briefly recap the key elements of the KV model, which we take directly
from their paper and augment by allowing for preference heterogeneity.21
    Agents live for 58 years, or J = 232 quarters, of which J w = 152 are spent earning income
and J r = 80 in retirement. Consumer i has Epstein-Zin preferences given recursively at age
j by:
                                                                                1
                                                                      1-1/i   1-1/i
                                        1- 1-1/i              1-
                          Vij =   (cij sij )         + i   EVi,j +1
                                                                       1-
                                                                                      ,


where c is non-durable consumption; s is the service flow from durables (to be described
below);  is the coefficient of relative risk aversion, which we set to 4 as in KV; and  is the
inter-temporal elasticity of substitution. Note that we allow the time-preference parameter
 and the IES to vary by individual. Following KV, we set  = 0.85, which is based on the
ratio of housing expenditures to total consumption in the US National Income and Product
Accounts.
    Earnings are given by the exogenous process:

                                          ln yij = j + i + zij ,

where j is a deterministic function of age, j , and i is an individual fixed effect. The
idiosyncratic risk is represented by zij , which is a random walk. KV estimate a fourth-order
polynomial for j using the PSID. The variance of the fixed effect is set to 0.18 and the
mean-zero quarterly innovation variance for the random walk zij is set equal to 0.003 to
match the age profile of the cross-sectional variance in earnings. The income process implies
that mean earnings equal $53, 000 dollars.
    An individual invests their wealth in two assets. The liquid asset, m, has an annual
 21
      We thank the authors for sharing their code.



                                                      35
after-tax return given by:
                                         
                                         5.77% if m  [m , 0);
                                                       j
                                rm (m) =
                                         -1.41% if m  0,


where mj is an age- and income-specific borrowing limit.22 The illiquid asset a  0 has
a higher return, but consumers must pay a fixed transaction cost  to alter their stock of
a. Again following KV, we set the after-tax return of the illiquid asset to 2.21% and  to
$1, 000.23
    In addition to the financial return on illiquid assets, there is a service flow from the stock
of illiquid assets. Specifically, sij = aij + hij , where hij  -aij represents housing services
obtained from a rental market. KV set  = 1%, quarterly. The units of rental housing h are
normalized such that the relative price of c to h is one.
    Consumption and rental housing are taxed at a rate of 7.2%. Earnings and assets are
taxed, with the tax rate a function of earnings and the consumer's portfolio: T (yij , mij , aij ).
Retirees receive social-security benefits given by p(J w , i , zi,J w ). The benefits are taxed
using the same function T as workers face, with p replacing y as the first argument. We
refer the reader to KV for the exact functional forms and parameterization of T and p.


5.2     Calibrating the Hand-to-Mouth
We solve the consumer's problem for four sets of preference parameters. Specifically, as in
Section 2 we let i  {0.5, 1.5} and (annualized) i  {0.90, 0.95}. In all cases, we set risk
aversion to  = 4, as in KV. Recall that the illiquid asset yields 2.21% plus a service flow,
and hence consumers are impatient relative to the financial return. The relatively patient,
inelastic specification ( = 0.95,  = 0.5) is a standard representative-agent parameterization
in macroeconomics. KV set all agents to  = 0.941,  = 1.5, and hence our patient elastic
specification is roughly comparable to the KV calibration. The two types with  = 0.90
are included to allow for extreme impatience as the driving force behind hand-to-mouth
behavior.
    Given the partial equilibrium nature of the model, we can solve and simulate each type
of agent separately. To obtain an ergodic distribution, we solve and simulate each preference
type's life-cycle 50,000 times.
  22
    Specifically, for j  J w , mj = 0.74yj . For j > J w , mj = 0.
  23
    KV calibrate the fixed cost to match the fact that one-third of households in the Survey of Consumer
Finance are hand-to-mouth. We keep their value of , but will calibrate preference parameters to match the
shares of hand-to-mouth observed in our PSID sample.



                                                   36
   Table 17 reports key moments for each preference configuration. In particular, we com-
pute the probability of our two hand-to-mouth status measures, as well as the ratio of total
net worth to income and illiquid wealth to income. The first row are the comparable mo-
ments from our PSID sample. The last row is our calibration with heterogeneous types,
which we discuss below.

                                  Table 17: Type-Specific Moments

                                      Prob of   Prob of   NW/Inc     Illiq NW/Inc
                                                            a+m            a
            Type                      H 2MN W   H 2MLIQ      y             y

            Data (PSID)                22.7%     17.5%      4.04         3.27

               = 0.95,    = 0.5         8.1%     18.9%       3.52        3.43
               = 0.95,    = 1.5         7.3%     43.6%       5.30        5.21
               = 0.90,    = 0.5        70.6%     9.4%        0.60        0.59
               = 0.90,    = 1.5        96.5%     0.9%       -0.04        0.03

            Calibration                22.0%     18.8%      3.21         3.15


    The simulated moments indicate that relative patience (that is,  = 0.95) is important for
generating realistic average wealth-to-income ratios. As one would expect, the specifications
with  = 0.90 generate very low levels of wealth. Accordingly, high- agents are relatively
unlikely to be hand-to-mouth at any point in time.
    For all types, most wealth is held in the illiquid asset. Holding  constant, a higher 
generates a small decrease in the fraction of wealth held in the liquid asset. Thus, a high
 plays an important role in generating illiquid hand-to-mouth agents. For example, the
 = 0.95,  = 1.5 agents are more than twice as likely to find themselves in the H 2MLIQ
state relative to  = 0.95,  = 0.5 agents. Hence, relative patience combined with a high
IES generates frequent "wealthy hand-to-mouth status." Recall that the  = 0.95,  = 1.5
agents are close to the preference specification used in KV, consistent with their finding that
a relatively high share of consumers are wealthy hand-to-mouth.
    We now simulate the model with heterogeneous types. To do so, we pool the four types
assuming type i has relative share i and then compute aggregate simulated moments. We
select the relative shares to match the empirical moments in the top row of Table 17. There
are four moments and three share parameters (one is redundant from the adding up to one
constraint), and we select shares to minimize the equally weighted squared percent deviation
between the pooled simulated moments and empirical moments.
    The bottom row of Table 17 reports the simulated moments, while the first column of

                                                37
Table 18 reports the shares for each type chosen that map to those moments. In terms
of fit, the calibration does well in matching the probability of H 2MN W status (22% in the
model versus 22.7% in the data). It slightly over-represents (by 1.3 percentage points) the
wealthy hand-to-mouth. The ratio of total wealth to income is lower in the simulation
(3.21 versus 4.04), but the ratio of illiquid net worth to income is quite close (3.15 versus
3.27). Note that preference heterogeneity is crucial for matching these moments. Standard
preferences, patient and not so elastic, do well in matching aggregate wealth, but generate
few poor hand-to-mouth. Interestingly, simply reducing patience, while maintaining the
lower IES, is rejected by the moment matching exercise. Finally, solely introducing a high
IES, maintaining patience, generates too many wealthy hand-to-mouth, but few poor hand-
to-mouth.
     In terms of relative shares, Table 18 indicates that 73 percent of the agents are relatively
patient and inelastic (that is,  = 0.95,  = 0.5). From the preceding table, patience is
important for generating a realistic wealth-to-income ratio. The calibration indicates that
11.3% of the population is the  = 0.95,  = 1.5 type. As these agents spend nearly half their
time in H 2MLIQ status, they cannot be the majority of the population given the relatively
small share of wealthy hand-to-mouth in the PSID sample (17.5%).
     The remainder of the population is impatient but elastic agents ( = 0.90,  = 1.5).
Interestingly, the moment matching sets the share of impatient-inelastic agents to zero.
Recall that in the one asset model, it was difficult to tell apart impatience and elasticity.
However, in the two asset model, the role of liquidity clearly indicates that the impatient
agents are also relatively elastic.

                       Table 18: Calibrated Preference Heterogeneity

                                   Calibrated     Share of    Share of    Share of
                                     Share       Not H 2M     H 2MN W     H 2MLIQ
             = 0.95,  = 0.5           73.0%          90.0%      26.8%       73.4%

             = 0.90,  = 0.5           0.0%           0.0%       0.2%        0.0%

             = 0.95,  = 1.5           11.3%          9.4%       3.9%        25.9%

             = 0.90,  = 1.5           15.7%          0.7%       69.2%       0.7%


   The remaining columns of Table 18 report the preference composition of each hand-
to-mouth state in the pooled cross-section. For example, 90% of the non-hand-to-mouth
agents are the "standard" patient-inelastic type. These types hold much of the wealth in

                                                38
                            Table 19: Aggregate MPC and IES

                                     Weighted        Not
                                     Average        H 2M   H 2MN W   H 2MLIQ
               MPCY                     0.64        0.57    0.89       0.55
               MPC out of $500          0.07        0.00    0.22       0.11
               IES                      0.54        0.60    0.68       0.21


the economy. Relative to their underlying 73% share of the total, they are infrequently
poor hand-to-mouth, but only slightly under-represented in the wealthy hand-to-mouth sub-
sample. Conversely, the patient-elastic types have a share of H 2MLIQ that is more than
double their population share. The vast majority (73.4%) of the poor hand-to-mouth are
the impatient-elastic types, which is more than four times their 15.7% share of the general
population.
    The bottom line of the calibration is that the hand-to-mouth have a disproportionately
high relative IES, with the poor and wealthy hand-to-mouth separated by their respective
discount factors. The poor hand-to-mouth are predominantly low  -high  agents, repre-
senting more than two-thirds of H 2MN W but only 15.7% of the population. The majority
of the agents are "standard" types, with relatively high discount factors and low IES; these
agents are important for wealth accumulation, but relatively less important for hand-to-
mouth status. That said, given that the latter group is such a large share of the population
and hold much of the wealth, they constitute a large share of the wealthy hand-to-mouth.


5.3    Implications of Preference Heterogeneity
Using the calibrated model we can address how preference heterogeneity affects objects key to
macroeconomic policy; specifically, the cross-sectional distribution of marginal propensities
to consume as well as sensitivities of consumption to movements in interest rates.
    The first row of Table 19 reports the marginal propensity to consume out of income
(MPCY). Specifically, as in the empirical exercise behind Table 12, we regress the log change
in consumption on the log change in income. As income in the model is a random walk, an
innovation in income has a relatively large effect on permanent income. Hence, MPCYs in
the model are quite large. The coefficient using the full simulated sample is 0.64; that is,
consumption growth is on average 64 percent of the contemporaneous income growth. This
number is lower for the non-hand-to-mouth. For the sub-sample of the poor hand-to-mouth
(H 2MN W ), the MPCY is nearly ninety percent. Despite the lack of liquidity, the H 2MLIQ
has an MPCY similar in magnitude to the non-H2M.

                                               39
    The second row computes the marginal propensity to consume out of a $500 transfer.
This is a pure transfer, and not offset by increased taxation. Using the policy functions, we
compute the difference in consumption between having a liquid asset position of m versus
m plus 500, dividing this difference by $500. This is equivalent to randomly assigning a
fraction of the simulated population an additional $500 and then regressing the change in
consumption on the amount received (either zero or $500). The coefficient is therefore the
percentage consumed by the recipients.
    The average MPC is quite small, only 7%. For the non-hand-to-mouth, the MPC is
zero. This reflects that the non-H2M are relative wealthy and liquid, and therefore close
to the boundary at which they re-adjust their portfolios. For 14 percent of the non-H2M,
the transfer induces a reallocation toward illiquid assets. Given that a fixed cost is paid for
this adjustment, the agent simultaneously cuts back on consumption to increase the amount
deposited. The MPC for the hand-to-mouth is larger. In particular, the H 2MN W and
H 2MLIQ have MPCs of 0.22 and 0.11, respectively. Johnson, Parker and Souleles (2006)
find that non-durable consumption increased by 37 cents on a dollar in response to the
income tax rebates of 2001, while Parker, Souleles, Johnson and McClelland (2013) found
an increase of non-durable spending of 12.8 cents on a dollar in response to the economic
stimulus payments of 2008. In neither case was this response monotonic in liquid assets.
                          Table 20: Breakdown of Aggregate MPC

                             Population   MPC out   MPC if         MPC if      MPC if
                               Share       of $500 not H 2M        H 2MN W     H 2MLIQ
       = 0.95,  = 0.5          73.0%         .015         .004        .070       .038

       = 0.95,  = 1.5          11.3%         .132        -.018        .179       .292

       = 0.90,  = 1.5          15.7%         .268         .020        .275       .354


    Table 20 shows how preference heterogeneity plays a role in the MPCs. Each row is a
particular type and the first column repeats the type's population share. The remaining
columns report the average MPC, the MPC if not H 2M , and the MPC conditional on being
H 2MN W and H 2MLIQ , respectively. The first-row concerns the most common type, that
is, patient but inelastic consumers. Their MPC is small on average (0.015), essentially zero
if not hand-to-mouth, and between four and seven percent if hand-to-mouth. Thus, the
standard macro preferences generate very small MPCs, even conditional on low net-worth or
low liquidity. Recall from Section 2 that conditional on assets, MPCs are higher if consumers
are less patient or more elastic. This is borne out in the remaining rows of Table 20. The

                                              40
second row is the patient, elastic type. This type has an average MPC of 0.132. Recall that
this type is similar to that of the original KV paper. Their benchmark rebate coefficient is
0.15, slightly higher than that reported in Table 20. The difference largely stems from the
fact that the original KV agents are less patient ( = 0.94 vs.  = 0.95).24 The final row of
Table 20 reports the MPCs for the impatient, elastic types. These MPCs are quite high on
average, primarily reflecting that they are prone to be in a hand-to-mouth status and have
a high MPC conditional on being hand-to-mouth. Thus, the results indicate that not only
asset positions, but the interaction of low assets or liquidity combined with high elasticities
and/or low discount factors especially matters for MPCs.
    Another perspective on how preference heterogeneity impacts MPCs is through a variance
decomposition exercise. In the simulated population, the variance of MPCs across individ-
uals is 0.036. We can decompose this number into the amount contributed by within-type
variation and that explained by type differences. Letting i  I index individuals, j  J type,
and sj denoting the population share of type j , we have

            V ar(M P Ci ) =          sj V ar(M P Ci |j ) +       sj (E[M P Ci |j ] - E[M P C ])2 .
                                 j                           j


The first term on the right is the weighted sum of within-type variances. The second term
captures how the conditional mean MPC varies by type. For the simulation, the average
within-type variance is 0.028, or 76% of the total. The remaining 24% is accounted for
by differences in means by type, which totals 0.009. Hence, nearly a quarter of the total
variation is accounted for by preferences heterogeneity. Even for within-type heterogeneity,
the nature of preferences plays an important role. In particular, the within-type variance
for the patient/inelastic agents is only 0.014, while it is 0.049 and 0.086 for the impatient
and patient elastic types, respectively. That is, a high inter-temporal elasticity is crucial to
generating a very dispersed within-type cross-sectional distribution of MPCs.
    The final row of Table 19 reports the average IES. Because the consumer's problem
is solved for a fixed set of interest rates, we do not have a policy function with respect to
interest rate changes. This would require solving the model with a specific stochastic process
for interest rates. We therefore consider the thought experiment of a one-time unanticipated
small change in the one-period liquid interest rate (for both borrowing and saving). For
consumers at an interior solution to their Euler Equation, this response is governed by  .
  24
     A second difference is the KV rebate coefficient is for a slightly different experiment. Specifically, they
randomly assign a rebate to half the population in quarter t and to the remaining half in period t + 1.
Thus, everyone is eventually treated, and the control group in the first quarter increases consumption in
anticipation of the transfer. This lowers the rebate coefficient. Performing our experiment using the KV
calibration generates an unanticipated transfer MPC of 0.16 out of $500.


                                                      41
Those with zero liquid assets, which face a discontinuity in the interest rate schedule, and
those at the age-specific borrowing constraint, are assumed to be completely insensitive to
small changes in interest rates and are assigned an IES of zero.25 We abstract from the fact
that in a richer model with interest rate shocks, changes in interest rates may also induce
portfolio rebalancing, altering the response of consumption to changes in the interest rate.
    The result of this experiment for the total population is an implied IES of 0.54, which
is close to the  of the majority of the population and in line with the standard one-agent
macroeconomic calibration. The effective IES of the poor H2M is relatively high, at 0.68.
This reflects that the majority of this group has  = 1.5, combined with the fact that only
36.8 percent of the H 2MN W are at the constraint. Thus, the poor hand-to-mouth may be
relatively responsive to changes in the inter-temporal terms of trade, despite the presence of
borrowing constraints.
    The H 2MLIQ tend to collect at zero liquid assets, due to the discontinuity in the interest
rate schedule, or at the borrowing constraint; in particular, 63.7 percent of the H 2MLIQ
are at zero or the lower bound. Hence, despite the fact that more than a quarter of this
sub-group has  = 1.5, the average effective IES is only 0.21.
    The heterogeneity suggests that the hand-to-mouth are not relatively insensitive to in-
terest rate changes; if anything, they are more responsive. This abstracts from capital gains
or losses due to interest rate policy shifts (as in Auclert (2019)). Nevertheless, it suggests
that hand-to-mouth agents may be effective targets of policies that affect the inter-temporal
terms of trade such as the Car Allowance Rebate System (aka cash-for-clunkers) of 2009,
or sales-tax holidays. The result is also relevant for the timing of insurance. For example,
the progressivity of social security benefits provides some insurance against adverse lifetime
income shocks, but are not paid out until the eligibility age. Lack of precautionary savings
suggests the delay in insurance may be costly for the hand-to-mouth; however, a relatively
high inter-temporal elasticity of substitution suggests there is a countervailing force.
    The calibration also suggests that MPCs are modest; indeed, the aggregate MPC is neg-
ligible and that of the wealthy unconstrained consumers is negative. However, the results do
reinforce the conventional wisdom that low-wealth and low-liquidity agents have a relatively
high MPC, both because of the usual concavity of the consumption function as well as the
relatively high  of these agents.
  25
    This implies that those at the knife edge case of an interior optimum at zero liquidity or the constraint
are strictly constrained.




                                                     42
5.4    Revisiting Consumption Behavior: Model versus Data
In Table 4 we documented that absent controls for type (either fixed effects or frequency
of H 2M status), the hand-to-mouth do not have a higher growth rate of consumption on
average. This runs counter to the standard model without preference heterogeneity discussed
in Section 2. However, once we control for fixed effects or the frequency of H 2M status,
we find in the data that the H 2MN W have stronger growth on average. In particular, those
prone to hand-to-mouth status tend to have a lower growth rate of consumption on average,
making this an important control variable in determining the impact of current H 2M status.
                     Table 21: Consumption Growth: Data vs. Model

                                           Data                         Model
                                   (1)      (2)       (3)        (1)     (2)     (3)

                                   .003   .025   .025
             H 2MN W                                            -.007   .004    .005
                                  (.004) (.006) (.007)

                                   -.009  .003   .002
             H 2MLIQ                                            -.007   -.007   -.007
                                  (.004) (.005) (.005)

             Fraction                                 -.038
                                                                                -.017
             time H 2MN W                            (.009)

             Fraction                                 -.025
                                                                                .004
             time H 2MLIQ                            (.007)


             Fixed effects         No       Yes       No         No      Yes     No
            Note: The columns labeled "Data" reproduce the empirical estimates in Table
            4. The columns labeled "Model" report the corresponding estimates based on
            model generated data.

   In Table 21, we replicate the empirical exercise as well as perform the same set of re-
gressions in our model simulation. The first column for the Model results indicates that
current H 2M status (for both measures) predicts a weakly lower consumption growth rate.
The second column includes fixed effects and increases the coefficient on H 2MN W by 1.1
percentage points. The coefficient on H 2MLIQ , however, remains unchanged. Column (3)
drops the fixed effect but adds the fraction of time spent in hand-to-mouth status as an
additional control. We see that the agents that are frequently H 2MN W have a lower growth
rate on average, consistent with the data. Including this control generates a similar outcome
on H 2MN W as adding the fixed effect.

                                                43
    Interestingly, H 2MLIQ is not sensitive to the inclusion of a fixed effect or the addition of
the frequency control. Moreover, those that are frequently H 2MLIQ tend to have a higher
average consumption growth rate, contrary to the data. This reflects in part that in the model
the H 2MLIQ are richer on average than their empirical counterparts. In particular, they are
relatively patient compared to the average discount factor in the simulated population. In
the data, the liquidity constrained are much closer to the poor hand-to-mouth (both in terms
of assets and behavior) than they are similar to the non-H2M. In the model, this is reversed;
the H 2MLIQ tend to look like the non-H2M.

                Table 22: Average Propensity to Consume: Data vs. Model

                                             Data                        Model
                                     (1)      (2)      (3)        (1)     (2)     (3)

                                    .065   -.007 -.022
              H 2MN W                                             .138   .016    .015
                                   (.010) (.010) (.015)

                                    .077   .005   .005
              H 2MLIQ                                            -.006 .003      .004
                                   (.012) (.009) (.011)

              Fraction                                 .157
                                                                                 .160
              time H 2MN W                            (.022)

              Fraction                                 .191
                                                                                 -.032
              time H 2MLIQ                            (.025)


              Fixed effects          No       Yes      No         No      Yes     No
             Note: The columns labeled "Data" reproduce the empirical estimates in Table
             11. The columns labeled "Model" report the corresponding estimates based on
             model generated data.


   In Table 22, we revisit how the average propensity to consume varies with H 2M status.
The first three columns of the table reproduce the empirical results reported in Table 11.
The final three columns are the counterparts using the model's simulated population. As
was the case in the previous table, the model's H 2MN W track the behavior of their empirical
counterparts. In particular, they have a relatively high APC with no controls for preference
heterogeneity. However, including a fixed effect or the frequency of hand-to-mouth status
lowers this difference substantially. This reflects that those prone to H 2MN W status tend to
have a high APC on average, even when not currently hand-to-mouth.
   The model again fails to match the empirical behavior of the liquidity-constrained hand-

                                                 44
to-mouth. In the model, those that are frequently H 2MLIQ tend to have an APC that is
similar to the non-hand-to-mouth (if not lower). Conversely, in the data those prone to be
H 2MLIQ have a much higher average APC than the non-H2M.
    Finally, in Table 23 we revisit the marginal propensity to consume out of income (MPCY).
In the model, MPCYs tend to be larger than in the data. This is not surprising, given that
income is a random walk in the model and is measured without error. In the data, those
that are frequently H 2MN W tend to have a larger MPCY, a pattern confirmed in the model.
Moreover, controlling for frequency of H 2MN W raises the estimated MPCY of the current
H 2MN W . Again, however, the H 2MLIQ results generate a conflict between model and data.
    Taking stock, the two-asset KV quantitative model, re-calibrated only to allow a limited
set of plausible patience and inter-temporal elasticity parameters, does surprisingly well in
matching the rich empirical patterns documented above. The quantitative model is partic-
ularly suited to match the behavior of the frequently H 2MN W , the sub-sample that, when
assets are low, empirically shows the lowest expected consumption growth as well as highest
average and marginal propensities to consume. The model allows us to pinpoint a willingness
to substitute inter-temporally as a crucial characteristic behind the observed patterns of the
hand-to-mouth in the data.

     Table 23: Marginal Propensity to Consume out of Income: Data (IV) vs. Model

                                                           Data           Model
                                                     (1)          (2)   (1)    (2)

                                                   .082   .045
                y/ (y + ra)                                             .333   .344
                                                  (.020) (.022)

                                                   .038   -.076
                y/ (y + ra) × H 2MN W                                   .229   .159
                                                  (.039) (.062)

                                                   .066   -.023
                y/ (y + ra) × H 2MLIQ                                   .037   .042
                                                  (.047) (.052)

                y/ (y + ra)                                   .188
                                                                               .078
                × Fraction time H 2MN W                      (.087)

                y/ (y + ra)                                   .211
                                                                               -.074
                × Fraction time H 2MLIQ                      (.101)
              Note: The columns labeled "Data" reproduce the empirical estimates in
              Table 13. The columns labeled "Model" report the corresponding estimates
              based on model generated data.



                                                45
6     Conclusion
A workhorse model of savings in the literature has consumers self-insuring their income risk
via a non-contingent asset subject to a borrowing constraint. This model has a number
of predictions for the spending of low-asset households; namely, they should exhibit a lower
average propensity to consume (APC) and higher expected consumption growth, as well as a
higher marginal propensity to consume (MPC). But these predictions are masked or muddled
in the data if differences in household asset holdings also reflect heterogeneity in preferences.
We show that, if either a low discount factor or a high IES is what drives households to
hold few assets, then these hand-to-mouth households can display higher APCs and lower
spending growth. Moreover, such households have a relatively high MPC, even if they are
at their target level of assets.
    We see in the data that hand-to-mouth households actually display higher APCs and
no faster spending growth than households with more assets, consistent with an important
role for preference heterogeneity. These statements apply to households we label as hand-
to-mouth based on their low net worth, or those we label as hand-to-mouth based only on
their lack of liquid assets (the wealthier hand-to-mouth). In addition, low-asset households
show more volatility in their spending, even conditioning on income, and adjust their spend-
ing to a greater extent by varying the number of categories consumed. The latter finding
cannot be explained by heterogeneity in discount factors, but is consistent with low-asset
households exhibiting a higher IES because they have a more active extensive margin to vary
consumption.
    Strikingly, all the "puzzles" we see in spending by hand-to-mouth households project
on a household's long-run average propensity to be hand-to-mouth, not on its current asset
position. That is, it is households that tend to hold few assets, in terms of liquid or illiquid,
that display higher APCs, lower spending growth, more volatile spending, and more volatility
in terms of categories of spending. Furthermore, it is households that are often hand-to-
mouth, especially by net worth, that display the largest responses of spending to changes
in their earnings. We view these findings as consistent with important, relatively stable,
differences in preferences for hand-to-mouth versus other households.
    To identify the source and consequences of this preference heterogeneity, we consider the
two asset setting in Kaplan and Violante (2014) where agents allocate wealth between liquid
and illiquid assets, but allow for heterogeneity in both households' discount factors and IES.
A high-IES household, all else equal, will hold less liquidity to avoid short-term fluctuations
in their consumption, thereby allowing us to distinguish a high IES from impatience. To
match empirical targets, we find that nearly three quarters of the model population must


                                               46
exhibit the higher discount factor of 0.95 as well as the lower IES of 0.5. But to explain
the significant share of households in the data with low net worth or low liquid wealth, the
model requires that the balance of the population have the high IES of 1.5, with a subset
also having a low discount factor. Most notably, the vast majority of the poor hand-to-
mouth are both impatient and have a high IES. The wealthy hand-to-mouth, while not
impatient, disproportionately have a high IES. Thus, we conclude that a high IES is at
least as important as impatience in determining those households that are typically treated
empirically as hand-to-mouth.
    We find, from our two-asset model, that preference heterogeneity plays an important role
in differences in MPCs across consumers. Finally, our model shows that the poor hand-to-
mouth exhibit a higher effective IES than the balance of the population. This reflects the
large share of poor hand-to-mouth with inter-temporally elastic preferences. Thus poorer
households may be more responsive to inter-temporal terms of trade, despite their proximity
to borrowing constraints.




                                            47
References
A¸
 cikg¨   ¨
     oz, Omer  T., "On the Existence and Uniqueness of Stationary Equilibrium in Bewley
 Economies with Production," working paper, 2016.

Aguiar, Mark and Mark Bils, "Has Consumption Inequality Mirrored Income Inequal-
 ity?," American Economic Review, September 2015, 105 (9), 2725­2756.

Aiyagari, S. R., "Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving," The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics, August 1994, 109 (3), 659­684.

Athreya, Kartik, Jos´  e Mustre-del-R´ io, and Juan M. S´   anchez, "The Persistence of
 Financial Distress," The Review of Financial Studies, October 2019, 32 (10), 38513883.

Auclert, Adrien, "Monetary Policy and the Redistribution Channel," American Economic
 Review, June 2019, 109 (6), 2333­2367.

Blundell, Richard, Luigi Pistaferri, and Ian Preston, "Consumption Inequality and
  Partial Insurance," American Economic Review, December 2008, 98 (5), 1887­1921.

Bound, John, Charles Brown, Greg J. Duncan, and Willard L. Rodgers, "Evidence
 on the Validity of Cross-Sectional and Longitudinal Labor Market Data," Journal of Labor
 Economics, 1994, 12 (3), 345­368.

Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, Francisco J. Gomes, and Paolo Sodini,
 "The Cross-Section of Household Preferences," 2019.

Carroll, Christopher D., "The Buffer-Stock Theory of Saving: Some Macroeconomic
 Evidence," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1992, 1992 (2), 61.

   and Miles S. Kimball, "On the Concavity of the Consumption Function," Economet-
  rica, 1996, 64 (4), 981­992.

  , Jiri Slacalek, Kiichi Tokuoka, and Matthew N. White, "The Distribution of
  Wealth and the Marginal Propensity to Consume," Quantitative Economics, 2017.

  , Thomas F. Crossley, and John Sabelhaus, Improving the Measurement of Consumer
  Expenditures, University of Chicago Press, 2015.

Chetty, Raj and Adam Szeidl, "Consumption Commitments and Risk Preferences*,"
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2007, 122 (2), 831­877.

Deaton, A., "Saving and Liquidity Constraints," Econometrica, 1991, 59 (4), 1221­1248.

                                           48
Dynan, Karen E., Jonathan Skinner, and Steven P. Zeldes, "Do the Rich Save
 More?," Journal of Political Economy, 2004, 112 (2), 397­444.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning, "Fiscal Multipliers: Liquidity Traps and Currency
  Unions," Handbook of Macroeconomics, 2017, 2, 2417­2492.

Fisher, Jonathan, David Johnson, Timothy Smeeding, and Jeffrey P. Thompson,
  "Estimating the Marginal Propensity to Consume Using the Distributions of Income,
  Consumption, and Wealth," 2019.

Foster, Kevin, Scott Schuh, and Hanbing Zhang, "The 2010 Survey of Consumer
  Payment Choice," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Research Review, 2013, 13.2.

Gelman, Michael, "What Drives Heterogeneity in the Marginal Propensity to Consume?
 Temporary Shocks vs Persistent Characteristics," 2019.

Grossman, Sanford J. and Guy Laroque, "Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio Choice
 in the Presence of Illiquid Durable Consumption Goods," Econometrica, 1990, 58 (1),
 25­51.

Havranek, Tomas and Anna Sokolova, "Do consumers really follow a rule of thumb?
 Three thousand estimates from 144 studies say "probably not"," Review of Economic
 Dynamics, May 2019.

Havrnek, Tom, "Measuring Intertemporal Substitution: The Importance of Method
 Choices and Selective Reporting," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2015,
 13 (6), 1180­1204.

Huggett, Mark, "The risk-free rate in heterogeneous-agent incomplete-insurance
 economies," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, September 1993, 17 (5-6), 953­
 969.

Imrohoroglu, Ayse, "Cost of Business Cycles with Indivisibilities and Liquidity Con-
  straints," Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97 (6), 1364­1383.

Jappelli, Tullio and Luigi Pistaferri, "Fiscal Policy and MPC Heterogeneity," American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2014, 6 (4), 107­136.

Johnson, David S., Jonathan A. Parker, and Nicholas S. Souleles, "Household
  Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates of 2001," American Economic Review, December
  2006, 96 (5), 1589­1610.


                                         49
Kaplan, Greg and Giovanni L. Violante, "A Model of the Consumption Response to
 Fiscal Stimulus Payments," Econometrica, 2014, 82 (4), 1199­1239.

  , Benjamin Moll, and Giovanni L. Violante, "Monetary Policy According to HANK,"
  American Economic Review, March 2018, 108 (3), 697­743.

  , Giovanni L. Violante, and Justin Weidner, "The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth," Brook-
  ings Papers on Economic Activity, 2014, 45 (1 (Spring), 77­153.

Krueger, D., K. Mitman, and F. Perri, "Macroeconomics and Household Heterogene-
 ity," in "Handbook of Macroeconomics," Elsevier, 2016, pp. 843­921.

McKay, Alisdair and Ricardo Reis, "The Role of Automatic Stabilizers in the U.S.
 Business Cycle," Econometrica, 2016, 84 (1), 141­194.

Michelacci, Claudio, Luigi Paciello, and Andrea Pozzi, "The Extensive Margin of
 Aggregate Consumption Demand," 2019.

Parker, Jonathan A., "Why Don't Households Smooth Consumption? Evidence from a
 $25 Million Experiment," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, October 2017,
 9 (4), 153­183.

  , Nicholas S. Souleles, David S. Johnson, and Robert McClelland, "Consumer
  Spending and the Economic Stimulus Payments of 2008," American Economic Review,
  October 2013, 103 (6), 2530­53.

Rogerson, Richard, "Indivisible labor, lotteries and equilibrium," Journal of Monetary
 Economics, January 1988, 21 (1), 3­16.

Schechtman, Jack and Vera L.S. Escudero, "Some results on an income fluctuation
  problem," Journal of Economic Theory, 1977, 16 (2), 151 ­ 166.

Straub, Ludwig, "Consumption, Savings, and the Distribution of Permanent Income,"
  2019.

Tonetti, Christopher, "Notes on Estimating Earnings Processes," working paper, 2011.

Zeldes, Stephen P., "Consumption and Liquidity Constraints: An Empirical Investiga-
  tion," Journal of Political Economy, 1989, 97 (2), 305­346.




                                         50
      Appendices for "Who Are the Hand-to-Mouth"


A1      Data Appendix
A1.1     Description of PSID sample
Our primary data source is the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) biannual surveys
from 1999 to 2015. The advantage of the PSID for our purposes is that it provides measures
of income, assets, and expenditures. Income measures were a focus of the PSID from it onset
in 1968 (hence its name). The PSID introduced a module to measure assets and liabilities in
1984 that reappeared every five years. Beginning 1999 the PSID includes a wealth module
in every survey. That is one reason we begin our sample in 1999. The second reason is that
the PSID first began surveying households on a number of expenditure categories, beyond
food and housing, with the 1999 survey.
    We focus here on our variable constructions for the key variables of earnings, income,
wealth, and expenditures. We then detail the sample restrictions we employ.
    The analysis separately considers earnings income and a broader measure of after-tax
income that includes net income from assets, including owner-occupied housing. We measure
earnings by wage and salary income, net of payroll taxes, plus the head of households's
labor component of income from any unincorporated business, and one half of family farm
income. We add to these earnings any receipts of government transfer payments from AFDC,
supplemental security income, other welfare payments, veteran's pensions, unemployment
benefits, worker's compensation, or social security benefits. To construct after-tax income,
we first sum taxable income (earnings, net profits from business or farm, and income from
assets), transfer income, and social security income for the husband and wife as well as
other family members. From this we subtract the family's federal and state income tax
liabilities as measured by the TAXSIM program. For homeowners we then add 6 percent of
the respondent's assessed value of their home to account for the implicit rent on their home,
while subtracting payments for property taxes, mortgage interest, and home insurance.
    We define a household net worth as the sum of its liquid and illiquid assets net of debts.
We treat liquid net worth as the sum of balances in checking or savings accounts, money
market funds, certificates of deposit, holdings of treasury bills and other government savings
bonds, the value of stocks outside of pension funds, minus the value of all debts. The values
for checking or savings accounts, money market funds, certificates of deposit, treasuries
and other government bonds are multiplied by 1.055, to reflect cash holdings that are not


                                             51
reported in the survey. See Foster, Schuh and Zhang (2013) for justification. Illiquid wealth
is the sum of a household's home equity, equity in other real estate, holdings of IRAs and
other pensions, the value of bonds (not including treasury or other government bonds),
insurance holdings, the value of any business or farm net of debts, and the value of any
vehicles (including motor homes), boats, and trailers net of debt owed. These distinctions
for liquid versus illiquid assets largely follow Kaplan et al. (2014), while fitting within the
grouping of assets within the PSID questionnaire. Our stratification of households into not
hand-to-mouth, hand-to-mouth by net worth, and hand-to-mouth by liquid wealth are based
on these measures of assets relative to our broad measure of earnings, as discussed at the
beginning of Section 4.
    Our base measure for expenditures includes spending categories for shelter, utilities (by
type), food for consumption at home, food for consumption away from home, gasoline,
health insurance, medical expenses (separately for doctors, hospitals, and prescription drugs),
education, child care, purchases or lease of vehicles, vehicle repair, vehicle insurance, parking,
and public transportation (by type). Spending on shelter reflects rent payments for renters;
for homeowners we set it to 6 percent of respondent's valuation of the home. Our measure of
nondurable and services spending excludes spending on vehicles or their repair from the base
measure. Beginning with the 2005 survey, the PSID added categories for home repairs, home
furnishings, clothing, vacations, recreation, and telecommunications. We consider robustness
to this broader measure in judging households spending relative to income (APC). Our base
measure of expenditures relative to after-tax income averages 58.3 percent. For the broader
measures of expenditures available beginning with the 2005 survey, this average is 73.2
percent.
    In addition to controlling for year and age effects, our regression analysis includes controls
for marital status (single or married/cohabiting), race (three values), and family size. Family
size takes five distinct values, with 5 representing family sizes of 5 and above. For regressions
in growth form, e.g., growth rate of expenditures over two years, the controls reflect year
and age dummies, and a set of dummies for the conceivable changes in marital status and
for whether family size increased, stayed the same, or decreased.
    Respondents report earnings, income, and taxes for the previous calendar year, whereas
they report assets and liabilities as of the interview. Expenditures are reported for differing
time frames. Among categories available from the 1999 survey, education spending is for
the prior calendar year, health spending (including health insurance) for the previous two
calendar years, and vehicle spending for since the survey two years prior. Other categories are
in terms of the household's usual (typically monthly) expenditures. We treat these variables
as aligned with respect to the previous calendar year, with assets viewed as end of period.


                                               52
We deflate nominal variables by the corresponding CPI measured in 2009 dollars.
    Our sample reflects only the PSID's nationally representative core sample (i.e., we use
the Survey Research Center sample, excluding the Survey of Economic Opportunity.). This
sample includes "split-off" families from the orignal sample as well as the PSID sample
extensions to better represent the families of immigrants and recent immigrants. Throughout
the analysis we employ the PSID longitudinal family weights, which are designed to correct
for non-random sample attrition as well as failures to draw an entirely random sample.
    We restrict our sample to households with heads ages 25 to 64. We exclude households
with less than $2,000 (2009 $'s) in any of annual earnings (including transfer receipts), after-
tax income, or annual expenditures. We also exclude households with extreme responses
on expenditures in which food purchases for consumption at home are zero, or spending on
housing and food (home and away) is less than 5% or greater than 90% of total expenditures.
Finally, we include only households whose hand-to-mouth status, from their earnings and
asset information, can be measured for at least three surveys. Table A1 displays the impact
of these restrictions sequentially for our resulting sample, both in terms of households and
number of observations. It also shows the sample impact of examining two-year growth rates,
such as income or expenditure growth.

                          Table A1: Impact of Sample Restrictions

                   Restriction                   Households     Observations
                   Ages 25 to 64                     7,572         35,766

                   Earnings & Inc.$2000              7,476         34,641

                   Expenditures$2000                 7,472         34,565

                   No odd spending                   7,341         33,325

                   H2M status 3+ times               4,907         27,134

                   WRT 2-year changes                4,767         21,569
                  Note: PSID data, 1999 to 2015 survey waves.




A1.2      Description of the Consumer Expenditure Survey Sample
We employ a sample derived from the Consumer Expenditure Surveys (CE) to augment our
evidence from the PSID that low-asset houshold concentrate their spending on a narrower


                                               53
set of categories. We make use of the CE data on income, assets, and expenditure from
survey years 1996 to 2016.
    The CE surveys households on their expenditures for up to four consecutive quarters.
We only include households that were surveyed in the fourth interview. In this interview
they are asked about asset and debt holdings and about their income over the previous 12
months. The CE does not provide information on households pensions, and is more limited
than the PSID in collecting information on some other forms of illiquid assets. Therefore,
we stratify households by assets only with respect to their liquid assets, using the definition
in Kaplan et al. (2014) for households that are hand-to-mouth. The asset information for
liquid assets parallels that in the PSID. It includes the household's balances in checking or
savings accounts, money market funds, certificates of deposit, holdings of treasury bills and
other government savings bonds, the value of stocks outside of pension funds. Debts include
credit card and store credit debt, student loans, and medical or personal loans.
    We express a household's assets relative to its annual income. That income sums house-
hold earnings, farm and business income, retirement payments including from social security,
government transfers, and alimony receipts. Our income measure is before taxes. (The cor-
responding CE variable for after-tax income was eliminated after 2015.)
    Each household's quarterly expenditures are divided into many distinct categories. To
examine the share of categories purchased, we exclude durable categories as well as utilities
(e.g., water, gas, electricity, trash collection) that we view as tied to the choice of housing.
The resulting 27 nondurable categories are listed in Table A2. The table reports the fraction
of households that spend on the category in a quarter, as well as the average fraction adding
or dropping the category in a quarter.


A2      Additional Empirical Results
A2.1      Results Splitting by Age and by Long-term Income
Table A3 reports spending growth and APC for the H2M, by age group. The first age group
includes households with heads ages 25 to 39. The second age group includes households
with heads ages 40 to 64.
    Table A4 reports spending growth and APC for the H2M, by long-term earnings. Long-
term earnings are defined as a household's average natural log of earnings after removing a
cubic function of the head's age and year dummies.




                                              54
                    Table A2: Nondurable Expenditure Categories, CE

 Category                                                     Share   Positive   Add    Drop

 Food at home                                                 0.289    1.00      0.00   0.00
 Motor fuel                                                   0.113    0.92      0.01   0.01
 Food away from home                                          0.097    0.86      0.06   0.06
 Telephone services                                           0.072    0.96      0.02   0.02
 Health insurance                                             0.067    0.61      0.04   0.03
 Motor vehicle insurance                                      0.052    0.61      0.12   0.12
 Professional services                                        0.035    0.52      0.14   0.13
 Video and audio ­ services                                   0.034    0.74      0.04   0.04
 Tuition, other school fees, and childcare                    0.034    0.19      0.06   0.06
 Tobacco and smoking products                                 0.026    0.28      0.04   0.04
 Public transportation                                        0.020    0.24      0.11   0.11
 Tenants' and household insurance                             0.016    0.33      0.08   0.08
 Personal care services                                       0.015    0.68      0.10   0.10
 Club memberships, fees for sports, lessons or instructions   0.014    0.33      0.10   0.10
 Prescription drugs                                           0.014    0.44      0.12   0.11
 Information processing other than telephone services         0.013    0.52      0.07   0.06
 Alcoholic beverages at home                                  0.012    0.40      0.09   0.09
 Admission tickets                                            0.012    0.45      0.14   0.14
 Motor vehicle fees                                           0.012    0.49      0.19   0.18
 Lodging away from home ­ hotel                               0.011    0.19      0.12   0.12
 Household operations ­ nondurables                           0.010    0.24      0.09   0.09
 Laundry and other apparel services                           0.009    0.40      0.10   0.11
 Financial and legal services                                 0.009    0.29      0.12   0.13
 Alcoholic beverages away from home                           0.008    0.32      0.10   0.10
 Hospital and related services                                0.005    0.06      0.05   0.05
 Elderly care, funeral and dating services                    0.002    0.02      0.02   0.02
 Medical supplies                                             0.001    0.02      0.01   0.01


A2.2     More on the Extensive Category Margin
The results of Tables 15 and 16 indicate that the hand-to-mouth consume fewer distinct
categories, but move into and out of categories more elastically. To explore this further, we
decompose the growth in nondurable consumption between t - 1 and t into three components:
the change in spending on goods consumed in both periods (the "intensive" margin); the
addition of new goods; and the dropping of old goods. In particular, suppose individual i
consumes Nk categories of goods in period k = t - 1, t. Let I denote the set of categories
consumed in both t - 1 and t. Let A denote the set of categories added in period t, and D
the set of categories dropped between t - 1 and t. Hence, Nt-1 = I  D and Nt = I  A.


                                             55
                Table A3: Consumption Growth and APC for H2M, by Age

                            Consumption Growth                                  APC
                    Ages 25 to 39          Ages 40-64          Ages 25 to 39           Ages 40-64
                     (1)       (2)         (3)         (4)      (5)       (6)          (7)     (9)

 H 2MN W             .003      .020       .005     .032         .049     -.056       .079      .012
                    (.006)    (.009)     (.006)   (.011)       (.013)   (.023)      (.015)    (.019)

 H 2MLIQ             -.007     .009       -.011    -.001        .066     -.012       .088      .015
                    (.006)    (.008)     (.005)   (.007)       (.016)   (.018)      (.015)    (.014)

 Fraction                      -.032               -.046                 .200                  .115
 time H 2MN W                 (.011)              (.013)                (.032)                (.031)

 Fraction                      -.038               -.016                 .191                  .196
 time H 2MLIQ                 (.013)              (.009)                (.033)                (.032)
Note: Sample is PSID for 1999-2015, with seeing H2M status at least 3 times. Regressions include usual
controls. Standard errors are clustered at household level.




       Table A4: Consumption Growth and APC for H2M, by Long-Term Income

                            Consumption Growth                                   APC
                   Bottom third         Top two-thirds         Bottom third         Top two-thirds
                    (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)          (7)      (9)

H 2MN W             .016      .039       .004      .018         .013     -.024       .032      -.007
                   (.008)    (.014)     (.005)    (.008)       (.022)   (.033)      (.009)    (.012)

H 2MLIQ             .005      .021       -.012     -.006        .085     .034        .027      -.009
                   (.009)    (.012)     (.004)    (.005)       (.026)   (.026)      (.009)    (.011)

Fraction                      -.043                -.027                 .073                  .072
time H 2MN W                 (.016)               (.010)                (.047)                (.018)

Fraction                      -.037                -.012                 .137                  .104
time H 2MLIQ                 (.016)               (.008)                (.047)                (.023)
Note: Sample is PSID for 1999-2015, with seeing H2M status at least 3 times. Regressions include usual
controls. Standard errors are clustered at household level.



                                                  56
Let xn,k denote expenditure on good n in period k = t - 1, t, always expressed in period t
prices. We decompose growth in expenditure between t - 1 and t as follows:

            ct - ct-1           nNt   xn,t -      nNt-1   xn,t-1
                          =
          0.5(ct + ct-1 )            0.5(ct + ct-1 )
                                nI (xn,t - xn,t-1 )       nA xn,t       - nD xn,t-1
                         =                          +                 +                 .
                                 0.5(ct + ct-1 )      0.5(ct + ct-1 )   0.5(ct + ct-1 )
                                      Intensive                Add              Drop


To obtain the contribution of the sub-components, we individually regress the three mea-
sures on the right-hand side of this decomposition on the total growth rate of non-durable
expenditure defined on the left-hand side. Mechanically, the coefficients from the three re-
gressions will add up to one. We run this decomposition for the pooled group of individuals
in the PSID, as well as the non-hand-to-mouth and the hand-to-mouth separately.
    Table A5 reports the results. The estimates indicate that the H2M households are rel-
atively prone to adding and dropping goods as they adjust expenditure while those with
higher wealth tend to operate more on the intensive margin. (The p-value of the tests that
the elasticities are the same across the two groups are all well below one percent.)

              Table A5: Decomposition of Spending Growth by H2M status

                       Status            Not H 2M         H 2MN W    H 2MLIQ
                       Intensive             0.736         0.677      0.734

                       Add                   0.116         0.138      0.114

                       Drop                  0.148         0.186      0.152
                     Note: Regressions include controls for age, year, and
                     changes in family size or marital status. HtM status ob-
                     served at least three times.




A3      The Extensive Margin and the IES: A Simple Two-
        Good Example
In this appendix we provide a simple model that links the extensive margin analysis of
Section 4.8 and the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution. The example is designed to
deliver a transparent and plausible explanation about why certain consumers are prone to
be highly elastic at the margin in terms of total expenditure's response to relative price

                                                     57
(including interest rate) movements.
    Suppose there are two goods, c1 and c2 and utility is given by u(c1 , c2 - cy ), where y
is average income and c is a parameter that captures a minimum consumption level as a
fraction of income. To make things simple, suppose both goods trade at price 1 and period
income is y = 1. We shall contrast two individuals with differing c.
    To make things concrete, let the indirect utility function over expenditure be given by:

                               v (x) = max c1 + 1[c2 >cy ] (c2 - cy )
                                                                     
                                       c1 ,c2

                                    subject to c1 + c2  x,

where 1x is an indicator function that takes value if x is true and zero otherwise, and  is
a parameter. The key static decision is to consume both goods versus only good 1. Figure
A1 plots v (x) for c = 1 (left panel) and c = 0.25 (right panel). The decision between one
versus two goods is to choose the max of the two alternatives (where the two-good option
is depicted by the dashed line). Of course, the switch from one good to two occurs at
much lower expenditures levels for low c. That is, conditional on spending, the agent with
low c is likely to consume fewer categories, just like the H 2M in the data. The important
point is whether the point at which the agent switches is far or close to the typical level of
expenditure. Keep in mind that the decision in the static problem is invariant to monotonic
transformations. Hence, one can make the convex kink as dramatic or negligible as one
wishes without altering the decision of whether to consume the second good.
                               Figure A1: v (x) as a function of x
     v(x)




                                                        v(x)




        0               1                  2                 0                1        2
                        x                                                     x
                   (a) c = 1                                            (b) c = 0.25


   To see how this affects the inter-temporal problem, suppose the individual has the fol-
lowing time-separable utility over two periods, t = 1, 2:

                                        V (x1 ) + V (x2 ),                                 (5)

                                                58
where
                                                            1-
                                                      v (x) 
                                              V (x) =        .
                                                       1-

Given a deterministic income process, yt , and an interest rate R, the consumer's problem
is to maximize (5) subject to x1 + R-1 x2 = y1 + R-1 y2 . Setting  = R-1 = 0.98 and
y1 = y2 = y = 1, Figure A2 plots the value of the objective as we vary x1 and letting
x2 (x1 ) = (2 + r)y - Rx1 . (We also set  = 1/3,  = 1.01.)

                             Figure A2: V (x1 ) + V (x2 (x1 )) as a function of x1
     v(x1)+ v(x2(x1))




                                                             v(x1)+ v(x2(x1))
                        0        1              2                               0         1        2
                                 x1                                                       x1
                            (a) c = 1                                               (b) c = 0.25


    From left to right in Panel (a) of Figure A2, the dashed lines denote the value from (i)
consuming one good in period 1 and two goods in period 2; (ii) consuming one good in
both periods; and (iii) consuming two goods in period one and one good in period two. As
drawn, the individual is indifferent over the three choices. The important point is that small
movements in inter-temporal prices may lead to large shifts in first-period expenditure. In
the right panel, the dashed lines denote the value from (i) consuming one good in period 1
and two goods in period 2; (ii) consuming two goods in both periods; and (iii) consuming
two goods in period one and one good in period two. Here, consuming both goods in both
periods is clearly optimal, and doing so is robust to small movements in the interest rate. In
other words, the agent with low c is more likely to adjust at the extensive margin, similarly
to the H 2M in the data.
    Figure A3 plots the indifference curves for the two period problem. That is, it depicts
                                                   ¯ for various values of V
points (x1 , x2 ) for constant V (x1 ) + V (x2 ) = V                       ¯ . It also includes the
budget line. Again, the non-convex portion is relevant for the left-hand c, but not the right.
Small changes in R (the slope of the budget line), can have a big effect on the inter-temporal
spending of the agent with low c, who willingly shifts spending over time via adding or
dropping the second good. Note that this is akin to this agent having a higher IES.

                                                      59
                         Figure A3: Indifference Curves

     2                                             2
x2




                                              x2


     1                                             1


     0                                             0
         0        1              2                     0          1       2
                  x1                                              x1
             (a) c = 1                                     (b) c = 0.25




                                      60
