                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 USING PAYROLL TAX VARIATION TO UNPACK THE BLACK BOX OF FIRM-LEVEL
                            PRODUCTION

                                       Youssef Benzarti
                                        Jarkko Harju

                                      Working Paper 26640
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26640


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




Harju has received funding from the Strategic Research Council (SRC) at the Academy of
Finland No. 293120, Work, Inequality, and Public Policy. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Youssef Benzarti and Jarkko Harju. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Using Payroll Tax Variation to Unpack the Black Box of Firm-Level Production
Youssef Benzarti and Jarkko Harju
NBER Working Paper No. 26640
January 2020
JEL No. H20,H22,H23

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper uses quasi-experimental variation in payroll taxes to estimate their incidence and
investigate how firms use their input factors. We find that higher payroll tax rates lead to large
employment responses and have no effects on employee earnings. As payroll taxes increase,
firms substitute away from low-skilled, routine and manual workers towards more productive
workers and also reduce investments. Our results imply that, contrary to the canonical tax
incidence model, firm-level production and input factor choices are affected by payroll taxes.


Youssef Benzarti
Department of Economics
University of California
Santa Barbara, CA 93106
and NBER
youssef.benzarti@gmail.com

Jarkko Harju
VATT Institute for Economic Research
Arkadiankatu 7
P.O.Box 1279
00101, Helsinki
Finland
jarkko.harju@vatt.fi
1       Introduction

Payroll taxes are ubiquitous: the vast majority of OECD countries and most of the rest of
the world impose some form of tax on payroll shared between employers and employees and
used to fund social insurance programs. Payroll tax rates can also be substantial, reaching
as much as 60 percent in France, for example. Moreover, the share of total tax revenue
raised by payroll taxes has been steadily increasing in OECD countries since the 1960's, so
much so that payroll taxes now raise more revenue than income taxes (see Figure 1).1 For
these reasons, payroll taxes can impose a substantial burden on the economy. The consensus
among economists is that this burden is mostly borne by workers, and therefore the price of
labor faced by firms is mostly undistorted by payroll taxes.
    In this paper, we estimate the incidence of payroll taxes and, in doing so, open the black
box of the firm to assess how much payroll taxes bias the use of production factors. We use
unique variation in the employer portion of payroll tax rates in Finland. Finnish employers
face a discontinuous increase in payroll tax rates if they exceed a set depreciation threshold.
This triggers a significant change in payroll tax rates, which is equivalent, on average, to a 5
percentage point increase in corporate taxes. Importantly, this variation affects all employees
in the firm, irrespective of their age, occupation status, etc., but does not affect the benefits
they are entitled to. This distinguishes our paper from recent payroll tax incidence papers
such as Saez et al. [2012], Saez et al. [2019] and Bozio et al. [2019] and ends up playing an
important role in interpreting our results.
    Using this exogenous variation, we first establish that payroll taxes do not affect net-of-
payroll-tax employee earnings, implying that firms bear the burden of payroll taxes. We
then estimate the causal effect of payroll taxes on employment and find that payroll taxes
reduce the number of employees, but with substantial heterogeneity by skill level and type
of occupation: the employment effects of payroll taxes are concentrated among low-skilled
    1
    In the US, for example, the share of Federal revenue raised by payroll taxes has increased from less than
10 percent in the 1950's to more than 34 percent in 2016. In OECD countries, they raise 26 percent of total
tax revenue, which is higher than the revenue raised by personal income taxes.


                                                     1
workers and workers performing routine tasks. We also estimate that payroll taxes tend
to reduce investments, which could be either consistent with workers and capital being
complements or with scale effects. Our empirical results support the existence of some scale
effects which tend to mask the substitution between labor and capital.
   There are two main potential concerns with our empirical approach, which we address.
First, regression discontinuity designs can be sensitive to functional form assumptions as
well as bandwidth choice. We address these issues in several ways. First, we use a placebo
test that relies on years when the discontinuity in payroll taxes did not exist and estimate
small and statistically insignificant discontinuities in outcomes at the threshold. Second, we
provide plots of data around the cutoff that transparently and non-parametrically show the
presence of a discontinuity in our outcomes of interest. Third, we show that our estimates are
not sensitive to the use of different functional forms. Fourth, we use the optimal bandwidth
estimates from Calonico et al. [2014], but also vary the bandwidth and find that our estimates
are not affected by bandwidth choice.
   The second potential concern is that we might be estimating evasion responses rather than
real responses. While firms bunch at the threshold, which could be due to evasion, we do not
use this bunching in our estimation. In addition, firms could be misreporting their number
of employees, by hiring them under the table, to avoid the additional payroll tax. There are
three reasons why we believe this behavior cannot explain our results. First, our dataset
contains both accounting and tax measures of the variables we observe and, the accounting
variables are systematically third-party-audited: 93 percent of firms in our baseline sample
are subject to such audits. If our results were due to evasion, our estimates should be
substantially smaller when using the accounting variables instead of the tax variables and
yet we estimate very similar effects in both cases. Second, if the employment response
we estimate was due to firms evading payroll taxes, we should not expect investments to
negatively respond to the increase in payroll taxes as well, but we observe clear effects
on these outcomes. Third, under-reporting the number of employees is very unlikely in


                                              2
Finland: while firms would be saving on payroll taxes, black market employment would
deprive employees of all social insurance benefits and would put them and their employers at
risk of facing legal consequences. Reducing wages to compensate for an increase in payroll
taxes would be far less risky/costly. For these three reasons, it is very unlikely that our
estimates are due to evasion and instead we are likely estimating real responses.
   This paper contributes to the following literatures. The first literature we contribute to
is the tax incidence literature. First, since taxes are at the heart of redistribution, knowing
whether they affect different skill levels differently is key for the design of optimal tax systems.
We provide some of the first evidence on this question by showing that payroll taxes affect
workers of different skill levels employed in different tasks differently. Second, we show that
payroll taxes tend to depress investment either through a capital-labor complementarity or
because of liquidity and scale effects, which should be accounted for when scoring payroll
tax changes. The US Congressional Budget Office, for example, currently assumes, as is
standard in the tax incidence literature, that payroll taxes are fully borne by workers.2 This
assumption implicitly implies that payroll taxes do not distort firm-level input use, which is
inconsistent with our findings and highlights the potential policy implications of our paper.
Third, we complement the compelling evidence of Saez et al. [2012] and Saez et al. [2019], who
use employee age- and cohort-based variation in payroll tax rates to question the consensus
that payroll taxes are borne by workers. Given that their identifying variation is age- and
cohort-specific, they argue that pay inequality concerns could explain their finding that
payroll taxes are borne by firms, since otherwise employers would be paying two different
wages to workers of different ages/cohorts but who are otherwise similar. In contrast, we first
show that, even in settings where payroll tax changes apply to all workers in a given firm,
which circumvents any issues of pay inequality between two workers within the same firm,
payroll taxes are still borne by firms, further exacerbating the inconsistency of this finding
with the canonical tax incidence model. Second, we can assess the distributional effects of
  2
      See, for example: https://www.cbo.gov/budget-options/2018/54805



                                                   3
payroll taxes across the skill and task spectrum, which is not easily implementable in Saez
et al. [2012] and Saez et al. [2019] because of the nature of their identifying variation. Third,
our identifying variation allows us to disentangle two possible channels through which payroll
taxes affect firm-level outcomes: (1) the liquidity channel, i.e. firms changing their behavior
because of the liquidity constraints that higher payroll taxes impose on them, and (2) the
marginal cost channel, i.e. firms changing their behavior because payroll taxes distort the
marginal cost of labor. This is also difficult to implement in Saez et al. [2012] and Saez et al.
[2019] because of the nature of their variation. Saez et al. [2019], for example, compare firms
with a high share of young workers versus firms with a medium share of young workers,
which, as they acknowledge, would capture both the liquidity and marginal cost channel
effects at the same time. In our paper, we find evidence more consistent with the liquidity
channel.
   Second, while there is a large body of work discussing job polarization and its effects
and causes (see Autor et al. [2006] and Goos et al. [2009]), there is limited evidence on how
taxes affect the relative distribution of workers across the skill spectrum. Our paper is one
of the first to show that payroll taxes affect skill levels and job tasks very differently. We
believe this is important, both because we provide an additional channel that could affect
job polarization that had not been explored before and also because our findings show that
payroll taxes, possibly differentiated by skill group or by task, could be used as a policy tool
to counteract job polarization.
   Finally, we contribute to the literature that estimates the capital-labor elasticity of sub-
stitution. The debate in this literature has mostly centered around whether the capital-labor
elasticity of substitution is greater than, equal to or smaller than 1 when using a constant
elasticity of substitution (CES) production function. The consensus has been that the elas-
ticity is equal to 1, prompting researchers to use a Cobb-Douglas production function. More
recently, this consensus has been questioned, for example by Raval [2014] and Oberfield and
Raval [2014], who estimate a capital-labor elasticity that is smaller than 1 (but larger than


                                               4
zero), using a CES framework. Since we estimate that both capital and labor decrease when
payroll taxes increase, our evidence is consistent with a capital-labor elasticity, at the micro
level, that is equal to zero, i.e., capital and labor are estimated to be complements in the
CES framework. However, this decrease in both capital and labor could also be consistent
with liquidity effects, which are implicitly assumed away in the CES framework. For this
reason, at the micro level, our findings could be either consistent with capital and labor being
complements or with liquidity effects dominating the capital labor substitution effect. Using
an empirical test, we show that the liquidity effects are likely to dominate, which calls for
the literature to incorporate and investigate them.



2       Institutional Background and Data

2.1     Institutional Background

2.1.1    Payroll Taxes in Finland

In Finland, social insurance contributions are used to fund pensions, unemployment insur-
ance, accident insurance, health insurance and life insurance. Both employees and employers
contribute to social insurance.3 In general, the largest share of total social insurance contri-
butions goes to pension contributions and employers' statutory share of total contributions
is larger than that of their employees. For example, in 2017, the average pension insurance
contribution rate was 17.95 percent of a given employee's monthly gross wage and the em-
ployee's contribution rate was 6.15 percent. In this paper, we use variation in how much
employers have to contribute to their employees' health and pension fund.
    3
     The split between employees and employers depends on several firm and worker characteristics, including,
for example, the age of the worker.




                                                     5
2.1.2    Identifying Variation in Payroll Tax Rates

Prior to 2010, there were three employer payroll tax rate brackets for health and pension
contributions, depending on the level of capital depreciation and labor costs of the firm, as
shown in Table 1 below.4 Importantly, the contribution rates of employees and the benefits
they qualify for were unaffected by these discontinuities. Category I corresponds to firms
with less than 50,500 euros of annual capital depreciation or more than 50,500 euros but
less than 10 percent of annual salaries. Category II corresponds to firms with depreciation
levels of more than 50,500 euros and 10 to 30 percent of labor costs. When depreciation
levels exceed 50,500 euros and 30 percent of labor costs, contributions are paid according to
Category III.5 The rationale for these three categories was to support labor-intensive firms
by reducing their labor costs and they were originally introduced in April 1973.
   Employers' payroll tax rates are an increasing step function of the category that firms
belong to. We focus on comparing firms in Category I, which fall below the depreciation
threshold, to firms in Categories II and III, which are above the threshold. As illustrated in
Appendix Table 14, firms in Categories II and III face a systematically high payroll tax rate,
approximately 2 to 3 percentage points higher, depending on the years and the category.

                            Table 1: Firm categories for payroll tax rates

         Definition for firm    categories
         I    D < 50,500         or        D  50,500     and D < 0.1 * labor costs
         II D  50,500           and D  0.1 * labor costs and D < 0.3 * labor costs
         III D  50,500          and D  0.3 * labor costs
Note: D refers to tax-deductible capital depreciations and labor costs refer to all salaries.


   In January 2010, these three categories were abolished and the three different contribution
rates were replaced with one single rate for all firms irrespective of annual capital depreciation
levels and labor costs.6
   4
     We provide details of the depreciation rules in Appendix Section A.
   5
     These categories were determined by the latest available tax information and salaries paid for the same
year as that used to determine the depreciation levels. For example, the 2006 payment category was based
on fiscal year 2004.
   6
     See legislation in Finlex: Government Proposal 147/2009.

                                                       6
2.1.3   Collective Wage Bargaining

In Finland, minimum wages are negotiated first at the national level and then at the industry
level between industry-specific employee unions and industry-specific trade unions. These
negotiations set a minimum wage level, which is industry-specific. Importantly, these agree-
ments apply to all workers, not only to employees who belong to labor unions. Although the
collective bargaining is extensive (over 90 percent of employees are covered by a collective
wage agreement), wages can vary across firms and across employees within firms. Firms can,
of course, pay higher wages but also lower wages as long as they remain above the industry-
specific minimum wage. Therefore, collective wage agreement could affect the incidence of
payroll taxes on wages and earnings, but only for workers for whom the minimum wage is
binding, which we assess below.


2.1.4   Accounting versus Tax Depreciation

In Finland, depreciation for tax purposes can differ from depreciation for accounting pur-
poses. Depreciation for accounting purposes is a systematic reduction of the cost of a fixed
asset and is subject to strict auditing and is thus difficult for the firm to manipulate. Accord-
ing to Finnish tax law, the amount of annual depreciation for tax purposes cannot be larger
than that for accounting purposes. This opens up the possibility for firms to manipulate the
amount of tax depreciation, e.g. by reducing tax depreciation to qualify, for example, for a
lower payroll tax rate, whereas this type of manipulation is virtually impossible for account-
ing depreciation. Fortunately, we have data on both the accounting and tax depreciation
levels and thus we can examine the extent to which this manipulation exists. In Appendix
Figure 14, we show that (1) the accounting and taxation depreciation levels are very highly
correlated (upper panel of Figure 14), and (2) the excess mass of bunching firms at the
threshold is very similar when using the accounting and taxation variables (lower panel of
Figure 14). We also implement our empirical approach, outlined below in Section 3, on both




                                               7
the accounting and tax measures and find very similar results.7


2.2     Data

We use firm-level tax record data covering the universe of Finnish firms from 1996 to 2015,
provided by the Finnish Tax Administration. The dataset contains a rich set of firm-level
variables and firm characteristics, including organizational form, location and industry code.
The dataset provides yearly information, at the firm level, on labor costs, number of em-
ployees, both accounting and tax amounts of capital depreciation and the level of capital
investment. Importantly, we can separate investments into three different main categories:
fixed assets, buildings and research and development. In addition, we have firm-level data
on sales and various cost categories, including material and rental costs.
   The upper panel of Appendix Table 15 shows summary statistics for the main firm-level
variables used in the empirical analysis. The lower panel of Table 15 shows the same summary
statistics for the whole population of Finnish firms with annual sales ranging between 10,000
and 100,000,000 euros, to illustrate how comparable the sample of affected firms is to the
whole population of firms. On average, firms are larger in our sample in comparison to
all Finnish firms, but the difference is relatively small. In Appendix Table 16, we also
show the distribution of industry and organizational forms. These two distributions are well
balanced across the threshold. Overall, the variation we use relies on a sample of firms that
is reasonably representative of the population of firms in Finland.
   The only data restriction we apply throughout the paper is that we exclude all firms that
were not subject to the depreciation rules we consider. Specifically, we remove all firms that
have capital depreciation below 10 percent of all wages. Legally, the discontinuity in payroll
tax rates we consider does not apply to these firms, so there is no reason to include them in
the analysis. This restriction removes approximately 25 percent of the total data.
   7
    The results using the tax measures, which are our baseline results, are discussed in Section 3 and the
results using the accounting measure can be found in Appendix Table 13 and are displayed in Appendix
Figure 15.


                                                    8
    In addition to the firm-level data, we also observe a wide set of information on the
employees of these firms, and, importantly, we can match the employee-level dataset to
the firm-level dataset using a unique identifier. Employee-level data are reported annually,
are based on job contracts and contain the following variables, among others: gender, age,
working days and months and annual earnings in each firm. These data also include the
starting and ending dates for each employee-firm job contract pair. In addition, we link
the employee-level dataset to an administrative dataset that contains information on the
education levels of all Finnish individuals in two forms: (1) a dummy for whether an employee
has a high school or a vocational school diploma, and (2) a six-category classification of
the highest education level attained. We first link the job contract data (which contain
information on employees and unique firm identifiers) to our firm-level tax register data
containing the annual depreciation levels and other yearly firm-level variables. We are able
to match 93.2 percent of all firm-year pairs to their employee-year pairs. Second, we link
these two datasets to the dataset containing employee education variables, with a match rate
of 99 percent. Appendix Table 17 provides definitions of the outcome variables and other
variables used in the empirical analysis below.



3     Empirical Strategy

To estimate the response of capital investment to labor costs, we use a discontinuity in
payroll tax rates at the e50,500 depreciation threshold as described in Section 2.1. As
firms cross the e50,500 depreciation threshold, the average (and marginal) payroll tax rates
discontinuously increase, effectively increasing labor costs, as shown in Figure 2.
    Our empirical analysis proceeds in four steps. First, we provide graphical evidence by
plotting all our outcomes of interest around the payroll tax discontinuity to ensure that any
estimated discontinuity in these outcomes is graphically present.
    Second, we formally estimate the size of the discontinuity in our outcomes of interest



                                              9
around the payroll tax rate threshold using a donut hole regression discontinuity design.
Because our running variable (depreciation levels) can be manipulated by firms, we exclude
firms that bunch at the cutoff. The upper panel of Figure 3 shows that firms adjust their
depreciations to avoid exceeding the threshold. Therefore, we cannot use a standard regres-
sion discontinuity design (RDD) approach to estimate the response of capital investment to
labor. Instead, we use a donut hole regression discontinuity design, as in Bajari et al. [2011],
Card and Giuliano [2014] and Barreca et al. [2016]. We use the method from Kleven and
Waseem [2013] to determine the manipulated area which, in their framework, corresponds to
the area of the excess and missing masses. We describe this approach in detail in Appendix
Section B.
   After defining the donut hole region using the bunching method, we follow the approach
of Calonico et al. [2014] to estimate the mean square error optimal bandwidth and report
bias-corrected estimates with robust standard errors. In addition, we perform placebo tests
by running our specification on the post-2010 years, after the repeal of the payroll tax
discontinuity. Formally, we run the following regression:


         log(yi ) =  + 1 · (depri - d) + 2  Abovei + 3  Abovei  (depri - d) +          i      (1)

where yit is the outcome of interest for firm i, depr is the level of capital depreciations, d
is the depreciation threshold above which the average payroll tax rate increases, Above is
a dummy (1 above the depreciation threshold, 0 otherwise),        i   is the error term, which is
estimated following Calonico et al. [2014] and 3 is the coefficient of interest showing the
magnitude of the change of the outcome variable at the payroll tax rate discontinuity. All
variables used in the analysis are defined in Appendix Table 17.
   Third, to ensure that our estimates are not spurious, we run equation (1) on the pre-
2010 years and the post-2010 years separately for each outcome. The treatment years are
the pre-2010 years, when the payroll tax discontinuity was in place. The post-2010 period
corresponds to the placebo years, when there was no payroll tax discontinuity. As a result,


                                              10
the post-2010 period offers a plausible falsification test.
    Fourth, we perform several robustness checks, including varying the size of the donut hole,
the bandwidth and using different degrees of polynomial fit. Our results are robust to all of
these checks, which we describe in detail in Section 4.
    Note that, in principle, we could use a difference-in-difference (DD) approach to estimate
the effect of the repeal of the threshold in 2010. The main reason we do not use this approach
is because we lack a clear-cut counterfactual control group. First, when the payroll tax
rate threshold was repealed in 2010, the payroll tax rates decreased for all firms, including
those below the threshold, which would bias our DD estimates if firms below the threshold
respond differently to those above the threshold due to underlying firm heterogeneity in the
responses. Second, firms periodically move across the threshold, which poses challenges in
defining treatment and control groups and is likely to bias the intensity of treatment in ways
that are hard to account for empirically. These issues are not present in our RD donut hole
setting, since we only rely on cross-sectional variation.



4     Results

In this section, we first establish that there is indeed a discontinuity in the average payroll
tax due by firms. We then use this discontinuity to estimate the effect of payroll taxes on
earnings and then on employment. Finally, we consider the effect of payroll taxes on capital,
as well as on other firm-level outcomes (including sales and productivity measures).


Payroll Tax Rate. Figure 2 plots the average payroll tax rate for health and pension
contributions above and below the e50,500 depreciation cutoff. The average payroll tax rate
exhibits a clear discontinuity at the cutoff, with an increase of 2.6 percentage points. This
confirms the presence of a discontinuity in payroll taxes and validates our empirical design.
While seemingly small in magnitude, especially compared to the payroll tax change analyzed
in Saez et al. [2019], this variation is substantial because, contrary to other payroll tax

                                               11
incidence papers, it affects all employees in a given treated firm. On average, it corresponds
to a 5 percentage point change in corporate taxes for the firms close to the payroll tax rate
threshold in our data.


Earnings. Figure 4a plots the effect of the payroll tax discontinuity on individual employee
earnings net of the employer and employee portions of payroll taxes.8 There is no evidence of
a discontinuity in earnings at the threshold, implying that employees above the cutoff do not
appear to bear the higher payroll taxes. Using equation (1), we estimate the discontinuity in
earnings at the threshold both in the treatment sample (years 1996 to 2009) and the placebo
sample (years 2010 to 2015). Table 2 shows the corresponding results: we estimate a small
and insignificant response in earnings in both the treatment and placebo samples of -0.003
and -0.032, respectively. Similarly, there is no response in earnings to payroll taxes when
estimating equation (1) on different earnings deciles, as shown in Appendix Table 9, or on
different types of workers (unionization status, gender, education and type of task), as shown
in Appendix Table 8. This mitigates concerns that earnings are mechanically prevented from
responding because of collective bargaining agreements, which only bind for low-earners, and
is a test implemented, for example, in Saez et al. [2019]. We return to this in Section 5.


Labor Costs. Next, we consider the effect of the payroll tax rate discontinuity on labor
costs at the firm level. We define labor costs as the total amount spent by a firm on their
employees net of the employer and employee portion of payroll taxes. Figure 4b plots the
response of labor costs to the discontinuity. We observe a decrease in labor costs just above
the cutoff, implying that net of payroll tax labor costs decrease as payroll taxes increase.
This is confirmed by the regression estimates, which show a 17.5 percent reduction in labor
costs. The corresponding placebo estimate is 7.6 percent.
   Since we have estimated that earnings do not respond to the payroll tax, but labor costs
  8
    Note that we winsorize the data by dropping the top and bottom 5% of observations in order to remove
outliers. Winsorizing does not affect the magnitude of the estimates much but reduces their variance.



                                                  12
do, and since labor costs are roughly the product of earnings and the number of employees,
this implies that employment likely responds to the payroll tax discontinuity. Therefore,
next, we estimate the effect of the payroll tax discontinuity on employment.


Employment. Figure 4c confirms that the labor costs response is mostly due to a decrease
in employment (rather than a decrease in earnings): as payroll taxes increase, the number
of employees at a given firm decreases. We estimate a -8.9 percent response to the payroll
tax, as show in column (3) of Table 2. This estimate implies labor demand elasticities that
vary between -2.90 and 4.16, depending on the years and the firm category we consider,
which matter because payroll tax rates vary slightly across years and firm categories. These
estimates are consistent with labor demand elasticities estimated in the labor economics
literature.9
   This finding is important and contrasts with the traditional view of the real effect of
payroll taxes on wages and employment. Since the common wisdom is that payroll taxes do
not affect the price of labor faced by firms as they are passed through to wages, and because
labor demand is more elastic than labor supply, we usually do not expect payroll taxes to
have employment effects. The fact that payroll taxes distort employment is consistent with
the findings of Saez et al. [2019], who show that, when payroll taxes are reduced for workers
aged under than 25, firms tend to employ more of them. We complement their compelling
findings in two ways: (1) we establish that these employment effects exist even when across-
the-board payroll tax changes are implemented, mitigating concerns that these employment
effects may be due to the pay inequality concerns of paying a 25-year-old a different wage
than a 26-year-old, and (2) we can assess the distributional effects of payroll taxes across
the skill and task spectrum, which is not implementable in Saez et al. [2019], since most
25-year-olds hold entry-level jobs that require limited skill levels and experience.
   These estimated employment effects indeed mask important dimensions of heterogeneity
   9
    See, for example, Lichter et al. [2015] for a survey of labor demand elasticity estimates and Ku et al.
[2020] for a recent estimate using payroll tax variation.



                                                    13
along skill levels but also along the type of tasks workers engage in. We describe both below
in detail.


Employment effects along the skill dimension. While the labor economics literature
has devoted substantial attention to the importance of skills in the labor market, our knowl-
edge of the differential effects of taxes by skill level is still limited in public finance.10 In
order to investigate this response, we break down our sample of workers into high- versus
low-skilled. The skill breakdown is based on educational attainment, as is commonly done
in the labor economics literature. In the Finnish education system, there are two main levels
of academic achievement: graduating from high school and graduating from college. We
perform our classification using these two metrics. Our first breakdown classifies workers
without a high school degree as low-skilled, and those with a high school degree as high-
skilled. The second classification draws the skill division at graduating from college. Figure
5 shows the employment effects of payroll taxes for these four groups. We detect no employ-
ment effects for high-skilled workers, whether defined by college or high school graduation,
as shown in Figure 5 panels c and d. Instead, all the effects seem to be concentrated among
low-skilled workers, as shown in Figure 5 panels a and b.
   The graphical evidence is confirmed by our regression estimates in Table 3: the employ-
ment response for low-skilled workers is -22.1 percent (no high school degree) and -16.9
percent (no college degree). In contrast, the effects for high-skilled workers are economically
small and statistically insignificant. The placebo tests (years from 2010 to 2015) show no
response for either low-skilled or high-skilled workers.


Employment effects along the task dimension. A more recent literature has been
arguing that the low-skilled/high-skilled categorization masks important heterogeneity and
a better suited categorization is one centered around job tasks, as surveyed in Acemoglu and
  10
   See the following for examples of the labor market importance of skills: Card and Lemieux [2001],
Carneiro and Lee [2011], Goldin and Katz [2007], Katz and Murphy [1992], Goldin and Katz [1998] and
Krusell et al. [2000]


                                                14
Autor [2011].11 Following this literature and using our dataset, including job descriptions,
we categorize workers into three groups: (1) upper-level employees, which include senior offi-
cials and upper management, senior officials and employees in research and planning, senior
officials and employees in education and training and other senior officials and employees; (2)
lower-level employees, including supervisors, clerical and sales workers and other lower-level
employees; and (3) routine and manual workers, including clerical and sales workers, routine
workers, workers in agriculture, forestry and commercial fishing, manufacturing workers,
distribution and service workers and other production workers.
   Figure 6 plots the employment response for these three groups. The negative employment
response is clearly concentrated among routine and manual workers. There is no substantial
response for non-manual, non-routine lower-level workers and we observe an increase for
upper-level workers. Table 4 confirms these observations and shows that there is a large
negative effect for manual workers (-20.7 percent), and substantially smaller and noisier
effects for lower-level employees (-7.4 percent), and upper-level employees (5.6 percent).


Investments. If the firm production function is such that capital and labor are substi-
tutes, then the employment effects we estimate should result in an increase in investment
to substitute for the decrease in labor. However, if capital and labor are complements, a
decrease in employment should result in a decrease in investment. It is worth noting that
this logic abstracts from any liquidity effects (firms not having enough cash to fund their
operations): if the liquidity effects are larger than the substitution effects, an increase in the
price of labor will lead to an increase in both capital and labor even if capital and labor are
substitutes. We return to this point below, in Section 5.
   Figure 7 shows the effect of the payroll tax discontinuity on investments. Panel a of Figure
7 shows that total investments decrease as a result of the higher payroll tax rates. This
decrease in total investments is driven by a decrease in fixed asset investments (investment
  11
    See also Akerman et al. [2015], Acemoglu and Restrepo [2018], Autor et al. [2003], Hershbein and Kahn
[2018], Autor and Dorn [2013] and Goos et al. [2014].


                                                   15
in machines and equipment), as shown in panel b of Figure 7. We do not observe any change
in buildings, as shown in panel c of Figure 7. And we observe an increase in R&D investment,
as shown in panel d of Figure 7.
   Table 5 provides the corresponding estimates. We estimate a decrease of 13.9 percent for
total investment, which is mostly driven by an 18.0 percent decrease in fixed assets. Note
that we also estimate a 24.4 percent increase in R&D investment, which only affects a few
firms, since the majority do not invest in R&D. The corresponding placebo estimates show
small and insignificant effects for total investment and all other investment subcategories.
   Note that the mechanical positive correlation between investment and capital depreciation
cannot explain these results for two main reasons. First, this correlation is positive, since
the more a given firm invests, the more depreciation it claims, which would go against
our findings that firms above the depreciation cutoff invest less. Second, this mechanical
correlation should affect investment linearly, and should not create a discontinuity at the
cutoff and therefore should not affect our estimation strategy.


Sales and productivity. Given that firms cut back on both capital and labor as a response
to the increase in payroll taxes, one could reasonably expect a decrease in sales. The upper
panel of Figure 8 plots the response of sales. The discontinuity at the threshold is negative.
We estimate a response of -6.5 percent (relative to a placebo of -3.3 percent), implying that
the volume of sales, while it responds negatively as one would expect, exhibits a limited
response. Importantly, the sales response is also statistically indistinguishable from the
placebo estimate.
   We also estimate a large decrease in the use of intermediate inputs of -29.2 percent, which
is consistent with the estimated decrease in sales. Note that, in principle, it could be that
the employment response we estimate is due to outsourcing. However, outsourcing costs are
included in inputs costs, and thus if firms were merely outsourcing employees, we should
observe an increase in inputs costs instead of the estimated decrease.



                                             16
   The observed limited decrease in sales could be consistent with an increase in productivity,
which would also be consistent with the fact that we estimate a decrease in less productive
workers, i.e. manual and routine workers, as well as low-skilled workers. In Figure 8, we
plot the response of labor productivity, which we define as the ratio of firm-level value added
divided by labor costs. We find that labor productivity indeed increases at the threshold. In
Table 6 we estimate that labor productivity increases by 12.8 percent, relative to a placebo
estimate of -6.2 percent. Similarly, we observe that capital productivity ­ value added divided
by annual investment ­ increases at the threshold by 11.3 percent and the placebo estimate
is statistically insignificant at -5.9 percent.
   These results suggest that firms could be mitigating the effects of the higher payroll tax
rates by scaling down on the less productive factors of production.


Robustness checks. We perform the following five robustness checks. First, and as men-
tioned above, we systematically implement our estimates on the post-2010 period, when
the discontinuity did not exist, as a placebo test and consistently estimate very small and
statistically insignificant responses, which mitigates concerns over our identification strategy.
   Second, we vary the bin size to ensure that the discontinuity observed in our graphical
evidence is not driven by this choice. Appendix Figures 11 and 12 plot the responses of
all our outcomes of interest using two smaller bin sizes compared to our standard choice.
Changing the size of the bins does not affect our graphical evidence.
   Third, we vary the size of the bandwidth in our estimations: Appendix Figure 13 shows
the estimated employment and investment responses by size of bandwidth. While small
bandwidths yield noisy estimates, the estimates stabilize relatively quickly and are virtually
constant when considering any bandwidths, even those far from the optimal bandwidth
derived from Calonico et al. [2014].
   Fourth, we vary the size of the donut hole and re-estimate equation (1). Appendix Table
10 reports the estimated investment and employment responses by the size of the missing



                                                  17
mass region (donut-hole region to the right of the threshold). Appendix Table 11 reports the
estimated investment and employment responses by the size of the bunching region (donut-
hole region to the left of the threshold). We estimate that the magnitude of the employment
and investment responses is robust to varying the size of the donut hole, both to the right
and to the left of the threshold.
    Fifth, we re-estimate equation (1) using second- and third-degree polynomials. Appendix
Table 12 reports the estimates for employment and investment. The estimates are also robust
to the choice of polynomial degree, and, if anything, the magnitude of the estimates is larger
with more flexible polynomials compared to our baseline estimates.



5      Implications for Firm-Level Production

Wages are downwards rigid. This is a finding that has been widely discussed in the
labor economics literature.12 Notably, Card [1990], shows that nominal wage rigidity leads
to employment effects at the firm level. Yet, in spite of this large literature documenting the
existence of wage rigidity, there is limited evidence of wages not responding to payroll tax
increases, and the consensus in public finance is still that the incidence of payroll taxes is
fully borne by workers.
    In principle, in our setting, wages could be rigid because of the prevalence of collective
sector-level wage agreements in Finland. These agreements set the industry-level minimum
wage, but otherwise allow wages to vary flexibly, and therefore should only bind for low-
earners. Therefore, they could explain why payroll taxes are fully borne by firms, but only
for employees earning the collectively bargained minimum wage. In Appendix Table 9, we
test whether the earnings of top earners respond to payroll taxes by showing the earnings
responses by earnings deciles. We find that they do not, suggesting that collective wage
agreements are not the explanation for payroll taxes being borne by firms, at least for non-
  12
   See, for example, Akerlof et al. [1996], Kahn [1997], Card and Hyslop [1997], Dickens et al. [2007],
Barattieri et al. [2014].


                                                  18
minimum wage-earning workers.
   What explains downwards wage rigidity? While this is beyond the scope of this paper,
several explanations have been put forward, including, more recently, explanations based on
fairness and norms. Kaur [2019], for example, shows, using a survey of farm workers in India,
that fairness considerations a la Kahneman et al. [1986] are likely to explain wage rigidity.
   Interestingly, we find that belonging to a labor union has limited employment effects as
shown in Figure 9 and Table 7. In other words, the employment responses seem to be very
similar whether or not employees belong to a labor union or not. This could be due to two
reasons: (1) labor unions tend to represent everyone in a particular industry, irrespective of
whether an employee actually contributes, or (2) the employment effects are not driven by
employees being fired but instead by fewer employees being hired. We believe both could
be at play in our setting, and as the collective bargaining in wage-setting is widely applied
across sectors in Finland, the first reason is likely to be very relevant.


At the micro level, we estimate that labor and capital are complements. When
assuming a constant elasticity of substitution (CES) production function, our results imply a
micro capital-labor elasticity of substitution that is equal to zero. We derive these predictions
in Appendix Section C, but the intuition for this result is straightforward. If the elasticity of
substitution between capital and labor is positive, then when labor decreases (after payroll
taxes increase), capital should increase, as firms substitute away from labor towards capital.
Instead, we estimate that, as labor decreases, so does capital, which implies that the two
are complements in the CES framework and that the micro-level capital-labor elasticity of
substitution is zero, i.e. that the production function is Leontief.
   There are very few estimates of firm-level capital-labor elasticity of substitution. Two
notable exceptions are Raval [2014] and Oberfield and Raval [2014], who estimate the capital-
labor elasticity of substitution using micro data by relying on cross-sectional variation in local
wages. Oberfield and Raval [2014] also offer a framework to aggregate micro elasticities into



                                               19
macro elasticities. Both papers estimate a capital-labor elasticity of substitution below one,
but the estimates are well above zero.
   Our paper provides one of the first of such estimates using a quasi-experimental setup. Our
estimate is far from the macro estimate, and while Houthakker [1955] shows that even micro-
level Leontief production functions can be aggregated to CES with a capital-labor elasticity
of substitution greater than 1, we show, in Appendix Section C, using the aggregation
framework from Oberfield and Raval [2014], that the macro-level capital-labor elasticity of
substitution implied by our micro estimate is far smaller than 1. In principle, this could cast
doubt on the argument put forth in Piketty [2014] that a fall in labor shares is likely driven
by a capital-labor elasticity of substitution greater than 1.
   However, if we step away from the CES framework, the positive correlation between
capital and labor could also be consistent with liquidity effects being larger than substitution
effects, which we explore below.


Liquidity Effects. Are liquidity constraints binding? In spite of this question being seem-
ingly simple, there is no clear empirical answer to it. Modigliani and Miller [1958] predict
that, with no differential costs of internal and external financing, firms should not face sub-
stantial liquidity constraints. On the other hand, if external financing is more costly than
internal financing ­ possibly because of asymmetric information or incomplete contracting
­ cash injections should have a positive effect on capital expenditures. Rauh [2006], for
example, uses a regression kink design at the pension funding threshold below which firms
have to spend extra cash to ensure that their pensions are funded. He finds that the ad-
ditional cash generated by the pension funding threshold affects capital expenditures but
acknowledges the possibility that external financing costs might be discontinuously different
above and below the pension funding cutoff, thus biasing the magnitude of the response
upwards. Another example is Blanchard et al. [1994], who analyze the response of a sample
of eleven firms to winning monetary payments from lawsuits and find no effect on capital



                                              20
expenditures, consistent with the prediction of Modigliani and Miller [1958]. Similarly, Saez
et al. [2019] acknowledge that the firm-level effect of payroll taxes that they estimate is the
combined effect on business activity of both cash windfalls and factor price changes. Because
of their empirical design, which compares labor-intensive versus capital-intensive firms, they
cannot disentangle these two effects.
    Using our empirical design, we can investigate whether payroll taxes impose substantial
liquidity constraints on firms by implementing a simple test: if labor and capital are comple-
ments, then we should observe a constant labor-to-capital ratio above and below the payroll
tax discontinuity. Figure 10 shows a decrease in the labor-to-capital ratio as payroll taxes
increase, implying that there could be substitution away from labor to capital that is masked
overall by liquidity effects.



6     Conclusion

In this paper, we use quasi-experimental variation in payroll taxes to investigate how firms
use their input factors. We uncover several new facts about firm behavior: as the cost of labor
increases, (1) firms substitute away from low-skilled, routine and manual workers towards
more productive workers, (2) firms decrease investments, while (3) productivity increases.
    Our results have important implications for our understanding of firm-level production
and input factor choices. First, our findings are inconsistent with large micro-level substi-
tution between capital and labor, or at the very least larger than liquidity effects. Second,
our results highlight the importance of accounting for heterogeneity in skill level and job
tasks when estimating the incidence of payroll taxes. Third, from a policy perspective, our
estimates imply that payroll taxes impose a negative fiscal externality on several other fiscal
bases as they reduce capital but also profits. This effect should be taken into account when
governments score payroll tax changes.




                                              21
References
Daron Acemoglu and David Autor. Skills, tasks and technologies: Implications for employ-
  ment and earnings. In Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 4, pages 1043­1171. Elsevier,
  2011.
Daron Acemoglu and Pascual Restrepo. The race between man and machine: Implications
  of technology for growth, factor shares, and employment. American Economic Review,
  108(6):1488­1542, 2018.
George A Akerlof, William T Dickens, George L Perry, Robert J Gordon, and N Gregory
  Mankiw. The macroeconomics of low inflation. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
  1996(1):1­76, 1996.
Anders Akerman, Ingvil Gaarder, and Magne Mogstad. The skill complementarity of broad-
  band internet. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130(4):1781­1824, 2015.
Pol Antras, Teresa C Fort, and Felix Tintelnot. The margins of global sourcing: theory and
  evidence from US firms. American Economic Review, 107(9):2514­64, 2017.
David Autor and David Dorn. The growth of low-skill service jobs and the polarization of
  the US labor market. American Economic Review, 103(5):1553­97, 2013.
David Autor, Lawrence Katz, and Melissa Kearney. The polarization of the US labor market.
  American economic review, 96(2):189­194, 2006.
David H Autor, Frank Levy, and Richard J Murnane. The skill content of recent technological
  change: An empirical exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4):1279­1333,
  2003.
Patrick Bajari, Han Hong, Minjung Park, and Robert Town. Regression discontinuity designs
  with an endogenous forcing variable and an application to contracting in health care.
  Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2011.
Alessandro Barattieri, Susanto Basu, and Peter Gottschalk. Some evidence on the impor-
  tance of sticky wages. American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(1):70­101, 2014.
Alan I Barreca, Jason M Lindo, and Glen R Waddell. Heaping-induced bias in regression-
  discontinuity designs. Economic Inquiry, 54(1):268­293, 2016.
Olivier Jean Blanchard, Florencio Lopez-de Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. What do firms do
  with cash windfalls? Journal of Financial Economics, 36(3):337­360, 1994.
Antoine Bozio, Thomas Breda, and Julien Grenet. Does tax-benefit linkage matter for the
  incidence of social security contributions? Working paper, 2019.
Sebastian Calonico, Matias D Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik. Robust nonparametric confi-
  dence intervals for regression-discontinuity designs. Econometrica, 82(6):2295­2326, 2014.




                                            22
David Card. Unexpected inflation, real wages, and employment determination in union
  contracts. The American Economic Review, pages 669­688, 1990.
David Card and Laura Giuliano. Does gifted education work? For which students? Working
  paper, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2014.
David Card and Dean Hyslop. Does inflation "grease the wheels of the labor market"? In
  Reducing inflation: Motivation and strategy, pages 71­122. University of Chicago Press,
  1997.
David Card and Thomas Lemieux. Can falling supply explain the rising return to college
  for younger men? A cohort-based analysis. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2):
  705­746, 2001.
Pedro Carneiro and Sokbae Lee. Trends in quality-adjusted skill premia in the United States,
  1960-2000. American Economic Review, 101(6):2309­49, 2011.
Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. Adjustment costs, firm
  responses, and micro vs. macro labor supply elasticities: Evidence from Danish tax records.
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(2):749 ­ 804, 2011.
William T Dickens, Lorenz Goette, Erica L Groshen, Steinar Holden, Julian Messina, Mark E
  Schweitzer, Jarkko Turunen, and Melanie E Ward. How wages change: micro evidence
  from the international wage flexibility project. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21(2):
  195­214, 2007.
Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F Katz. The origins of technology-skill complementarity. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(3):693­732, 1998.
Claudia Goldin and Lawrence F Katz. The race between education and technology: The
  evolution of US educational wage differentials, 1890 to 2005. Working paper, National
  Bureau of Economic Research, 2007.
Maarten Goos, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons. Job polarization in Europe. American
  Economic Review, 99(2):58­63, 2009.
Maarten Goos, Alan Manning, and Anna Salomons. Explaining job polarization: Routine-
  biased technological change and offshoring. American Economic Review, 104(8):2509­26,
  2014.
Brad Hershbein and Lisa B Kahn. Do recessions accelerate routine-biased technological
  change? Evidence from vacancy postings. American Economic Review, 108(7):1737­72,
  2018.
Hendrik S Houthakker. The Pareto distribution and the Cobb-Douglas production function
  in activity analysis. The Review of Economic Studies, 23(1):27­31, 1955.
Shulamit Kahn. Evidence of nominal wage stickiness from microdata. The American Eco-
  nomic Review, 87(5):993­1008, 1997.


                                             23
Daniel Kahneman, Jack L Knetsch, and Richard Thaler. Fairness as a constraint on profit
  seeking: Entitlements in the market. The American Economic Review, pages 728­741,
  1986.
Lawrence F Katz and Kevin M Murphy. Changes in relative wages, 1963­1987: supply and
  demand factors. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1):35­78, 1992.
Supreet Kaur. Nominal wage rigidity in village labor markets. American Economic Review,
  109(10):3585­3616, 2019.
Henrik J. Kleven and Mazhar Waseem. Using notches to uncover optimization frictions
  and structural elasticities: Theory and evidence from Pakistan. The Quarterly Jour-
  nal of Economics, 128(2):669­723, 2013. doi: 10.1093/qje/qjt004. URL http://qje.
  oxfordjournals.org/content/128/2/669.abstract.
Per Krusell, Lee E Ohanian, Jos´e-V´ictor R´
                                           ios-Rull, and Giovanni L Violante. Capital-skill
  complementarity and inequality: A macroeconomic analysis. Econometrica, 68(5):1029­
  1053, 2000.
H Ku, U Schoenberg, and R Schreiner. Do place-based tax incentives create jobs? Journal
  of Public Economics, 2020.
Andreas Lichter, Andreas Peichl, and Sebastian Siegloch. The own-wage elasticity of labor
  demand: A meta-regression analysis. European Economic Review, 80:94­119, 2015.
Franco Modigliani and Merton H Miller. The cost of capital, corporation finance and the
  theory of investment. The American Economic Review, 1:3, 1958.
Ezra Oberfield and Devesh Raval. Micro data and macro technology. 2014.
Thomas Piketty. Capital in the 21st Century. Harvard University Press Cambridge, MA,
  2014.
Joshua D Rauh. Investment and financing constraints: Evidence from the funding of corpo-
  rate pension plans. The Journal of Finance, 61(1):33­71, 2006.
Devesh Raval. The micro elasticity of substitution and non-neutral technology. Working
  paper, 2014.
Emmanuel Saez, Manos Matsaganis, and Panos Tsakloglou. Earnings determination and
  taxes: evidence from a cohort-based payroll tax reform in Greece. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 127(1):493­533, 2012.
Emmanuel Saez, Benjamin Schoefer, and David Seim. Payroll taxes, firm behavior, and rent
  sharing: Evidence from a young workers' tax cut in Sweden. American Economic Review,
  109(5):1717­63, 2019.




                                            24
Figure 1: Payroll and Income Tax Shares of Total Tax Revenue
                         (a) OECD Countries




                             (b) Finland




    Notes: These Figures plot the share of total tax revenue raised
    by payroll and income taxes over time in the OECD countries
    (Figure 1a) and in Finland (Figure 1b).




                                  25
                Figure 2: Payroll Tax Rate
               (a) Treatment Years (1996-2009)




                (b) Placebo Years (2010-2015)




Notes: This Figure plots the average payroll tax rates above and
below the capital depreciation threshold for health and pension
contributions. The second panel shows a placebo test for years
2010 to 2015 for the same variable.



                              26
          Figure 3: Distribution Around Cutoff
               (a) Treatment Years (1996-2009)




                (b) Placebo Years (2010-2015)




Notes: These Figures plot the distributions of capital deprecia-
tion in the treatment years (1996-2009) and placebo years (2010-
2015) around the threshold. We follow the methods of Kleven
and Waseem [2013] to estimate the excess mass at the threshold
and determine the manipulated area, corresponding to the area
of the excess and the missing masses. This approach is explained
in more detail in Appendix Section B.

                              27
                            Figure 4: Earnings and Labor Costs
           (a) Earnings                                                   (b) Labor Costs
28




                                     (c) Number of Employees




     Notes: The first panel shows the response of earnings per employee (in logs) at the payroll
     tax discontinuity. The second panel shows the response of labor costs net of payroll taxes
     paid by firms to the payroll tax discontinuity. The years included are 1996 to 2009.
                       Figure 5: Employment Effects by Skill Level
29




     Notes: These Figures plot the (log) number of employees with lower than secondary educa-
     tion (first panel), with no high school diploma (second panel), with higher than secondary
     education (third panel) and with a high school degree in firms around the capital depre-
     ciation threshold.
                       Figure 6: Employment Effects by Job Task
30




     Notes: These Figures plot the (log) number of employees by type of task.
                                            Figure 7: Effects on Investments
31




     Notes: These Figures plot the (log) total annual investments of firms (first panel), and total investments divided by
     fixed assets (second panel), buildings (third panel) and R&D (fourth panel) around the capital depreciation threshold.
                                         Figure 8: Production and Productivity
32




     Notes: These Figures plot the (log) sales (first panel), labor (lower-left panel) and capital productivity (lower-right
     panel) of firms around the capital depreciation threshold.
                                    Figure 9: Employment by Unionization Status
33




     Notes: These Figures plot the (log) number of non-union employees, employees paying unemployment insurance pay-
     ments but not belonging to a union (fake union) and employees belonging to a labor union around the capital depreciation
     threshold.
                                   Figure 10: Liquidity Test
34




     Notes: This Figure plots the share of labor costs divided by total assets around the capital
     depreciation threshold.
                     Table 2: Effects on Earnings and Number of Employees
                             Outcomes (logs)      Earnings      Labor Costs           No. Employees
                                                                 Treatment
                             RD Estimate            -0.003       -0.175***              -0.089***
                                                   (0.008)        (0.041)                (0.028)

                             Bandwidth             11,417            17,540              19,011
                             N above               12,832            22,749              24,115
                             N below               29,299            61,477              67,368

                                                                     Placebo
                             RD Estimate            -0.032            0.076               0.034
                                                   (0.023)           (0.063)             (0.037)

                             Bandwidth             8,773             14,237              18,214
                             N above               5,438             9,865               12,771
                             N below               10,491            21,308              29,923
Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on log earnings (first column), log labor costs (second column)
and log number of employees (third column). The upper panel shows the results for the pre-2010 period (treatment) and
the bottom panel shows the results for the post-2010 period (placebo). The Table shows the bias-corrected estimates with
robust standard errors, the size of the optimal bandwidth (one common mean square error optimal bandwidth), the number
of observations above (N above) and below (N below) the threshold within the bandwidth, respectively, following Calonico
et al. [2014].




                                           Table 3: Effects by Skills
                            Log No.           High      No Highs         Secondary        Lower than
                            Employees        School      School          or Higher        Secondary
                                                        Treatment
                            RD Estimate       0.047     -0.221***          0.055           -0.169***
                                             (0.056)     (0.063)          (0.049)           (0.060)

                            Bandwidth        11,626         8,241          12,253            8,709
                            N above           8,567         7,811           8,204            8,792
                            N below          18,505         18,749         19,091           18,784

                                                         Placebo
                            RD Estimate       -0.081      0.008            -0.076            -0.036
                                             (0.149)     (0.052)          (0.112)           (0.061)

                            Bandwidth         6,851         11,623            7,571         10,530
                            N above           2,336         7,812             2,608         6,666
                            N below           4,577         15,402            4,777         12,734
Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on log number of employees with a high school degree (first
column), with no high school degree (second column) with a college degree or higher (third column) and without a college
degree (forth column). The upper panel shows the results for the pre-2010 period (treatment) and the bottom panel shows
the results for the post-2010 period (placebo). The Table shows the bias-corrected estimates with robust standard errors,
the size of the optimal bandwidth (one common mean square error optimal bandwidth), the number of observations above
(N above) and below (N below) the threshold within the bandwidth, respectively, following Calonico et al. [2014].




                                                              35
                                       Table 4: Effects by Job Tasks
                                Log No.          Upper-level       Lower-level      Manual
                                Employees         workers           workers         workers
                                                                   Treatment
                                RD Estimate        0.056*           -0.074*        -0.207***
                                                   (0.029)          (0.041)         (0.047)

                                Bandwidth          14,997            11,700         10,496
                                N above            20,100            14,908         12,901
                                N below            49,474            35,022         30,261

                                                                     Placebo
                                RD Estimate         0.030             0.022          -0.005
                                                   (0.042)           (0.051)        (0.050)

                                Bandwidth          10,505            11,801         12,612
                                N above            7,817             9,046           9,781
                                N below            15,489            18,190         19,951
Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on the number of upper-level employees (first column), log
lower-level employees (second column) and log manual workers (third column). The upper panel shows the results for the
pre-2010 period (treatment) and the bottom panel shows the results for the post-2010 period (placebo). The Table shows
the bias-corrected estimates with robust standard errors, the size of the optimal bandwidth (one common mean square error
optimal bandwidth), the number of observations above (N above) and below (N below) the threshold within the bandwidth,
respectively, following Calonico et al. [2014].




                                      Table 5: Effect on Investments
                         Outcomes (logs)    Investment       Fixed assets      Buildings       R&D
                                                             Treatment
                         RD Estimate          -0.139***      -0.180***            0.120       0.244**
                                               (0.043)        (0.047)            (0.119)      (0.101)

                         Bandwidth             20,376             18,755         13,284        15,799
                         N above               24,993             22,227         7,514         10,006
                         N below               71,862             61,295         17,493        22,601

                                                               Placebo
                         RD Estimate            0.052           0.016             0.128        0.158
                                               (0.066)         (0.067)           (0.150)      (0.165)

                         Bandwidth             16,538             16,535         14,402        12,906
                         N above               11,144             10,536         4,918          4,057
                         N below               25,139             23,743          9,969        7,762
Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on log total investments (first column), log investment in
fixed assets (second column), log investment in buildings (third column) and log investment in research and development
(fourth column). The upper panel shows the results for the pre-2010 period (treatment) and the bottom panel shows the
results for the post-2010 period (placebo). The Table shows the bias-corrected estimates with robust standard errors, the
size of the optimal bandwidth (one common mean square error optimal bandwidth), the number of observations above (N
above) and below (N below) the threshold within the bandwidth, respectively, following Calonico et al. [2014].




                                                             36
                            Table 6: Effect on Firm Production Measures
          Outcomes (logs)      Sales       Inputs      Markup      Labor Productivity     Capital Productivity
                                         Treatment
          RD Estimate         -0.065**    -0.292**       0.014          0.128***                0.113**
                               (0.027)     (0.128)      (0.054)          (0.028)                (0.046)

          Bandwidth            25,227      27,884       23,658           19,224                  23,112
          N above              32,834       36,345      22,840           24,615                  27,615
          N below             114,189      118,055      74,573           69,495                  86,439

                                           Placebo
          RD Estimate          -0.033       0.142        -0.008           -0.062                  -0.059
                              (0.050)      (0.163)      (0.064)          (0.038)                 (0.089)

          Bandwidth            15,997      14,461       18,405           14,672                  14,868
          N above              12,225      11,121       13,219           10,110                   9,813
          N below              28,483      24,964       32,494           21,956                  21,345
Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on log sales (first column), log intermediate inputs (second
column), log markup (third column), labor productivity (fourth column) and capital productivity (fifth panel). The upper
panel shows the results for the pre-2010 period (treatment) and the bottom panel shows the results for the post-2010 period
(placebo). Table shows bias-corrected estimates with robust standard errors, the size of optimal bandwidth (one common
mean square error optimal bandwidth), the number of observations above (N above) and below (N below) the threshold
within bandwidth, respectively, following Calonico et al. [2014].




                                                           37
                                           Table 7: Role of Unions
                    Outcomes        Share of union    No. not union     No. fake union    No. union
                                      employees        employees          employees       employees
                                                        Treatment
                    RD Estimate          -0.014          -0.056*          -0.138***       -0.107***
                                        (0.015)          (0.030)           (0.044)         (0.036)

                    Bandwidth           9,372             14,527             9,456          9,860
                    N above              8,966            19,418            11,114          11,805
                    N below             20,343            47,297            26,246          27,809

                                                         Placebo
                    RD Estimate          0.001            0.052              0.070          -0.015
                                        (0.016)          (0.043)            (0.045)        (0.033)

                    Bandwidth           10,951            12,101            11,213          11,030
                    N above              6,560             9,327             8,479          8,304
                    N below             12,131            18,818            16,935          16,522
Note: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on log share of union employes (first column), log number
of employees not affiliated with a union (second column), log number of employees affiliated with a union that provides
insurance benefits but no representation (fake union) (third column) and log number of employees affiliated with a union
that provides insurance benefits and representation (fourth column). See Table 17 in Appendix for exact definitions for fake
union and real union measures. The upper panel shows the results for the pre-2010 period (treatment) and the bottom panel
shows the results for the post-2010 period (placebo). Table shows bias-corrected estimates with robust standard errors, the
size of optimal bandwidth (one common mean square error optimal bandwidth), the number of observations above (N above)
and below (N below) the threshold within bandwidth, respectively, following Calonico et al. [2014].




                                                          38
ONLINE APPENDIX NOT FOR PUBLICATION

A     Depreciation Rules
The Finnish tax authorities' definition of capital is any fixed assets, including all long-term
tangibles that firms use in their production process to generate income that cannot easily
be converted into cash, such as land, buildings, machinery, stocks, equipment, vehicles,
leasehold improvements, and other such items. Firms can choose their depreciation rules:
(1) linear depreciation with the same euro value per year, or (2) double declining balance
depreciation with the same percentage per year. In Finland, buildings, other constructions,
machinery and equipment are all depreciated using the declining balance method. There are
also different depreciation rules and percentages for different asset types. Depreciation for
each building is calculated separately, with the maximum depreciation percentage varying
from 4 percent to 20 percent, depending on the type of construction. For example, the
annual depreciation rate for office buildings is 4 percent, 7 percent for factory buildings and
20 percent for immovable capital. The maximum rate of depreciation of machinery and
equipment is 25 percent.
   The life of assets can vary depending on the asset type and this directly affects the amount
of depreciation. Assets with a useful life of less than three years may be written off using the
free depreciation method, i.e. deduct up to 100 percent of the cost of assets in a single tax
year where the value of each item is less than 850 euros and the total value of such assets is
no more than 2,500 euros per tax year. Patents and other intangible rights, such as goodwill,
are amortized on a straight-line basis for ten years, unless the taxpayer demonstrates that
the asset has a shorter useful life.


B     Bunching Methodology
We follow Chetty et al. [2011] and Kleven and Waseem [2013] in estimating the magnitude
of bunching. First, we construct the counterfactual density by excluding the "distorted
distribution" close to the observed distribution, and then fit a flexible polynomial function
using the undistorted distribution.
    We begin by constructing a bin sample. We divide the data into 100 euro bins and count
the number of firms in each bin. Then we estimate a counterfactual density by running the
following regression while excluding the region around the threshold [DL , DH ]:




                                              39
                                 p                DH
                                            i
                         cj =         i (Dj ) +          i · 1(Dj = i) + j                (2)
                                i=0               i=DL

   where cj is the count of firms in bin j , Dj denotes the depreciation in bin j and p is the
order of the polynomial. Therefore, the estimated values for the counterfactual density are
^j = p
c                  i
        i=0 i (Dj ) . We can calculate the excess bunching by comparing the actual number
of firms just below the threshold (within (DL , D )) to the estimated counterfactual density
within the same region:

                                                   D
                                      ^            i=DL (cj - c^j )
                                      b(D ) =       D 
                                                    i=DL c^j /Nj
    where Nj represents the number of bins within [DL , D ].
    As is common in the bunching literature, we define the lower limit of the excluded region
(DL ) simply based on visual observations, representing the point where bunching begins.
    We follow the approach of Kleven and Waseem [2013] to define the upper limit and thus
the marginal buncher firm DH . This point is determined such that the estimated excess
mass equals the estimated missing mass above the threshold D . In practice, we do this
using an iterative process which starts with a small DH and converges when the excess mass
is equal to the missing mass, i.e. ^
                                   bE (y  )  ^
                                             bM (y  ).
    Finally, we calculate standard errors by using a residual-based bootstrap procedure. We
first generate a large number of depreciation distributions by randomly resampling the resid-
uals from equation (2) with a replacement. Then, based on the resampled distributions, we
estimate a large number of counterfactual densities. In the bootstrap procedure, we also
take into account the iterative process to determine the marginal buncher. Based on these
bootstrapped counterfactual densities, we evaluate variation in the estimates of interest. The
standard errors for each estimate are defined as the standard deviation in the distribution
of the estimate.


C     Capital-Labor Elasticity of Substitution: Concep-
      tual Framework
C.1     Micro Capital-Labor Elasticity of Substitution
Production Function. We assume that firms exhibit constant elasticity of substitution
(CES) production functions as follows:


                                                  40
                                                   -1                   -1     
                                  F (k, l) = (k         + (1 - )l            ) -1 ,

   where k is capital, l is labor, and  and  are parameters.  is assumed to be strictly
positive and has no upper bound. When   0, it can be shown that the production function
is Leontief with the following form:

                                          F (k, l) = min(k, l).

   Denote by k,l the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor and by RTS the rate
of technical substitution between capital and labor. It can be shown that the capital-labor
substitution elasticity only depends on  :

                                   d(k/l) RT S     d(k/l) -Fl /Fk
                        k,l   =                =                  = .
                                  d(RT S ) k/l   d(-Fl /Fk ) k/l
   Next, since we are interested in how capital and labor respond to changes in payroll taxes,
we derive the demands for labor and capital by minimizing the cost function subject to a
production level constraint. We assume  > 0 throughout and return to Leontief production
functions below. Formally, we solve the following minimization problem for  > 0, where w
is wages and r is the cost of capital:

                                        min C (w, r) = wl + rk
                                         k,l

subject to
                                               F (k, l) = q0

This yields the following condition:
                                                                
                                                   w 
                                          k=                       l
                                                   r 1-
   Using this relationship and the resource constraint F (k, l) = q0 , we get:
                                                                                   
                                                          -1                      1-
                                           w 
                              l = q0                           + (1 - )                ,
                                           r 1-
                                                                                   
                                                                1-                1-
                                                   w 
                          k = q0 (1 - )                                +               .
                                                   r 1-

   We take the derivative of these two equations with respect to w to get the elasticity of
capital and labor with respect to wages:


                                                        41
                                      k w        (1 - )
                            k,w   =       =                 -1 ,
                                      w k   (1 - ) + ( w
                                                       r 1-
                                                            )

                                      l w            
                            l,w   =       =-                1- .
                                      w l     + (1 - )( w
                                                        r 1-
                                                             )
   These two expressions imply that firms with CES production functions with  > 0 will
increase capital when wages decrease and decrease labor when wages increase. Empirically,
firms with CES production functions would respond to labor cost changes by decreasing
their number of employees and increasing their capital investment to replace workers.

Leontief Production Function. Leontief production functions are a special case of CES
production functions: it can be shown that when   0, i.e. the capital-labor supply elastic-
ity tends to zero, which means that capital cannot be substituted with labor and vice-versa,
F (k, l) = min(k, l). In this case, labor and capital are used in equal shares. For this
reason, when the cost of labor increases, both the demand for labor and for capital decrease.
This implies that when the capital-labor elasticity of substitution is zero, both k,w and l,w
will be negative. Empirically, when labor costs increase, firms with Leontief production
functions reduce both their number of employees and their investment in capital since both
inputs are used in fixed proportions.

A Simple Empirical Test of Leontief versus CES Production Functions. The
derivations above imply a simple test of whether k,l is strictly positive or zero: estimating
the response of capital flows, i.e. investments, to labor cost changes. If investments increase
when labor costs increase, then k,l > 0. If instead, investments decrease when labor costs
increase then k,l = 0. In the rest of the paper, we set up our empirical framework to estimate
how investments respond to changes in labor costs.


D      Macro Elasticities
The capital-labor elasticity of substitution we have estimated is a micro elasticity and does
not account for possible substitution across different firms andor industries. However, we
can use our micro elasticity to derive an estimate of the macro elasticity by relying on the
framework of Oberfield and Raval [2014]. The authors show that the aggregate elasticity of
substitution is a weighted average of the micro elasticity of substitution and the elasticity of
demand.



                                               42
                                                                        -1             -1   
   Formally, given the following production function: F (k, l) = (k  + (1 - )l  ) -1 ,
we denote by i = rkirk  i
                       +wli
                            and  = rkrk  +wl
                                             the capital share in the total costs of production
for firm i and the aggregate capital share, respectively. Further, we define i to be plant i's
cost of labor and capital as a share of the aggregate costs of labor and capital. Oberfield and
Raval [2014] show that the macro capital-labor elasticity of substitution  agg is a weighted
average of the micro elasticity of substitution and the elasticity of demand :

                                  0,  agg = (1 - ) +                                        (3)
                         2
                      i -)
   where  = iI (            represents the degree of heterogeneity in the relative use of labor
                       (1-) i
and capital in a given market and I is the total number of firms. (1 - ) measures the
substitution of labor with capital within a given plant as a response to changes in relative
factor prices and  measures the reallocation effect of labor and capital across firms when
relative factor prices change: for example, when the cost of capital increases, firms that rely
more heavily on labor gain a cost advantage that they can pass through to prices. The
elasticity of demand  determines the extent to which consumers respond to lower prices by
shifting consumption to the labor-intensive commodity.
   i ,  and i are directly observable in the corporate tax data, which report both labor
and capital costs. To estimate , we use the average markup µ and assume that  = 1/µ.
                                                           -costs
We follow Antras et al. [2017] and define markups as sales
                                                         costs
                                                                  .
   We estimate that  = 0.13 and  = 1.29. These estimates imply a macro capital-labor
elasticity of substitution  agg = 0.17.




                                              43
                                       Figure 11: Smaller Bin Width: 500 euros
44




     Notes: These Figures show the main firm-level outcomes with a smaller, 500 euro, bin width at the payroll tax discon-
     tinuity from 1996 to 2009. In these Figures, we also plot the mean outcomes within the donut hole region.
                                       Figure 12: Smaller Bin Width: 100 euros
45




     Notes: These Figures show the main firm-level outcomes with a smaller, 100 euro, bin width at the payroll tax discon-
     tinuity from 1996 to 2009. In these Figures, we also plot the mean outcomes within the donut hole region.
               Figure 13: Estimates by Different Bandwidth
                    (a) Investment Response by Bandwidth




                   (b) Employment Response by Bandwidth




Notes: These Figures plot the estimated response of investment (panel a) and employ-
ment (panel b) by size of bandwidth.



                                        46
                                      Figure 14: Real Versus Reporting Response
47




     Notes: These Figures compare tax depreciation to accounting depreciation measures. The first panel plots the dis-
     tribution of the difference between tax and accounting depreciation for firms that bunch at the threshold and firms
     that do not. The second and third panel show the distribution of tax and accounting depreciation, respectively, in the
     neighborhood of the payroll tax discontinuity.
        Figure 15: Accounting depreciations as a running variable




Notes: These Figures plot our main outcomes, the (log) number of employees (first
panel) and total investments (second panel), using capital depreciations in accounting
as a running variable.




                                         48
          Table 8: Earnings Responses by Employee Types
             Outcomes: Mean employee-level log earnings
     Unionization           All         Non-union      Fake union         Union
     RD Estimate          -0.008         -0.025*          0.003           -0.001
                         (0.014)         (0.015)         (0.014)         (0.013)

     Bandwidth           30,000           30,000         30,000          30,000
     N above             35,404           28,045         30,526          32,442
     N below             67,317           50,133         54,015          58,536

     Education       No High School     High School    No College    College degree
     RD Estimate         -0.013            0.009         -0.011          -0.002
                        (0.013)           (0.016)       (0.013)         (0.014)

     Bandwidth           30,000           30,000         30,000          30,000
     N above             34,592           24,220         32,168          34,363
     N below             65,129           42,185         58,154          64,090
     Tasks             Upper level      Lower level     Manual
     RD Estimate         0.027             0.003         -0.016
                        (0.017)           (0.015)       (0.013)

     Bandwidth           30,000           30,000         30,000
     N above             22,006           25,323         29,541
     N below             35,987           44,171         52,013
     Gender                Men            Women
     RD Estimate          -0.049           0.005
                         (0.043)          (0.023)

     Bandwidth           30,000           30,000
     N above             4,985            11,914
     N below              9,708           21,564

Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on mean employee-level
log earnings for all workers ("All"), non-unionized workers ("Non-union"), fake union
workers ("Fake union"), unionized workers ("Union"), workers with no high school degree
("No high school"), workers with no college degree ("No College"), workers with a col-
lege degree ("College Degree"), upper-level workers ("Upper Level"), lower-level workers
("Lower Level"), manual workers ("Manual"), male workers ("Men") and female workers
("Women"). We use a fixed 30,000 euro bandwidth in these specifications to have compa-
rable estimates across employee types due to the relatively small number of observations
in some of the categories.




                                          49
          Table 9: Earnings Responses by Earnings Decile
                     Outcomes: Mean employee-level log earnings
    Decile          Smallest decile     2nd        3rd        4th           5th
    RD Estimate       -0.128**         -0.021     -0.001   -0.007**        0.001
                       (0.064)        (0.032)    (0.005)    (0.004)       (0.003)

    Bandwidth           30,000         30,000    30,000     30,000        30,000
    N above              1,818         2,715      3,422      3,971        4,139
    N below             5,750          6,949      7,391      7,624        7,831

    Decile                6th           7th        8th        9th     Largest decile
    RD Estimate          -0.002        0.002     -0.007*     0.002        0.018
                        (0.003)       (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.010)      (0.023)

     Bandwidth           30,000         30,000    30,000     30,000       30,000
     N above              4,327          4,093     4,180      3,463        3,276
     N below              7,413          6,925     6,818      5,363        5,253
Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on mean employee-
level log earnings by deciles of earnings. We use a fixed 30,000 euro bandwidth in these
specifications to have comparable estimates across earnings deciles due to the relatively
small number of observations in each category.




                                          50
                           Table 10: Estimates by Size of the Missing-Mass Region
                                             Size of the donut hole
                                   500                                 1500                                 2500
     Outcome         Log investments   Log no. empl.      Log investments   Log no. empl.      Log investments Log no. empl.
     RD Estimate        -0.220***         -0.068*            -0.208***          -0.067            -0.227***      -0.131***
                         (0.050)          (0.038)             (0.060)          (0.045)             (0.064)        (0.047)

     Bandwidth             7,321             6,297             7,921              6,925             9,082              8,388
     N above              12,358            11,039             11,439             10,206            11,391             10,717
     N below              18,469            15,966             20,326             17,982            24,057             22,697

                                             Size of the donut hole
                                  3500                                 4500
     Outcome         Log investments   Log no. empl.      Log investments   Log no. empl.
     RD Estimate        -0.178***        -0.122***           -0.147***        -0.049***
                         (0.047)          (0.034)             (0.034)          (0.019)

     Bandwidth            16,620             14,011              29,879            42,114
51




     N above              20,560             17,615              34,154            46,061
     N below              52,899             43,635             104,006           108,741
     Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on employment and investment using different thresholds
     for the missing-mass region (donut hole to the right of the threshold). The Table shows bias-corrected estimates with robust
     standard errors, the size of the optimal bandwidth (one common mean square error optimal bandwidth), the number of
     observations above (N above) and below (N below) the threshold within the bandwidth, respectively, following Calonico
     et al. [2014].
                                                Table 11: Estimates by Size of the Excess-Mass Region
                                            Size of the excess-mass region
                                  3500                                   3000                                2500                                2000
     Outcome         Log investments   Log no. empl.        Log investments   Log no. empl.     Log investments Log no. empl.       Log investments Log no. empl.
     RD Estimate        -0.174***        -0.065**              -0.136***        -0.063**           -0.114**       -0.066**             -0.110**       -0.079***
                         (0.059)          (0.033)               (0.053)          (0.032)            (0.048)        (0.029)              (0.044)        (0.030)

     Bandwidth               16,074            18,388            17,868            18,524            19,262            19,604            20,501            18,442
     N above                 19,289            23,309            21,820            23,492            23,603            24,856            25,149            23,376
     N below                 43,211            56,486            52,853            58,682            61,423            66,060            69,592            61,187

                                            Size of the excess-mass region
                                  1500                                   1000                                 500
     Outcome         Log investments   Log no. empl.        Log investments   Log no. empl.     Log investments Log no. empl.
     RD Estimate        -0.115***        -0.081***             -0.139***        -0.089***          -0.147***      -0.123***
                         (0.042)          (0.028)               (0.043)          (0.028)            (0.041)        (0.031)

     Bandwidth               21,066             19,019            20,376            19,011          21,062             16,575
52




     N above                 25,819             24,125            24,993            24,115          25,814             20,687
     N below                 74,234             65,811            71,862            67,368          77,555             56,931
      Notes: This Table     reports the results of estimating equation (1) on employment and investment using different thresholds for the excess-mass region (donut
      hole to the left of   the threshold). The Table shows bias-corrected estimates with robust standard errors, the size of the optimal bandwidth (one common
      mean square error     optimal bandwidth), the number of observations above (N above) and below (N below) the threshold within the bandwidth, respectively,
      following Calonico    et al. [2014].
                                     Table 12: Estimates by Different Polynomials of Different Degrees
                                                                                    Polynomial fit
                                                          2nd degree                           3rd degree
                                        Outcome         Log investments     Log no. empl.    Log investments    Log no. empl.
                                        RD Estimate        -0.128***          -0.086***         -0.212***         -0.115***
                                                            (0.040)            (0.026)           (0.048)           (0.036)

                                         Bandwidth             20,362           19,578           38,541              36,819
                                         N above               24,978           24,828           43,151              43,070
                                         N below               71,791           70,433          104,006             108,741
     Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on employment and investment using different polynomial fits. The Table shows bias-corrected
     estimates with robust standard errors, the size of the optimal bandwidth (one common mean square error optimal bandwidth), the number of observations
     above (N above) and below (N below) the threshold within the bandwidth, respectively, following Calonico et al. [2014].
53
        Table 13: Capital Depreciations in Accounting as a Running Variable
                                              Capital depreciations in accounting
                              Outcome         Log investments    Log no. empl.
                              RD Estimate        -0.121***         -0.099***
                                                  (0.031)           (0.048)

                               Bandwidth            35,445            35,039
                               N above              27,263            26,581
                               N below              54,533            52,123
Notes: This Table reports the results of estimating equation (1) on employment and investment using capital
depreciations in accounting as a running variable. The Table shows bias-corrected estimates with robust standard
errors, the size of the optimal bandwidth (one common mean square error optimal bandwidth), the number of
observations above (N above) and below (N below) the threshold within the bandwidth, respectively, following
Calonico et al. [2014].




                                                      54
Table 14: Social insurance percentages by firm categories, different insurance types and years

                  Health and pension                         Unemployment

                       Firm categories*       Accident      Firm categories**    Group life    Employees    Total    Total

         Year      I          II      III    insurance***    I           II     insurance***   pension***   lowest   highest


         1996    4.000      5.600    6.500       1.2        1.00        4.00       0.100         16.80      23.100   28.600

         1997    4.000      5.600    6.500       1.4        1.00        4.00       0.090         16.70      23.190   28.690

         1998    4.000      5.600    6.500       1.4        0.90        3.90       0.080         16.80      23.180   28.680

         1999    4.000      5.600    6.500       1.3        0.90        3.85       0.080         16.80      23.080   28.530

         2000    4.000      5.600    6.500       1.2        0.90        3.45       0.090         16.80      22.990   28.040

        7/2000   3.600      5.600    6.500       1.2        0.90        3.45       0.090         16.80      22.590   28.040

         2001    3.600      5.600    6.500       1.2        0.80        3.10       0.095         16.60      22.295   27.495

         2002    3.600      5.600    6.500       1.1        0.70        2.70       0.095         16.70      22.185   27.085

        3/2002   2.950      5.150    6.050       1.1        0.70        2.70       0.095         16.70      21.535   26.635

         2003    2.964      5.164    6.064       1.1        0.60        2.45       0.081         16.80      21.545   26.495

         2004    2.964      5.164    6.064       1.1        0.60        2.50       0.080         16.80      21.544   26.544

         2005    2.966      5.166    6.066       1.2        0.70        2.80       0.080         16.80      21.746   26.946

         2006    2.958      5.158    6.058       1.1        0.75        2.95       0.080         16.70      21.588   26.888

         2007    2.951      5.151    6.051       1.1        0.75        2.95       0.080         16.64      21.521   26.821

         2008    2.771      4.971    5.871       1.0        0.70        2.90       0.080         16.80      21.351   26.651

         2009    2.801      5.001    5.901       1.0        0.65        2.70       0.070         16.80      21.321   26.471

        4/2009   2.000      4.201    5.101       1.0        0.65        2.70       0.070         16.80      20.520   25.601

         2010    2.220      2.220    2.220       0.8        0.75        2.95       0.070         16.90      20.74    22.94

         2011    2.210      2.210    2.210       1.0        0.80        3.20       0.070         17.10      21.18    23.58

         2012    2.210      2.210    2.210       1.0        0.80        3.20       0.070         17.35      21.43    23.83

         2013    2.040      2.040    2.040       0.9        0.80        3.15       0.070         17.35      21.16    23.51

         2014    2.140      2.140    2.140       0.9        0.75        2.95       0.070         17.75      21.61    23.81

         2015    2.080      2.080    2.080       0.9        0.80        3.15       0.070         18.00      21.85    24.89

         2016    2.120      2.120    2.120       0.8        1.0         3.90       0.070         18.00      21.99    24.89

         2017    1.080      1.080    1.080       0.8        0.8         3.30       0.070         17.95      20.70    23.20

* Refers to firm categories by wage sums and capital depreciation.
** Category I is for wages below a certain wage sum threshold, e.g. 2,059,500 euro in year 2017, and Category
II is for wages above the threshold. The threshold varies slightly over years.
*** Represents the average values of these insurances.




                                                                   55
                           Table 15: Descriptive statistics: Firm-level sample vs. all Finnish firms in 2002
           Sample
         VARIABLE         Depreciations     Depreciations       Capital       Investments     Investments      Investments      Investments
          Statistics       in taxation      in accounting        Stock                        Fixed assets      Buildings          R&D
            Mean             49627.8            41413.3        262603.9        90755.2          66497.8          17836.2           6421.2
           Median            46634.5            44876.1        176874.5        57025.7          43283.8             0                 0
          Se. mean            135.4              560.5          8136.1          3364.3           1673.2           2895.1            600.5
                              Sales          Intermediate     Labor costs     Number of          Profits       Value added   Labor Productivity
                                                 costs                        employees
            Mean            1132873             657483         205057.1          12.4           52490.7          475440            1.330
           Median           561326.5            150501         156830.3            9            30872.7         379644.9           1.138
          Se. mean           38766.3            36010.5         3118.6           .235            4301.0          7738.6             .017
          N=2,972
56




      All Finnish firms
        VARIABLE            Depreciations     Depreciations       Capital       Investments     Investments     Investments       Investments
          Statistics         in taxation      in accounting        Stock                        Fixed assets     Buildings           R&D
            Mean               31249.6            27384.5        228694.9        58058.6          31461.2         18564.5            8032.8
           Median               436.7                 0              0               0               0               0                  0
          Se. mean              891.1              1008.3         13265.1         6080.1           1471.5          5624.6             951.2
                                Sales          Intermediate     Labor costs     Number of          Profits      Value Added    Labor Productivity
                                                    costs                       employees
            Mean              606997.3           306996.0      102499.5            10.1     42562.6       300001.4            .968
           Median              66537.0            3355.4        3124.8               1      3105.9        47954.8             .650
          Se. mean              9730.6             6330.7       1841.2             .360     5009.9         5000.5             .003
         N=148,211
     Notes: The upper panel of this Table reports the descriptives statistics for the data used in the graphical analysis in the paper.
     The sample is restricted to firms with capital depreciations between 40,500­64,500 euros, and excluding the donut hole region. The
     lower panel of the Table shows the same descriptive statistics for all Finnish firms with sales between 10,000­100,000,000 euros. The
     descriptive statistics are presented only for year 2002, the mid-year of our treatment period 1996­2009.
  Table 16: Descriptive statistics: Industry and organizational form distribution
                                              Below the threshold                   Above the threshold
       Industry classification        Frequency     Share Cumulative         Frequency Share       Cumulative
          Farming & Mining               2,389       8.93       8.93            1,920      9.91        9.91
            Manufacturing                4,462      16.68       25.61           3,454     17.83       27.75
  Construction & Transportation         14,356      53.66       79.27          9,915      51.19       78.94
               Services                 3,402       12.72       91.99          2,427      12.53       91.47
       Finance & Real estate            1,883        7.04       99.02          1,472      7.60        99.07
           Other & Missing                261        0.98      100.00            181       0.93      100.00
        Organizational form           Frequency Share Cumulative             Frequency Share Cumulative
           Sole proprietors             2,933       10.96       10.96          1,682       8.68        8.68
            Corporations                19,185      71.68       82.64          14,613     75.43       84.11
             Partnerships                4,647      17.36      100.00           3,079     15.89      100.00
Notes: This Table reports the number of firms, the share of firms and cumulative proportion of firms by industry
codes and organizational form for the data used in the graphical analysis in the paper. The sample is restricted
only to firms with capital depreciations between 40,500­64,500 euros, and excluding the donut hole region.




                                                      57
              Table 17: Definitions of the variables used in the analysis
Variables                            Definitions

Payroll tax rate                     Firm-level payroll tax rate for health and pension contributions.

Capital depreciation in taxation     Firm-level annual capital depreciations used in taxation in euros.

Capital depreciation in accounting   Firm-level annual capital depreciations in accounting in euros.

Earnings                             Employee-level total annual earnings of employees.

Labor costs                          Annual total wages and other wage-related compensations paid by the
                                     firm to employees excluding all social insurance contributions and
                                     taxes in euros.

Number of employees                  The sum of the number of employees who worked in the firm during
                                     the tax year.

Secondary degree                     Employee-level education measure for individuals with a bachelor or
                                     masters degree or higher.

High school graduate                 Employee-level education measure for individuals who have graduated
                                     from high school.

Upper-level employees                Employee-level task measure for individuals whose position is senior
                                     official and upper management, senior officials and employees in
                                     research and planning, senior officials and employees in education and
                                     training or other senior officials and employees.

Lower-level employees                Employee-level task measure for individuals whose position is
                                     supervisor, clerical and sales workers or independent work.

Manual workers                       Employee-level task measure for individuals whose position is clerical
                                     and sales worker, worker in agriculture, forestry and commercial
                                     fishing, manufacturing worker, other production worker or distribution
                                     and service worker.

Investments                          Annual euro value of gross investments in fixed capital, buildings and
                                     research and development.

Fixed asset investments              Annual euro value of gross investments in machines and equipment.

Building investments                 Annual euro value of gross investments in buildings.

R&D investments                      Annual euro value of gross investments in research and development.

Sales                                Gross annual sales of the firm from its primary operating activity
                                     minus any discounts given, valued-added taxes, and other taxes based
                                     on sales volumes.

Intermediate inputs                  Annual euro value of the costs used as intermediate inputs in
                                     production.

Labor productivity                   Annual euro value of sales minus intermediate inputs divided by labor
                                     costs.

Capital productivity                 Annual euro value of sales minus intermediate inputs divided by
                                     annual investments.

Union employees                      Employee-level dummy for individuals with above-median tax
                                     deductible labor union membership fee.

Fake union employees                 Employee-level dummy for individuals with below-median tax
                                     deductible labor union membership fee.

Not union employees                  Employee-level dummy for individuals with no tax-deductible labor
                                     union membership fee.




                                              58
