                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             JAPANESE FOREIGN EXCHANGE INTERVENTIONS, 1971-2018:
            ESTIMATING A REACTION FUNCTION USING THE BEST PROXY

                                         Takatoshi Ito
                                        Tomoyoshi Yabu

                                       Working Paper 26644
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26644


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




The first author gratefully acknowledges financial support from the JSPS through Grants-in-Aid
for Scientific Research (17H00995). Yabu gratefully acknowledges financial support from the
JSPS through Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research (No. 17K03663). The authors are solely
responsible for any remaining errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26644.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Takatoshi Ito and Tomoyoshi Yabu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Japanese Foreign Exchange Interventions, 1971-2018: Estimating a Reaction Function Using
the Best Proxy
Takatoshi Ito and Tomoyoshi Yabu
NBER Working Paper No. 26644
January 2020
JEL No. E52,E58,F31,G15

                                         ABSTRACT

We analyze the history of Japanese foreign exchange interventions from 1971 to 2018. First, we
provide the best proxy for monthly interventions for the period from 1971 to 1990, when the
intervention timings and amounts were not officially disclosed. The accuracy of the proxy is
tested for the period when the statistics were disclosed after 1991. The proxy explains 99.8% of
actual settlement-based interventions. Second, we examine conditions under which the Japanese
monetary authorities are likely to intervene by estimating a policy reaction function, using the
long-term data, spanning the period when intervention data have been officially disclosed and the
period where our proxy is available. Third, we analyze intervention timings and amounts for
Japan, the US, and Germany. Fourth, we present the episode of international coordination
represented by the Plaza and Louvre agreements as a case study of notable interventions during
the period.


Takatoshi Ito
Columbia University
School of International and Public Affairs
International Affairs Building
Room 927, (MC 3333)
420 West 118th Street
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
ti2164@columbia.edu

Tomoyoshi Yabu
Keio University
Tokyo 108-0073
Japan
tomoyabu82@gmail.com




A data file is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26644
1. Introduction
Japan is known to have resisted rapid yen appreciation by occasionally conducting foreign exchange
interventions since it departed from the Bretton Woods system in August 1971. The frequency and
scale of interventions have been relatively large for a developed country, and Japan has been a popular
country for studies in the intervention literature. The daily data of interventions for the period since
April 1, 1991 have been officially made available to the public. However, intervention data before
March 1991 have not been officially disclosed. Some researchers have relied on newspaper reports
based on leaks and market rumors in order to analyze particular episodes. Others have used either
changes in foreign reserves or the data titled "Treasury Funds and Others/Foreign Exchange" released
by the Bank of Japan as a proxy for intervention. However, changes in foreign reserves, for example,
include receipts of interest income on the foreign reserves, which are not interventions.


Ito and Yabu (2017) identified an accurate proxy for the monthly intervention amount for the period
for which official data have not been disclosed. The accuracy of different possible proxies was tested
against "transaction-based" interventions which took place during the period from which data are
available. The best proxy, identified by Ito and Yabu, is more accurate than other popular proxies used
in the existing literature, which include change in foreign reserves and the Bank of Japan's "Treasury
Funds and Others/Foreign Exchange."


In this paper, we first show that, in testing for the best proxy, it is important to distinguish "transaction-
based" intervention from "settlement-based" interventions. Due to the market practice in the foreign
exchange market, settlement is done two business days later than transactions--a rule known as  +
2 . We find that Ito and Yabu's (2017) best proxy captures the movements of settlement-based
interventions very well, explaining 99.8% of settlement-based interventions. Our first contribution is
that we provide reliable data for intervention, from August 1971--the end of the Bretton Woods
system--to March 1991. From April 1991, the official data for intervention are available.


Second, we analyze the conditions under which interventions are most likely to occur for the period
from August 1971 to March 2018. The officially disclosed data are used for April 1991 to March 2018
and our proxy is used from August 1971 to March 1991. Since reaction functions, which represent the
monetary authorities' tolerance of and resistance to exchange rate volatility, are expected to have
evolved and transformed over the 47 years under consideration, possible structural breaks in reaction
functions will be carefully examined in this paper.


Third, the US and German monetary authorities have disclosed daily intervention data for the period
beginning in 1973 and 1976, respectively. By analyzing intervention timings and amounts in the three


                                                      2
countries, insights can be obtained on policy coordination or lack thereof, among the G3, in the past
four decades.


Fourth, we present the episode of international coordination represented by the Plaza and Louvre
agreements as a case study of notable interventions during the period under consideration.


The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 will review the foreign exchange intervention
literature. Section 3 will review Ito and Yabu (2017) and show that in testing for the best proxy, it is
important to distinguish transaction-based intervention from settlement-based intervention. Section 4
will provide an overview of the yen/dollar rates and interventions over the past 47 years. Section 5
will analyze the conditions under which the Japanese monetary authorities are likely to intervene in
the foreign exchange market. Section 6 will present a case study on notable interventions during the
period.


2. Literature
In July 2001, the Japanese Ministry of Finance released daily intervention records from April 1991 to
the present. Since then, the Ministry of Finance has updated these records every quarter. The new data
has stimulated academic research on Japanese intervention. One group of studies examined the
effectiveness of intervention, i.e., whether intervention impacted exchange rate movements. This
includes Ito (2003), Kearns and Rigobon (2005), Fatum and Hutchison (2006), Hoshikawa (2008),
Chen, Watanabe, and Yabu (2012), and Fatum and Yamamoto(2014). Estimates vary across studies as
to the estimated effect that one-trillion yen-selling interventions have had on the yen/dollar rate,
ranging from 0.4 to 1.8 percent depreciation of the yen.


Another group of papers, including Ito (2003), Frenkel, Pierdzioch, and Stadtmann (2003, 2005), and
Ito and Yabu (2007), examined the reaction function, i.e., under what financial conditions monetary
authorities are more likely to intervene. Ito (2003) and Ito and Yabu (2007) identified factors that seem
to trigger interventions: the deviation in the yen/dollar rate from long-run trends and recent movements
of the yen/dollar rate. Moreover, the person or people in charge of interventions seem to influence the
frequency and magnitude of interventions. For example, since June 1995, when Eisuke Sakakibara
became Director General of the International Finance Bureau, the frequency of interventions lowered
substantially but, when they occurred, the daily intervention amount increased significantly. The
frequency and daily amount of intervention also had a distinctive pattern; for example, there were
more frequent interventions during the 2003-04 period when Zenbei Mizoguchi was in charge of
intervention.




                                                    3
However, given that intervention data before April 1991 has not been disclosed, we have to use a proxy
to estimate past intervention data if, for example, we wish to examine and analyze interventions during
the 1970s and 1980s.


In the literature several proxies have been proposed and adopted. These proxies can be obtained on a
monthly basis. The most popular proxy is changes in the foreign reserves, namely, "Total Reserves
excluding Gold," also known as "Change in Reserve" for short. In an earlier study of intervention,
this proxy was used by Dornbusch (1980), Takagi (1991) and others. Dornbusch (1980) and Takagi
(1991) found that the Japanese monetary authorities followed a lean-against-the-wind policy during
the 1970s. This is also a popular proxy when an international cross-country comparison is attempted,
as the statistics are readily available. For example, Dominguez, Hashimoto, and Ito (2012), in their
large cross-country study, used "Change in Reserve," but adjusted for interest income receipts.


However, a proxy that has been considered to be more accurate is data from the Bank of Japan titled
"Treasury Funds and Others/Foreign Exchange" (hereafter, "BOJ FE"). Quirk (1977) was one of the
earliest papers to argue that the "BOJ FE" was a better proxy than "Change in Reserve." He also
argued that the monetary authorities followed a lean-against-the-wind policy and that there was no
"target" for the exchange rate in the 1970s. Meanwhile, Hutchison (1984) and Watanabe (1992) both
used "BOJ FE." Hutchison (1984) found that the monetary authorities adopted a lean-against-the-wind
policy but were biased against yen appreciation in the 1970s. Watanabe (1992) concluded that before
April 1980, the monetary authorities adopted a lean-against-the wind policy, whereas after April 1980,
they began to try to achieve target levels of exchange rates.


Another proxy similar to "BOJ FE" is the Ministry of Finance statistics contained in the fiscal
account "Receipts and Payments of the Treasury Funds; Foreign Exchange Equalization Fund"
(hereafter, "MOF FEEF"). The difference between the "BOJ EF" and the "MOF FEEF" is that the
latter include transactions related to issuance and redemption of government securities for the IMF
quota. When an adjustment is made to the account by subtracting the balance of "Issuance and
Redemption of Financial Bills in the Financial Market" (hereafter, "Adjusted MOF FEEF"), then it
is believed to be much more representative of actual interventions. Both Suda (1999) and Nakada
(1998) used "Adjusted MOF FEEF." Suda (1999) pointed out a structural problem with the foreign
exchange special account where profits were transferred to the general account while unrealized
losses were carried over, whereas Nakada (1998) constructed a neural network model in order to
forecast interventions.


At the time these proxies were proposed and adopted by the various authors mentioned above, actual


                                                   4
intervention data had not yet been disclosed. After the actual intervention data disclosure, an
academic interest in proxies was lost. However, actual intervention data have only been disclosed for
the period after April 1991. Proxies are still needed for research and analysis of interventions that
took place before April 1991. Since we have actual intervention data, we can test the proxies against
the official data using a "test sample period" where both proxies and actual interventions are
available. In fact, Ito and Yabu (2017) conducted such as test and identified the best proxy for actual
interventions. 1
3. In search of the best proxy
This section first introduces candidate proxies. Then, we will give an overview of the yet to be
translated Japanese paper by Ito and Yabu (2017) and review their testing procedure and estimation
results. Moreover, this section establishes that it is important to distinguish transaction-based
intervention from settlement-based intervention in the testing procedure. This has not been discussed
at all in the existing literature.


3.1Candidates for Proxies
Data regarding actual interventions of the Japanese monetary authorities have been available with
daily frequency since April 1, 1991. However, only proxies with a monthly frequency can be used for
the period prior to April 1, 1991.


As discussed in section 2, four proxies have been used in the literature. Since actual intervention data
are available on and after April 1, 1991, Ito and Yabu (2017) compared these proxies to actual
transaction-based interventions for a period from April 1991 to March 1999. The end of the sample
period for the test was determined by the point at which one of the proxies had a discontinuity in the
classification. Each proxy is explained below in detail. (Table 1 lists brief summary of the proxies.)
                                                       <Table 1 about here>


 (1) Change in Reserve
When large cross-country studies on interventions are conducted, foreign reserves (less gold) are often
used. What is included and what is not is standardized by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and
the variable is readily available from the IMF (see IMF, 2013 for details). One drawback of using this
as a proxy is that changes in foreign reserves include an amount of interest income received. Hence,
in order to recover the amount of intervention, the estimated interest income should be deducted from
the change in foreign reserves. However, for such an estimation, a researcher needs currency and


1 A similar test of proxies against the actual data was carried out by Neely (2000) for interventions in the United States,
Switzerland and Germany. Neely used the correlation coefficient to judge whether the change in "Total Reserve excluding Gold" is
a good proxy of true interventions. However, a test using a simple correlation is inconclusive at best. A regression can determine
whether a proxy is an unbiased estimator.

                                                                  5
maturity information on assets that are held as foreign reserves; this information is not available.


Conceptually, the first proxy for interventions is defined as follows:

                                           
                                                         ( + -1 )
                                    - -1 -                         
                                                            2
where  is the end-of-month t amount of foreign reserves (less gold) in USD;  is the yen/dollar
                                
rate average for the month; and  is the average yield of foreign reserve assets in month t.
                                                                   
Dornbusch (1980) and Takagi (1991) used the 3-month T-bill rate as  . However, portfolios are not
disclosed, meaning that the appropriateness of the 3-month T-bill rate cannot be tested. More recently,
it can be inferred from interest incomes that the foreign reserves of several countries include treasury
bonds as well as T-bills. In order to check robustness with regard to portfolio interest rates, three
different cases are considered: Change in Reserve, with T-bill (3 months); Change in Reserve, with T-
bond (3 years); and Change in Reserve, with T-bond (10 years).


(2) BOJ EF
The BOJ EF captures an item in the flow of funds, the need of the government account. Hutchison
(1984) and Watanabe (1992) used this data set in order to analyze the intervention record, policy
intention, and effectiveness. The data are available from the Bank of Japan's website (http://www.stat-
search.boj.or.jp/ssi/cgi-bin/famecgi2?cgi=$nme_s050_en). The series code is MD06'MASDM26.


(3) MOF FEEF
This series captures the Ministry of Finance's account that is used for all transactions in the foreign
exchange market. This data is published monthly by the Ministry of Finance in Ministry of Finance
Statistics Monthly. This is the counterpart of the Bank of Japan's account that is used for all
transactions in the foreign exchange market. The data is available in Japanese on the Ministry of
Finance's website (https://www.mof.go.jp/pri/publication/zaikin_geppo).


(4) Adjusted MOF FEEF
The source of this data set is the same as that for the MOF FEEF. The data set is adjusted for an item
that is not related to intervention; namely, "Balancing of issuance and redemption of Financial Bills
in the financial market," which is not related to intervention activities but rather to fees that the
Ministry pays to issuing and redeeming securities. An adjustment is made to MOF FEEF by
subtracting from it "Receipts and Payments of the Treasury Funds: Foreign Exchange Equalization
Fund" in the fiscal operations statistics. Suda (1999) and Nakata (1998) used the Adjusted MOF
FEEF.




                                                     6
3.2Ito and Yabu (2017)
We review the testing procedure and estimation results of Ito and Yabu (2017). In order to test the
accuracy of the proxies, monthly data of the four proxies from April 1991 to March 1999 are tested
against actual interventions in the same period. The disclosed data regarding interventions were
observed with daily frequency but have been aggregated to monthly values for the purposes of testing.
The sample period ends March 1999, because in April 1999, "MOF FEEF" becomes impossible to
adjust due to changes in categorization.


The tests are conducted with the following regression:
                                      = 0 + 1  +                                                  (1)
where  denotes the transaction-based intervention amount ( > 0 implies selling yen, buying
dollars) and  denotes a particular proxy. Both variables are measured in units of 100 million
yen. The null hypothesis is 0 = 0 and 1 = 1. If the null is not rejected, it implies that a proxy is
an unbiased estimator of actual interventions. Among the proxies that are shown to be unbiased
estimators, the best estimator is the one in which  2 is closest to 1.


Proxies to be tested are (1) Change in Reserve, 3-month T-bills; (2) Change in Reserve, 3-year T-
bonds; (3) Change in Reserve, 10-year T-bonds; (4) BOJ EF; (5) MOF FEEF; and (6) Adjusted MOF
FEEF. Table 2 shows the estimated results of Eq. (1) with the null hypothesis of 0: 0 = 0 and 0:
1 = 1.
                                           <Table 2 about here>


The null hypothesis of 0 : 1 = 1 is rejected when we adopt "BOJ EF" or "MOF FEEF." Thus, they
are not unbiased estimators. Their coefficients of determination ( 2) are low as well. This is surprising,
given that alternatives to "Change in Reserve" were popular among researchers before actual
intervention data were made available to the public. The null hypothesis of an unbiased estimator is
not rejected when either "Change in Reserve" with an interest income adjustment or "Adjusted MOF
FEEF" is used. The estimated coefficient of 0 is closest to 0 and 1 is closest to 1 when "Adjusted
MOF FEEF" is adopted. Moreover when "Adjusted MOF FEEF" is adopted,  2 is 0.969 and higher
than those with "Change in Reserve" (with any of the three possible interest rate assumptions): 0.928.
Therefore, "Adjusted MOF FEEF" is concluded to be the best proxy for transaction-based
interventions.


In order to determine the accuracy of the best proxy, Figure 1 shows the time series of transaction-
based intervention amounts ( ) and the estimated errors of the proxy (Adjusted MOF FEEF), which
are defined as:


                                                    7
                                        =  -  .
The error is small overall; however, there is a negative serial correlation in the error ( ), meaning
that when the error is positive in one month, there is a negative error of a similar amount the following
month. This may suggest some accounting issue: When actual intervention takes place near the end of
the month, settlement and booking may spill over into the next month. This may explain the negative
correlation.
                                        <Figure 1 about here>


3.3. Important adjustments in the test
In testing for the best proxy, it is important to distinguish transaction-based interventions from
settlement-based interventions. Due to the market practice in the foreign exchange market, settlement
is done two business days after transactions--a rule known as  + 2.


The following is true of any transaction in the foreign exchange market: For example, if Bank A buys
yen from Bank B in exchange for US dollars on Monday, the transactions are recorded as having taken
place on Monday. However, the currency is not actually sent to until Wednesday. Transactions between
the monetary authority and its counterpart in the market are no exception. Supposing that the monetary
authority intervenes in the market to purchase foreign currency (say, US dollars) by selling domestic
currency (say, yen) on Monday, the market impact should be immediate. In the market, if it is
impressed by the authority's move, foreign currencies will appreciate (preventing further depreciation)
on Monday. However, actual payments of yen and receipts of the foreign currency by the authority do
not take place until Wednesday. Official records, the balance sheets of the central banks, or the
government's fiscal account that records actual changes in government's assets and liabilities do not
change until Wednesday. Thus, any interventions that are so recognized by the market and so recorded
in the official statistics of interventions during the last two business days of the month (say, ) will
not be recorded as a change in the balance sheet or fiscal accounts of the central bank and the
government in month , but rather in month  + 1. This fact is important in evaluating the precision
of a monthly proxy, by using daily intervention amounts for the period that daily intervention amounts
are officially disclosed.


                                                                                        
Let us denote interventions conducted during the last two business days of the month by  .
These amounts are recorded in the fiscal accounts that are used in the monthly proxy of month  + 1.
           
Similarly, -1 is recorded in the monthly proxy of month . Thus, the proxy of month  should
be compared against settlement-based intervention amounts, calculated as:
                                      
                              =  -  - -1 .




                                                   8
In order to see the point of this discussion, the estimated errors of the best proxy ( =  -
 ) are examined. We argue that this is mostly explained by the end-of-month interventions and
the  + 2 difference between transaction and settlement. We define the  + 2 difference as
 (abbreviation of "end of month difference"):
                                                    
                                               =  - -1 .


Figure 2 shows the time series of  and  where  is again computed using
"Adjusted MOF FEEF" as a proxy. As expected, the "Errors" appear to be explained mostly as a result
of end-of-month interventions and the  + 2 settlement. To be statistically accurate, a regression is
conducted:
                                          = -8.200 + 1.074 
                                                       (7.166) (0.083)                                          2 = 0.956


Here HAC standard errors are in brackets. 2 Neither 0 : 0 = 0 nor 0 : 1 = 1 is rejected; the
deviation of the proxy from transaction-based interventions is well explained by the end-of-month
interventions. In fact, 95.6% of the deviation is due to end-of-month interventions, as shown by  2 =
0.956.
                                                      <Figure 2 about here>


We further examine how close settlement-based intervention data are to various proposed proxies for
the period after the disclosure, April 1991. Table 3 shows the regression results of Eq. (1) with the
                                                         
dependent variable being settlement-based interventions ( ). As shown, the explanatory
power of proxies is much improved, compared to the one in Table 2. For the regression using "Adjusted
MOF FEEF," the  2 improves from 0.968 in Table 2 to 0.998 in Table 3. 3 This is a confirmation that
the proxy is an accurate measure, explaining 99.8% of the movements of settlement-based
interventions.
                                                       <Table 3 about here>


The above detailed examination in search of the best proxy for interventions is thus concluded with
both encouraging and discouraging results. We are encouraged to have found that "Adjusted MOF
FEEF" is the best proxy with 99.8% accuracy. However, our enthusiasm must be tempered slightly
given that this accuracy is measured against settlement-based interventions. Hence, considering that


2 The long-run variance is constructed based on the quadratic spectral window with the truncation parameter being selected via the
Andrews' (1993) plug-in method.
3 For the regression adopting "Change in Reserve," the  2 improves from 0.928 in Table 2 to 0.950 in Table 3, which
means that this popular proxy is for settlement-based interventions, not for transaction-based interventions. Researchers interested in
this proxy for interventions in other countries should keep this point in mind.

                                                                  9
daily data are not available prior to April 1991, the available monthly interventions data for months
() covers the period from the last two days of month ( - 1) to the third to last business day of month
(). This may pose a problem in analyzing the effectiveness of interventions or the reaction function
of the monetary authorities when intervention actions are concentrated at the end of the month.
However, an adjustment can be applied when such circumstances are suspected based on the volatility
of the exchange rate; for example, one can use the exchange rate from the third to last business day as
the monthly exchange rate. This is what we will do in section 5 when estimating the reaction function
of the monetary authorities.




4. Patterns of intervention
Figure 3, panels (a) and (b), show monthly data of the yen/dollar rate and amounts of interventions by
the Japanese monetary authorities. 4 Panel (a) shows the movement of the yen/dollar rate. The dotted
line represents the past-five-year moving-average of the yen/dollar rate.
                                                      <Figure 3 about here>


Panel (b) shows that in the 1970s and 1980s, interventions were very "frequent and symmetric": yen-
selling interventions as well as yen-buying interventions were frequently conducted. The yen had been
on a long-term appreciation trend, as shown in panel (a), throughout the 1970s and 1980s. It has been
well documented that the authorities intervened in an attempt to stop this appreciation, presumably to
prevent adverse effects on export industries.


However, it was little publicized that yen depreciation was also resisted by selling the dollar. Three
hypotheses could explain the symmetric interventions. First, the authorities genuinely believed that
the long-run trend could not be resisted, yet it was the authorities' role to reduce "excess" volatilities,
upside and downside. Second, merely resisting yen appreciation by buying US dollars, would only
have resulted in ever-accumulating foreign reserves that would have been exposed to increasing
evaluation losses, which could have triggered political criticism. Third, the interest rate in Japan was
similar or even higher than the US interest rate during the 1970s and 1980s; hence, building up foreign
reserves meant that interest income might not cover domestic interest payments to fiscal bills that are
liabilities in the foreign exchange special accounts. The "quasi-fiscal" costs were real concerns in
Japan during the 1970s and 1980s.



4 In the analysis below, intervention amounts below 30 billion yen for the period from August 1971 to March 1991 are assumed to
be 0, as intervention amounts for the period are estimated based on the proxy and the proxy is likely to contain a certain degree of
estimation error. The intervention amounts are in units of 100 million yen. The monthly yen/dollar rate is the Tokyo close rate on the
third to last business day for the period before April 1991, since the proxy is for settlement-based interventions. After April 1991, we
use the end-of-month New York close rate for the monthly yen/dollar rate.

                                                                  10
For the reasons mentioned above, whenever the yen depreciated to some extent, like in 1973 and 1979
(due to the oil crises), 1981-82, and 1989, the yen was bought back, which appears to slow the yen's
depreciation and to keep foreign reserves at a reasonable level. This attitude of symmetric
interventions changed in the 1990s. After 1992, the only instance of sizable dollar-selling interventions
was 1997-98 when the banking crisis of Japan caused a sharp yen depreciation. The magnitude of
interventions became distinctively large while the frequency of interventions was reduced. In
particular interventions in 2003-04 and 2011 were very large.


Table 4 shows the details of interventions by fiscal year (April to March): intervention frequencies
(the number of months), intervention (cumulative) amounts (by fiscal year), and the average (per
month) magnitude of interventions (year total divided by the number of intervention months). This
clearly shows that the frequency has declined, but also that the per-month magnitude has become
larger since 1995. Prior to 1995, there were 178 months featuring intervention, amounting to 46 trillion
yen in total. Thus, average per-month intervention was 257 billion yen. After 1995, interventions
occurred during 41 months, with intervention totals reaching 78 trillion yen. The average per-month
intervention amount was 1.9 trillion yen--more than 7 times the amount before 1995. Neely (2011)
described and examined the fact that interventions had become infrequent over time in major
countries: frequent interventions were ceased in the UK in 1993; in the US, Germany, and Switzerland
in 1995; in Canada in 1998, and in Japan in March 2004.
                                          <Table 4 about here>


Figure 4 shows the changing ceiling and floor exchange rates for intervention over time. The last
selling rate is the yen/dollar rate when the dollar was sold by the Japanese monetary authorities, while
the last buying rate is the yen/dollar rate when the dollar was bought by the Japanese monetary
authorities. The band between the two prices implies the tolerance range, or target zone, for the
fluctuation of the exchange rate for the authorities. Between 1971 and 1990, both the ceiling and floor
of the tolerance band shifted gradually toward yen appreciation. The figure shows that the Japanese
authorities had a moving band of symmetric interventions. Although the band shifted over time, the
floor and ceiling had a significant spread most of the time. Until 1992, interventions were symmetric,
but the range had shifted, gradually allowing for a long-run trend of yen appreciation.
                                          <Figure 4 about here>


The above figure shows that after 1991, the last selling rate consistently remained above 125, while
the last buying rate stayed below 125. Since the last dollar-selling intervention was in 1998, the last
selling rate has not changed. Since 1991, the last buying rate only went down toward the appreciated
level, while the last selling rate only went up toward the depreciated level. Thus, the tolerance band


                                                   11
has widened to the range of 77.5-140.6, which is a spread of 63 yen.


Intervention became more unilateral after 1998, only changing the point of intervention on the
appreciation side, mitigating the speed of yen appreciation and defending the particular level, such as
75 to 80 yen per dollar in 2010-12.


5. Reaction Function
In this section, we estimate the monetary authorities' reaction function using the data from August
1971 to March 2018. Most papers analyzing interventions before March 1991 have used "Change in
Reserve" or "Treasury Funds and Others/Foreign Exchange" as a proxy for interventions. What
differentiates this paper from these previous papers is the use of the proxy Ito and Yabu (2017)
identified and also the adoption of a state-of-the-art reaction function proposed by Ito and Yabu (2007).


5.1. Ordered Probit Model
Almekinders and Eijffinger (1996) were the first to derive a reaction function from a loss function of
monetary authorities. Ito and Yabu (2007) extended their model by allowing for a more realistic
formulation of the target exchange rate and a cost function of interventions to derive a reaction function
as an ordered probit model.


The ordered probit model of Ito and Yabu (2007) is the following 5:
                                                                             
                                            +1                           2 < 
                                                                            
                                          =  0                         1 <  < 2                                             (2)
                                                                          
                                            -1                             < 1
      
where  =   +  with    .  .  . (0,  2 ) and
                                                        
                               = 1 (-1 - -2 ) + 2 (-1 - -1 ) + 3 -1.


Here  takes a value of +1 if there is dollar-purchasing intervention, -1 if there is dollar-
selling intervention, and 0 if there is no intervention. The log of the monthly yen/dollar rate is denoted
                                                                                   6
by  and the log of the moving average yen/dollar rate over the past five years by  . The lag of
 is included to explain a positive autocorrelation of interventions, i.e., when there is intervention
                                                                                                      
one month, it is likely that intervention will take place in the following month. The latent variable 
                                                                                              
represents the optimal amount of intervention and intervention does not take place as long as  is
inside a "neutral band" of no intervention, i.e., [1 , 2 ].


5 Ito and Yabu (2007) include the daily change in the yen/dollar rate as an explanatory variable. However, this paper analyzes
monthly data and thus omits the daily change in the yen/dollar rate.
6 We also adopted different windows to check the robustness of results such as the past one year as well as the past three years.
However, our main results did not depend on the choice of the window.

                                                                 12
Regarding the parameters of the model, the parameter 1 takes a negative value (1 < 0) when there
is lean-against-the-wind intervention and 2 takes a negative value (2 < 0) when policy makers
have a long-run target in mind. On the other hand, the parameter 3 takes a positive value (3 > 0)
when there is intervention one month and intervention is likely to take place in the following month.
Here, 1 represents the cost of dollar-selling intervention while 2 is the cost of dollar-buying
intervention. The cost of interventions is introduced to explain the fact that interventions do not take
place every month. 7 We estimate this model using the maximum likelihood method but identify only
the normalized parameters    / and 
                                      /, not the parameters  and  themselves.


5.2. Structural Break Test
Before Ito and Yabu (2007), most papers estimated a model similar to the following:
                                             
                = 0 + 1 (-1 - -2 ) + 2 (-1 - -1 ) + 3 -1 +                                                                     (3)
This model is considered to be a linearized version of Eq. (2). Note that 1 < 0 when there is a
lean-against-the wind intervention and 2 < 0 when policy makers have a long-run target in mind;
3 > 0 when there is a positive autocorrelation in interventions.


Ito and Yabu (2007) analyzed the data from April 1991 to December 2002 to find that there was a
structural break in the reaction function in June 1995 when Eisuke Sakakibara took charge of
interventions. Ito (2007) and Watanabe and Yabu (2013) asserted that when Zenbei Mizoguchi was
in charge of the intervention from January 2003 to July 2004, the frequency and daily amount of
intervention had a distinctive pattern--more frequent interventions of greater magnitude. We take
these observations as given and examine whether there exist any additional structural breaks
between August 1971 and May 1995.


Here we analyze the data from August 1971 to May 1995 to conduct Andrews' (1993) sup F test and
search for an unknown structural break date. 89 The possible structural break dates are assumed to be
the middle 70% of the sample period. The first and last 15% of dates are excluded from break
candidates. (We set the trimming parameter at 0.15). The standard Chow test is conducted to obtain

7 Ito and Yabu (2007) explained the cost of interventions as "Political costs reflect costs of discussion with Minister of Finance of
own country and other major countries of intervention currencies. In order to carry out intervention, an explanation to the Minister
of Finance, and in some cases to other ministers, including the Prime Minister, is necessary and a tacit approval, if not coordinated
intervention, of other countries has to be sought. Political costs are most likely independent of the magnitude of the intervention.
However, once the approval is secured, then intervention can be carried out over the course of several days in a row, if the situation
does not change dramatically."
8 There is a possibility of endogeneity in this analysis. However, Perron and Yamamoto (2015) found that we can test for structural
changes and consistently estimate the break dates using the standard methods even when endogenous regressors are present. This is
because when true parameters change, the probability limits of the OLS parameter estimates also change simultaneously.
9 The sample period starts from August 1971 when the Bretton Woods system collapsed, but some may argue that the sample
period should start from March 1973 when the floating rate system started. Therefore, we checked the sensitivity of our results to
the starting date to find that our main results are robust to the selection of the starting date.

                                                                 13
the F-statistic at each break candidate.


Figure 5 shows the sequence of F-statistics for each break candidate. In the figure, the break dates
are given on the horizontal axis and the F-statistics on the vertical axis. As shown, the F-statistic has
the largest value in November 1981 at 4.80. This is larger than the 5% critical value of 4.09 but
slightly lower than the 1% critical value of 5.12. Therefore, we reject the null hypothesis of no break
and accept the alternative of a structural break. In addition, based on the figure, the F-statistic is
single-peaked, implying that there are no other structural breaks. 10 The structural break date of
November 1981 is a year and a half after a break date pointed out by Watanabe (1992) without
conducting any structural break test.


5.3. Conventional Regression
We split the full sample into five subperiods and estimate a linearized version of the reaction
function Eq. (3) for each subsample. As discussed in section 5.2, the sample before May 1995 is
divided into two periods: 1) August 1971 to November 1981; and 2) December 1981 to May 1995
just before Eisuke Sakakibara took charge of interventions. In addition, taking into account large-
scale and frequent interventions by Zenbei Mizoguchi, the sample after June 1995 is divided into
three periods: 3) June 1995 to December 2002; 4) January 2003 to July 2004; and 5) August 2004 to
March 2018.


Table 5 summarizes the estimated results of Eq. (3) for each subsample. In the first period (August
1971 to November 1981), the parameter 1 is significantly negative, but 2 is not significantly
different from zero. The monetary authorities adopted a lean-against-the-wind policy without setting
any long-run targets. They were only intent on reducing monthly volatility in the exchange rate.
These results are consistent with the findings of Quirk (1977), Hutchison (1984), and Watanabe
(1992). On the other hand, the parameter 3 is significantly positive and thus there was a positive
autocorrelation in interventions.
                                                     <Table 5 about here>


In the second period (December 1981 to May 1995), the parameter 2 is significantly negative, but
1 is not significantly different from zero. That is, the monetary authorities had long-run targets in
mind, but they were not mindful of reducing monthly volatility in the exchange rate. These results
are sharp contrast to the results of the first period but are consistent with the findings of Watanabe
(1992). The parameter 3 has a large value of 0.713, a strong positive autocorrelation of


10 We also conducted the Bai and Perron (1998) multiple break tests for the period from August 1971 to May 1995 and confirmed
that there was only one break, which occurred in November 1981. This result is consistent with our visual impression from Figure 5.

                                                               14
interventions. Adjusted  2 has the largest value of 0.598 among the subsamples. Interventions were
easiest to predict among the subsamples.


In the third period (June 1995 to December 2002), we obtain results similar to Ito and Yabu (2007),
which analyzed the same period using daily data. Both parameters of 1 and 2 are significantly
negative. In other words, the monetary authorities paid attention to changes in the exchange rate as
well as long-run targets. In contrast to the results of the first and second periods, the parameter 3 is
now close to zero and no longer significant. There was no evidence of autocorrelation of
interventions in this period. 11 Adjusted  2 is smaller than it was in the previous two periods and
thus interventions became more difficult to predict.


In the fourth period (January 2003 to July 2004), the parameter 3 is significantly positive, while
both parameters 1 and 2 are not significantly different from zero. The monetary authorities,
thus, intervened only because they had intervened the month before. As Ito (2007) and Watanabe and
Yabu (2013) have pointed out, the monetary authorities may have had other motives to conduct
interventions.


For the last period (August 2004 to March 2018), the parameter 2 is significantly negative, while
both parameters 1 and 3 are not significantly different from zero. Therefore, the monetary
authorities had long-run targets in mind but were not intent on reducing the volatility of the
exchange rate. In addition, there was no positive autocorrelation of interventions. Therefore,
interventions during the previous month did not significantly increase the likelihood of interventions
occurring during the following month. Adjusted  2 has the smallest value of 0.069 among the
subsamples because interventions took place during only 5 months of the 14-year period which also
shows the difficulty of predicting interventions.


5.4. Ordered Probit Regressions
Table 6 presents the estimated results of the ordered probit model Eq. (2) for each subsample. When
these results are compared with the ones from the linearized model in section 5.3, the signs of the
estimated coefficients and their significances are almost the same. Consequently, we only discuss
                                                               
estimates of new parameters in the ordered probit model: 1 and 2 , which respectively represent the

cost of dollar-selling interventions and the cost of dollar-buying interventions. Note that in the last two
                                                                                 
periods, there was no dollar-selling intervention at all and thus, the parameter 1 is not estimated in
the regression.


11 Ito and Yabu (2007) found using daily data that the parameter  was close to zero yet significantly different from zero. The
                                                                 3
reason we missed this autocorrelation is partly because the number of observations is much smaller than in Ito and Yabu (2007).

                                                                15
                                           <Table 6 about here>


                                                       
In the first period, 1 is significantly negative while 2 is not significantly different from zero. The
monetary authorities were accordingly more inclined to buy rather than sell dollars due to the
difference in cost. This point was also raised by Hutchison (1984).


                                     
For the second period, the parameter 2 is significantly positive. Due to international political
pressure, it might have been difficult for the monetary authorities to purchase dollars to induce yen
                            
depreciation. The parameter 1 is significantly negative and larger in terms of absolute values than
the corresponding parameter from the first period, which means that there was a higher cost for dollar-
                                                  
selling interventions. Moreover, 2 is larger than 1 in terms of absolute values and thus, the cost
of dollar-selling interventions was higher than the cost of dollar-buying interventions. The monetary
authorities are more inclined to resist yen appreciation than yen depreciation. The neutral band of no
intervention is wider here than that of the first period.


                                            
For the third period, both parameters 1 and 2 are significantly different from zero. As was the
                                             
case for the second period, 1 is larger than 2 in terms of absolute values and thus, the cost of
dollar-selling interventions was larger than the cost of dollar-buying interventions. The monetary
authorities were more inclined to prevent yen appreciation than yen depreciation, and the neutral band
                                                                            
of no intervention was even wider than that of the second period. Note that 2 is lower than the
corresponding parameter for the second period, which means that the cost of dollar-buying
interventions becomes lower in this period.


                       
For the fourth period, 2 is not significantly different from zero. Therefore, there is no evidence of a
neutral band, which means that there was no international political pressure from other countries when
the monetary authorities intervened in the foreign exchange market. As Taylor (2006), who served as
the Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs during the George W. Bush
administration, documented, the US Treasury has been critical of interventions but approved Japanese
interventions during this period in order to show support for the quantitative easing policy adopted by
the Bank of Japan. (See Taylor, 2006 for details). In fact, Watanabe and Yabu (2013) found that when
yen-selling interventions supplied yen funds to the market, the Bank of Japan offset 60% of the yen
funds through market operations, while the remainder remained in the market for a while.


                                         
On the other hand, for the fifth period, 2 has the largest value of 8.405. Hence, its neutral band was
the widest among all subsamples. This is because interventions took place only on rare occasions, such
as when the yen appreciated sharply due to the Great East Japan Earthquake in March 2011 and when


                                                    16
the yen/dollar rate appreciated to 75 yen per dollar, setting a historical record in August 2011.
Therefore, the monetary authorities were not able to intervene in the market due to international
political pressure, except in cases when it was clear that excess volatility and disorderly movements
in the yen/dollar rate would damage economic and financial stability. In contrast to the results in the
linear regression, this period has higher explanatory power ( -  2) than other periods. This
is due to the fact that the model is now rich enough to predict zero intervention by introducing a
neutral band of no intervention.


6. International Coordination or non-Coordination
6.1. Policy coordination on exchange rates
The Group of Seven (G7) monetary authorities were engaged in interventions very frequently during
the 1970s and 1980s. However, the frequency of interventions declined during the 1990s. Frequent
interventions by the US, Germany and the UK ceased by 1995. The frequency of Japanese intervention
also declined after 1995, apart from 14 months of frequent interventions from January 2003 to March
2004.


During the period of frequent interventions, there were many cases where two or three of the G3--the
US, Japan and Germany--intervened in the same direction simultaneously. There were also cases of
US-Japan joint interventions; US-German joint interventions and even three-way interventions. When
engaging in joint interventions, they must have shared the same views in terms of the level and
movement of the exchange rate, such as the idea that since the US dollar is overvalued, the US should
buy German marks and Japanese yen, while Germany and Japan should sell US dollars. When two or
three authorities intervene in the same direction in the same month, we refer to them as "coordinated
interventions" throughout the rest of the paper.


Figure 6 shows that the number of months per year during which the authorities coordinated their
interventions from 1976 to 1995. For example, in 1979, US-German joint interventions were
conducted during nine months and US-German-Japanese joint interventions were conducted during
three months. In September 2000, there was a joint ECB-US-Japan intervention in order to stop further
depreciation of the euro. On March 18, 2011, the G7 countries intervened to reverse the direction of
yen appreciation that had progressed following the Great East Japan Earthquake. One of the proposed
reasons for this appreciation was based on speculation that Japanese insurance companies would need
to liquidate assets abroad and convert them to yen to pay for claims. (See Neely 2011). The
aforementioned coordinated intervention, the first since 2000, played a crucial role in stabilizing the
yen.
                                         <Figure 6 about here>


                                                   17
Policy coordination on exchange rates among the G5 countries occasionally had dramatic effects
during the 1970s and 1980s. The most prominent example of this was the period bookended by the
Plaza agreement of September 1985 and the Louvre accord of February 1987.


6.2. Case Study: Policy coordination under the Plaza and Louvre agreements 12
With newly estimated intervention amounts for the Japanese authorities, we are able to examine one
of the most dramatic policy coordination events of the post-Bretton Woods era, namely the Plaza and
Louvre agreements.


The meeting of G5 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors was called primarily to rectify an
overvaluation of the US dollar on September 22, 1985. The real effective US dollar appreciated by
about 40% from January 1981 to March 1985, due to the policy of Reaganomics which resulted in
large fiscal deficits. This meeting resulted in what would come to be known as the Plaza Agreement.


The communiqué stated the following: 13
            "The Ministers and Governors agreed that exchange rates should play a role in adjusting
            external imbalances. In order to do this, exchange rates should better reflect fundamental
            economic conditions than has been the case. They believed that agreed policy actions must
            be implemented and reinforced to improve the fundamentals further, and that, in view of the
            present and prospective changes in fundamentals, some further orderly appreciation of the
            main non-dollar currencies against the dollar is desirable. They stand ready to cooperate
            more closely to encourage this when to do so would be helpful." (Underlines by the author.)


The communiqué itself did not mention "intervention" or a targeted level of appreciation for the non-
dollar currencies, although they were part of the discussion that was kept confidential at the time.
According to Funabashi (1988), the non-paper draft stated that intervention shares were 25% for the
US, Japan, and Germany, followed by 12.5% for the UK and France. With German objection, the US
revised the ratios for the US and Japan to 30%; followed by Germany at 25%; France at 10%; and the
UK at 5%. The obligation to intervene in order to achieve the exchange rate goals was also discussed.
According to Gyohten (2013), 18 billion US dollars were committed over a period of six weeks.
Countries would be relieved of their intervention obligation if the necessary currency adjustments
were achieved. All G5 members committed themselves to these goals and interventions willingly.



12
   This section heavily draws on Ito (2016).
13
   The statement is available at
http://warp.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/8779816/www.mof.go.jp/english/international_policy/convention/g7/g7_850922.pdf

                                                             18
The communiqué was announced on Sunday, September 22, 1985. Meanwhile, the Tokyo market was
to be closed on Monday, September 23, for a national holiday. Initial interventions were conducted in
the European and US markets on September 23 and in Tokyo on September 24. 14 Gyohten (2013, p.
77) stated in his memoir that, over the seven days that followed the Plaza announcement, Japan sold
USD 1.25 billion; surpassing the USD 635 million sold by France, the USD 480 million sold by the
US; the USD 247 million sold by West Germany, and the USD 174 million sold by the UK. The proxy
largely corroborates the numbers in the memoir.


The proxy shows that the Japanese monetary authorities intervened to buy yen, selling the US dollars,
in the amount of 705 billion yen over three months: September, October and November. The US sold
USD 1.44 billion over the same three months. Consequently, the USD/JPY rate became 200 by the
end of November. There were no interventions by the Japanese or US authorities in December. So it
appeared that the target had been achieved.


On the DEM/USD markets, both the US and German authorities intervened to appreciate the German
mark over the same three months. The mark reached 2.5 marks per dollar by the end of November,
with interventions of USD 1.86 billion by the US and DEM 3 billion by Germany over the three
months starting in September. In short, the US, Japanese and German authorities conducted
coordinated interventions for three months and achieved the agreed exchange rate targets by the end
of November.


The yen continued to appreciate beyond 200 in 1986. The USD/JPY rate dipped into the 190s in
January 1986, to the 180s in February, and finally to the 170s in March. Given that this movement was
unacceptable to the Japanese authorities, they began to intervene in the opposite direction, namely
selling the yen, in April 1986. However, in 1986, interventions were conducted by the Japanese
authorities alone. It was unilateral intervention as opposed to coordinated intervention. Japan
requested to have another agreement to stabilize the exchange rate.
                                                     <Table 7 about here>


The Plaza agreement was followed by the Louvre agreement of February 1987, in which the G7
authorities agreed that "their currencies [are] within ranges broadly consistent with underlying
economic fundamentals." Thus, "they agreed to cooperate closely to foster stability of exchange rates
around current levels" in their statements. The market interpreted that the authorities have committed
to a target zone around the "current levels." The authorities indeed started to intervene in a coordinated


14 According to Gyohten (2013, pp. 69-70), "As far as [non-dollar] currency appreciation, Japan was the most forthcoming.
Finance Minister Takeshita expressed [during the Plaza meeting] that Japan could accept yen appreciation up to 200 yen/dollar."

                                                               19
manner; that is, both the Japanese and U.S. authorities intervened, selling the yen and buying the dollar,
to counter yen-appreciation pressure. The coordinated interventions continued through April 1988.


7. Concluding Remarks
This paper confirms that "Adjusted MOF FEEF" is the best proxy for settlement-based interventions.
In fact, the proxy explains 99.8% of the movements of settlement-based interventions. The monthly
intervention data are presented in the appendix and are also available on the authors' websites. 15 At
least in the monthly frequency, it has become possible to research topics related to Japanese
interventions from August 1971 to the present day. One caution: most researchers are interested in
transaction-based interventions when analyzing the effectiveness of interventions or in the reaction
function of the monetary authorities since the exchange rate reacts to the buy and sell in the market
transactions. The difference is the last two business days of the month. Therefore, when we use
settlement-based interventions as transaction-based interventions, we must use the exchange rate
returns using the third to last business day as the monthly exchange rate.


This paper has analyzed the reaction function of the Japanese monetary authorities. The following
points stand out. First, the reaction functions were not stable over time. In fact, we observed four break
dates and thus five regimes: August 1971 to November 1981, December 1981 to May 1995, June 1995
to December 2002, January 2003 to July 2004, and August 2004 to March 2018. These policy shifts
might be associated with changes in the impact of interventions on the yen/dollar rate. Therefore, we
need to exercise caution when analyzing the effectiveness of interventions. Second, the neutral band
of the reaction function widened over time, apart from during the period in which it did not exist,
between January 2003 to July 2004. This implies that the Japanese monetary authorities have
experienced increased political pressure from other countries over time concerning their intervention
or proposed intervention in the foreign exchange market. Third, the cost of selling-dollar interventions
was higher than the cost of buying-dollar interventions. This implies that the monetary authorities
were more inclined to resist yen appreciation.




                                                       References


Andrews, Donald W.K., 1993. "Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change with Unknown
   Change Point." Econometrica 61, 821-856.
Almekinders, Geert J., and Sylvester CW Eijffinger, 1996. "A friction model of daily Bundesbank and

15 The data are available at
http://www3.grips.ac.jp/~t-ito/JapaneseIntervention1971-2018.xlsx
http://www.fbc.keio.ac.jp/~tyabu/JapaneseIntervention1971-2018.xlsx

                                                             20
  Federal Reserve intervention." Journal of Banking and Finance 20, 1365-1380.
Bai, Jushan and Pierre Perron, 1998. "Estimating and Testing Linear Models with Multiple Structural
  Changes." Econometrica 66, 47-78.
Chen, Chih-nan, Tsutomu Watanabe, and Tomoyoshi Yabu, 2012. "A new method for identifying the
  effects of foreign exchange interventions." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 44, 1507-1533.
Dominguez, Kathryn, Yuko Hashimoto, and Takatoshi Ito, 2012. "International Reserves and the
  Global Financial Crisis." Journal of International Economics 88, 388-406.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1980. "Exchange rate economics: Where do we stand?" Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity 1, 143-185.
                                         "Effectiveness of official daily foreign exchange market
Fatum, Rasmus and Michael Hutchison, 2006.
  intervention operations in Japan."Journal of International Money and Finance 25, 199-219.
Fatum, Rasmus, and Yohei Yamamoto, 2014. "Large Versus Small Foreign Exchange Interventions,"
  Journal of Banking and Finance 43, 114-123.
Frenkel, Michael, Christian Pierdzioch, and Georg Stadtmann, 2003."Modeling coordinated foreign
  exchange market interventions: The case of the Japanese and US interventions in the 1990s." Review
  of World Economics 139, 709-729.
Frenkel, Michael, Christian Pierdzioch, and Georg Stadtmann, 2005."Japanese and US interventions
  in the yen/US dollar market: estimating the monetary authorities' reaction functions." The Quarterly
  Review of Economics and Finance 45, 680-698.
Funabashi, Yoichi, 1988. Managing the Dollar: from the Plaza to the Louvre. Institute for International
  Economics.
Gyohten, Toyoo, 2013. "En no Kobo: `Tsuka Mafia no Dokuhaku." (in Japanese, translation: "Offense
  and Defense of the Yen, Monologue of a `Currency Mafia'"). Tokyo: Asahi Shinbun Pub.
Hutchison M. Michael, 1984. "Official Japanese intervention in foreign exchange markets: Leaning
  against the wind?" Economic Letters 15, 115-120.
Hoshikawa, Takeshi, 2008. "The Effect of Intervention Frequency on the Foreign Exchange Market:
  The Japanese experience." Journal of International Money and Finance 27, 547-559.
Ito, Takatoshi, 2003. "Is foreign exchange intervention effective? The Japanese experiences in the
  1990s." In: Mizen, P. (Ed.), Monetary History, Exchange Rates and Financial Markets, Essays in
  Honour of Charles Goodhart. Edward Elgar Pub, Cheltenham, U.K.
Ito, Takatoshi, 2007. "Myths and reality of foreign exchange interventions: An application to Japan."
  International Journal of Finance & Economics 12, 133-154.
Ito, Takatoshi, 2016. "The Plaza Accord and Japan: Reflections on the 30th Anniversary." in C. Fred
  Bergsten and Russell A. Green (eds.), International Monetary Cooperation: Lessons from the
  Plaza-Accord after Thirty Years. Peterson Institute for International Economics and Rice
  University's Baker Institute for Public Policy: 73-103.


                                                  21
Ito, Takatoshi, and Tomoyoshi Yabu, 2007. "What prompts Japan to intervene in the Forex market? A
  new approach to a reaction function." Journal of International Money and Finance 26, 193-212.
Ito, Takatoshi, and Tomoyoshi Yabu, 2017. "Kawase Kainyu to Gaika Junbi: Unyo Soneki no Choki
  Tokei." (in Japanese, translation: "Forex Intervention and Foreign Reserves: Long-term Estimate
  of Profits/losses from Interventions"). JCER Economic Journal, 2017, Pages 98-127.
International Monetary Fund, 2013. International Reserves and Foreign Currency Liquidity:
  Guidelines for a Data Template.
  http://www.imf.org/external/np/sta/ir/IRProcessWeb/pdf/guide2013.pdf
Kearns, Jonathan, and Roberto Rigobon, 2005. "Identifying the Efficacy of Central Bank
  Interventions: Evidence from Australia and Japan." Journal of International Economics 66, 31-48.
Nakada (Kuroda), Sachiko, 1998. "Neural Network Approach ni yoru Keizai Bunseki (2): Tsuka
  Tokyoku no Gaitameshijyo heno Ouyou Rei." (in Japanese, translation: "A Neural Network
  Approach to Economic Analysis (2): An Application to the Interventions by the Monetary
  Authorities"). Kinyu Kenkyu 17, 99-122.
Neely, Christopher, 2000. "Are changes in foreign exchange reserves well correlated with official
  intervention?" Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 82, 17-32.
Neely, Christopher, 2011. "A Foreign Exchange Intervention in an Era of Restraint." Federal Reserve
  Bank of St. Louis Review 93(5), 303-324.
Perron, Pierre and Yohei Yamamoto, 2014. "Using OLS to Estimate and Test for Structural Changes
  in Models with Endogenous Regressors." Journal of Applied Econometrics 30(1), 119-144.
Quirk, Peter J., 1977. "Exchange Rate Policy in Japan: Leaning Against the Wind." IMF Staff Papers
  24, 642­664.
Suda, Miyako, 1999. "Gaikoku Kawase Shikin Tokubetsu Kaikei To Gaikoku Kawase Seisaku." (in
  Japanese, translation: "The Special Account for Foreign Exchange Fund and Foreign Exchange
  Policy"). Gakusyuin Daigaku Keizai Ronshu, 185-217.
Takagi, Shinji, 1991. "Foreign Exchange Market Intervention and Domestic Monetary Control in
  Japan, 1973-89." Japan and the World Economy 3, 147-80.
Taylor, John, 2006. "Lessons from the recovery from the `Lost Decade' in Japan: the case of the great
  intervention and money injection." In: Paper Presented at the ESRI International Conference,
  Cabinet Office, Government of Japan, September 14, 2006.
Watanabe, Tsutomu, 1992."The signaling effect of foreign exchange intervention: the case of Japan."
  Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Proceedings.
Watanabe, Tsutomu and Tomoyoshi Yabu, 2013. "The Great Intervention and Massive Money
  Injection: The Japanese Experience 2003-2004." Journal of International Money and Finance 32,
  428-443.




                                                 22
Table 1: List of proxies for interventions
 Change in Reserve        Changes in the "Total Reserve Excluding Gold" available in the Balance
                          of Payments statistics.
 BOJ EF                   Bank of Japan. "Treasury Funds and Others/Foreign Exchange,"
                          Statistical category: Sources of Changes in Current Account Balances at
                          the BOJ and Market Operations.
 MOF FEEF                 Ministry of Finance. "Receipts and Payments of the Treasury Funds:
                          Foreign Exchange Equalization Fund" in the fiscal operations statistics.
 Adjusted MOF FEEF        Ministry of Finance. Subtracting "Balancing of Issuance and Redemption
                          of Financial Bills in the Financial Market" from "Receipts and Payments
                          of the Treasury Funds: Foreign Exchange Equalization Fund" in the fiscal
                          operations statistics.




                                                    23
Table 2: Proxies used for transaction-based intervention
Sample period: April 1991 ­ March 1999
 = 0 + 1  + 
                           Change in Reserve                                 BOJ                                MOF
                    3 months    3 years    10 years                           EF                    FEEF         Adjusted FEEF
0                   -176.544 -27.292       48.409                          -24.279                -24.287             0.448
                    (130.508) (129.000) (128.572)                         (264.463)              (264.463)          (33.421)
1                     1.026      1.024      1.025                          0.751**                0.751**             0.995
                     (0.056)   (0.057)     (0.057)                          (0.109)                (0.109)           (0.020)
R2                    0.928      0.928      0.928                            0.757                  0.757             0.969
Note: (1) Both transaction-based intervention amounts and proxies are in units of 100 million yen. (2) HAC standard errors are

presented in brackets; The long-run variance is constructed based on the quadratic spectral window with the truncation parameter

being selected via the Andrew's (1993) plug-in method. (3) The null hypothesis is 0 : 0 = 0 and 0 : 1 = 1, tested independently

with t-statistics; Asterisks (*, **, ***) denote the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance of the hypothesis testing, respectively. (4) The sample

period ends March 1999, since one of the proxies has a discontinuity in the classification.



Table 3: Proxies used for settlement-based intervention
Sample period: May 1991 ­ March 1999

 = 0 + 1  + 
                            Change in Reserve                                BOJ                                MOF
                    3 months     3 years    10 years                          EF                    FEEF         Adjusted FEEF
0                   -214.191 -64.378        11.486                         -28.087                -28.095            -5.264
                    (120.814) (118.523) (117.537)                         (267.028)              (267.028)          (10.951)
1                     1.027       1.025      1.026                         0.751**                0.751**             0.996
                     (0.053)    (0.053)     (0.054)                         (0.109)                (0.109)           (0.004)
R2                    0.950      0.950       0.950                           0.778                  0.778             0.998
Note: (1) Both settlement-based intervention amounts and proxies are in units of100 million yen. (2) HAC standard errors are presented

in brackets; The long-run variance is constructed based on the quadratic spectral window with the truncation parameter being selected

via the Andrew's (1993) plug-in method. (3) The null hypothesis is 0 : 0 = 0 and 0 : 1 = 1 , tested independently with t-

statistics; Asterisks (*, **, ***) denote the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance of the hypothesis testing, respectively. (4) The sample starts

from May 1991 because we needed information on daily intervention at  - 1 month in order to compute settlement-based

intervention at  month. The sample period ends March 1999. This is because one of the proxies has a discontinuity in the

classification.




                                                                  24
Table 4: Frequency and magnitude of interventions
   FY     Months Total amount Amount per month Yen/Dollar rate     FY        Months Total amount Amount per month Yen/Dollar rate
  1971         9         33711            3746              304   1995            7         47672            6810              107
  1972        12         22478            1873              266   1996            0             0               0              124
  1973        12         30499            2542              275   1997            1         10591           10591              133
  1974        10          7945             795              291   1998            3         37033           12344              119
  1975         8         10764            1346              300   1999            7         79626           11375              103
  1976         6          5957             993              277   2000            1         13854           13854              126
  1977         9         30798            3422              222   2001            1         31455           31455              133
  1978         8         20376            2547              208   2002            5         62837           12567              118
  1979        11         40857            3714              250   2003           11        327865           29806              104
  1980         6         16494            2749              211   2004            0             0               0              107
  1981         6          8670            1445              247   2005            0             0               0              118
  1982         8         19113            2389              239   2006            0             0               0              118
  1983         3          3142            1047              225   2007            0             0               0              100
  1984         4          3062             766              254   2008            0             0               0               99
  1985         3          7046            2349              180   2009            0             0               0               93
  1986         7         42083            6012              149   2010            2         28174           14087               83
  1987         8         29180            3648              124   2011            3        136046           45349               83
  1988         2          4745            2373              133   2012            0             0               0               94
  1989        11         47734            4339              159   2013            0             0               0              103
  1990         2          2622            1311              138   2014            0             0               0              120
  1991        12          1909             159              133   2015            0             0               0              113
  1992         4          5664            1416              115   2016            0             0               0              111
  1993         7         30917            4417              103   2017            0             0               0              106
  1994        10         32990            3299               87
Sub-total    178        458756            2577                  Sub-total         41       775153             18906

Note: "Fiscal year (FY)" is from April (in year ) to the end of March (in year  + 1). "Yen/dollar rate" uses the Tokyo close rate

on the third to last business day of March before April 1991 as well as the New York close rate at the end of March after April 1991.

"Months" denotes the number of months in which the intervention amount exceeds 30 billion yen. Interventions are in units of 100

million yen.




                                                                 25
Table 5: Estimating the reaction function for various sample periods
                              
 = 0 + 1 (-1 - -2 ) + 2 (-1 - -1 ) + 3 -1 + 
                                                                 Sample period
           1971/8-1981/11 1981/12-1995/5                        1995/6-2002/12          2003/1-2004/7           2004/8-2018/3
0            0.118          -0.073   *                            0.179 ***                0.561 **               0.023    **
            (0.107)        (0.041)                               (0.044)                  (0.223)                (0.011)
1            -7.184 ***     -1.536                                -2.425   *              -1.992                 -0.169
            (2.406)        (1.114)                               (1.251)                  (3.648)                (0.371)
2            0.733          -0.389   *                            -1.607 ***               4.119                 -0.275    **
            (0.681)        (0.214)                               (0.419)                  (2.608)                (0.129)
3            0.373 ***       0.713 ***                            0.121                    0.440   *              0.113
            (0.097)        (0.063)                               (0.127)                  (0.250)                (0.181)
Adjusted R2 0.291            0.598                                0.282                    0.194                  0.069
Note: (1) HAC standard errors are presented in brackets; The long-run variance is constructed based on the quadratic spectral

window with the truncation parameter being selected via the Andrew's (1993) plug-in method. (2) Asterisks (*, **, ***) denote the

10%, 5%, and 1% significance of the hypothesis testing, respectively.



Table 6: Estimating the reaction function based on the ordered probit model
                                                                         
                                            +1                       2 < 
                                                                        
                                          =  0                     1 <  < 2
                                                                      
                                            -1                         < 1
      
where  =   +  with    .  .  . (0,  2 ) and
                                                        
                               = 1 (-1 - -2 ) + 2 (-1 - -1 ) + 3 -1

                                                                 Sample period
                     1971/8-1981/11 1981/12-1995/5              1995/6-2002/12          2003/1-2004/7           2004/8-2018/3
 1*                   -13.928 ***     -4.613                     -10.773 **                -6.676                 10.219
                      (5.334)        (3.492)                     (4.505)                 (10.781)               (11.962)
 2*                    1.059          -1.125   *                  -7.335 ***              16.562                 -33.315 ***
                      (1.186)        (0.614)                     (2.017)                 (11.313)               (11.580)
 3*                    0.574 ***      1.819 ***                   0.412                     1.485  *              -0.251
                      (0.158)        (0.207)                     (0.403)                  (0.796)                (0.802)
 2*                    0.264          1.448 ***                   1.110 ***               -0.339                   8.405  ***
                      (0.179)        (0.160)                     (0.215)                  (0.628)                (2.546)
 1*                    -0.622 ***     -1.002 ***                  -2.863 ***
                      (0.186)        (0.172)                     (0.351)
pseudo-R2              0.168          0.417                       0.302                     0.298                 0.517

Note: (1) Standard errors are in Brackets. (2) Asterisks (*, **, ***) denote the 10%, 5%, and 1% significance of the hypothesis

testing, respectively. (3) We can estimate only the normalized parameters    / and 
                                                                                      /, not the parameters  and
                                                                                                                  
 themselves. (4) In the last two periods, there was no dollar-selling intervention at all and thus, the parameter 1 is not estimated

in the regression.



                                                                26
Table 7: From Plaza to Louvre, and beyond
            USD/JPY                                                  U.S. Intervention
                                             Japanese Intervention
             (End of       Major Events                                (1 Million of Unilateral or CoordinatedDirection of Interventions
                                             (100 millions of Yen)
             Month)                                                        USD)
  Sep-85          222.8 Plaza Agreement                     -2839                 -224 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Oct-85          212.9                                     -3303                -1138 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Nov-85          200.9                                      -904                  -77 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Dec-85         202.92                                         0                    0
   Jan-86         194.3                                         0                    0
  Feb-86         181.85                                         0                    0
  Mar-86             180                                        0                    0
  Apr-86          170.2                                      4743                    0 Japan unilateral       Sell yen; buy dollars
  May-86          168.9                                      1914                    0 Japan unilateral       Sell yen; buy dollars
  Jun-86          166.1                                      1767                    0 Japan unilateral       Sell yen; buy dollars
   Jul-86         155.7                                      6178                    0 Japan unilateral       Sell yen; buy dollars
  Aug-86         155.25                                      4680                    0 Japan unilateral       Sell yen; buy dollars
  Sep-86         154.43                                         0                    0
  Oct-86         159.35                                         0                    0
  Nov-86          162.5                                         0                    0
  Dec-86          159.5                                         0                    0
   Jan-87         151.2                                     13494                   50 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  Feb-87         153.55 Louvre Agreement                        0                    0
  Mar-87             149                                     9307                 2435 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  Apr-87          138.1                                     13930                 1529 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  May-87         143.15                                         0                   20 US unilateral          Sell yen; buy dollars
  Jun-87          145.9                                         0                  103 US unilateral          Sell yen; buy dollars
   Jul-87        150.15                                         0                    0
  Aug-87         142.55                                       653                  105 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  Sep-87         144.22                                      1677                  285 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  Oct-87         140.75 Black Monday                          336                   65 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  Nov-87         134.75                                      6408                  428 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  Dec-87          123.5                                      3548                 1089 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
   Jan-88        127.65                                      2258                  235 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  Feb-88          128.8                                         0                    0
  Mar-88         124.37                                       370                  318 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  Apr-88         124.57                                      1114                  260 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  May-88         124.64                                         0                    0
  Jun-88         130.95                                         0                    0
   Jul-88         132.5                                         0                    0
  Aug-88          134.2                                         0                    0
  Sep-88          134.2                                         0                    0
  Oct-88          125.9                                         0                  200 US unilateral          Sell yen; buy dollars
  Nov-88             122                                     3631                 1570 Policy Coordination    Sell yen; buy dollars
  Dec-88         125.27                                         0                  200 US unilateral          Sell yen; buy dollars
   Jan-89        128.65                                         0                    0
  Feb-89         126.29                                         0                    0
  Mar-89         133.25                                         0                 -100 US unilateral          Buy yen, sell dollars
  Apr-89         131.47                                         0                  -50 US unilateral          Buy yen, sell dollars
  May-89         142.88                                     -6835                -3185 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Jun-89         143.55                                    -10120                -3823 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
   Jul-89        139.35                                     -2145                 -230 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Aug-89         144.15                                     -1191                 -595 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Sep-89         141.35                                     -4300                -1594 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Oct-89         142.75                                     -3606                -1100 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Nov-89         143.65                                      -764                  -50 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Dec-89          142.1 Peak of the Bubble                   -665                 -100 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
   Jan-90        143.22                                     -4155                 -600 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Feb-90         148.65                                     -2858                 -350 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Mar-90         158.63                                    -11095                -1180 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars
  Apr-90         159.25                                     -1342                  -50 Policy Coordination    Buy yen, sell dollars




                                                               27
Figure 1: Actual intervention and estimated error
30,000     (yen 100mil)

                                                                                              Actual Intervention
20,000                                                                                        Error


10,000          Dollar Buying Interventions



     0
          91              92               93   94          95           96              97             98          99

-10,000
                Dollar Selling Interventions



-20,000



-30,000


Notes: The intervention amounts are in units of 100 million yen.  is defined as  -  where  is Adjusted

MOF FEEF.




Figure 2: Estimated error and EoMDiff
10,000
          (yen 100mil)
                                                                                 EoMDiff
 8,000
                                                                                 Error
 6,000

 4,000

 2,000           Dollar Buying
                 Interventions

     0
          91              92               93   94         95           96               97            98           99
 -2,000
                 Dollar Selling Interventions
 -4,000

 -6,000

 -8,000

-10,000


                                                                         
Notes:  is defined as  -  where  is Adjusted MOF FEEF.  is defined as  - -1
      
where  is interventions conducted in the last two business days of the month .




                                                         28
Figure 3: The yen/dollar rate and magnitude of interventions from August 1971 to March 2018
(a) Yen/dollar exchange rate
      360
      340                                                                                                           Spot
      320                                                                                                           Moving Average
      300
      280
      260
      240
      220
      200
      180
      160
      140
      120
      100
       80
       60
            71

                  73

                        75

                              77

                                    79

                                          81

                                                83

                                                      85

                                                            87

                                                                 89

                                                                      91

                                                                            93

                                                                                 95

                                                                                      97

                                                                                           99

                                                                                                01

                                                                                                     03

                                                                                                          05

                                                                                                               07

                                                                                                                    09

                                                                                                                         11

                                                                                                                                13

                                                                                                                                     15

                                                                                                                                          17
(b) Magnitude of Japanese interventions


   100000     (yen 100mil)


    80000


    60000


    40000                    Buy dollars, sell yen



    20000


        0
         71

                 73

                       75

                             77

                                   79

                                         81

                                               83

                                                     85

                                                           87

                                                                 89

                                                                      91

                                                                            93

                                                                                 95

                                                                                      97

                                                                                           99

                                                                                                01

                                                                                                     03

                                                                                                          05

                                                                                                               07

                                                                                                                    09

                                                                                                                           11

                                                                                                                                13

                                                                                                                                     15

                                                                                                                                          17




   -20000

                             Sell dollars, buy yen
   -40000

Note: The monthly yen/dollar rate uses the Tokyo close rate on the third-to-last business day for the period before April 1991, since

the proxy is for settlement-based interventions. After April 1991, we use the end-of-month New York close rate for the monthly

yen/dollar rate. Intervention amounts below 30 billion yen for the period from August 1971 to March 1991 are assumed to be 0, as

intervention amounts for the period are estimated with the proxy and the proxy is likely to contain a certain degree of estimation

error. The intervention amounts are in units of 100 million yen.




                                                                           29
Figure 4: The yen/dollar exchange rate, last selling rate, and last buying rate
360
340
                                                                                            spot
320
300                                                                                         Last buying rate
280
                                                                                            Last selling rate
260
240
220
200
180
160
140
120
100
 80
 60
       71 73 75 77 79 81 83 85 87 89 91 93 95 97 99 01 03 05 07 09 11 13 15 17




Figure 5: Structural break test
 6.0

                                                        Sup-F = 4.80


 5.0




 4.0




 3.0




 2.0




 1.0


                                                             Break Date
                                                             1981/11
 0.0
      71
           72
                73
                     74
                          75
                               76
                                    77
                                         78
                                              79
                                                   80
                                                        81
                                                             82
                                                                  83
                                                                       84
                                                                            85
                                                                                 86
                                                                                      87
                                                                                           88
                                                                                                89
                                                                                                     90
                                                                                                          91
                                                                                                               92
                                                                                                                    93
                                                                                                                         94
                                                                                                                              95




Note: The sample period is from August 1971 to May 1995. The trimming parameter is set to 0.15. Therefore, break candidates are

the middle 70% of the sample.




                                                                  30
Figure 6: Coordinated interventions
12


                                                                                        US-Germany
10

                                                                                        US-Japan
 8
                                                                                        US-Japan-
                                                                                        Germany
 6



 4



 2



 0
     1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995




                                                31
                Data Appendix
Table: Japanese Interventions and yen/dollar rates




                       32
Table: Japanese Interventions and yen/dollar rates (continued)




                             33
                  Table: Japanese Interventions and yen/dollar rates (continued)
          Japanese Interventions (100mil Yen)                                  Japanese Interventions (100mil Yen)
                                              Yen/Dollar Rate                                                       Yen/Dollar Rate
              Actual           Estimated                                           Actual            Estimated
 Jan-91              NA                     0           131.2         Jan-96                  0                   0            107.1
Feb-91               NA                     0           133.1        Feb-96              16037               16037             105.2
Mar-91               NA                 -1280           138.4        Mar-96                   0                   0            107.3
Apr-91                 0                 -489           136.1        Apr-96                   0                186             105.1
May-91              -139                 -139           138.5        May-96                   0               -182             108.1
Jun-91              -424                 -424           137.5        Jun-96                   0                   1            109.7
 Jul-91                0                    0           137.4         Jul-96                  0                   0            106.9
Aug-91                 0                    0           136.8        Aug-96                   0                   0            109.0
Sep-91                 0                    0           133.0        Sep-96                   0                   0            111.4
Oct-91                 0                    0           130.8        Oct-96                   0                   1            114.1
Nov-91                 0                    0           130.0        Nov-96                   0                  -1            113.9
Dec-91                 0                    0           124.8        Dec-96                   0                  -1            115.9
 Jan-92              -63                  -62           125.8         Jan-97                  0                   0            121.4
Feb-92              -896                 -896           129.5        Feb-97                   0                   1            120.4
Mar-92              -387                 -387           132.8        Mar-97                   0                   1            123.8
Apr-92             -2036                -1104           133.3        Apr-97                   0                   1            127.1
May-92             -1673                -1775           127.6        May-97                   0                   0            116.3
Jun-92             -1477                -2305           125.7        Jun-97                   0                   1            114.7
 Jul-92             -478                 -478           127.2         Jul-97                  0                   0            118.8
Aug-92              -160                 -160           123.2        Aug-97                   0                   0            120.8
Sep-92                 0                    0           119.9        Sep-97                   0                   0            120.4
Oct-92                 0                    0           123.5        Oct-97                   0                   0            120.5
Nov-92                 0                    0           124.6        Nov-97                   0                   7            127.8
Dec-92                 0                    1           124.9        Dec-97             -10591              -10585             130.6
 Jan-93                0                    0           124.7         Jan-98                  0                   1            127.2
Feb-93                 0                    0           118.3        Feb-98                   0                   0            126.1
Mar-93                 0                    0           114.8        Mar-98                   0                   0            133.0
Apr-93              6756                 6756           111.1        Apr-98             -28158              -28157             132.9
May-93              4971                 2384           107.5        May-98                   0                   0            138.8
Jun-93              5386                 7974           107.3        Jun-98              -2312               -2312             138.8
 Jul-93              366                    0           104.9         Jul-98                  0                   0            144.7
Aug-93              7835                 8262           104.8        Aug-98                   0                   0            139.2
Sep-93               218                  219           106.2        Sep-98                   0                   2            136.7
Oct-93                 0                    1           108.6        Oct-98                   0                   1            116.0
Nov-93                 0                    0           109.1        Nov-98                   0                   2            123.0
Dec-93                 0                    0           111.8        Dec-98                   0                   0            113.5
 Jan-94                0                    0           108.5         Jan-99              6563                6564             116.4
Feb-94              2445                 1869           104.5        Feb-99                   0                   1            119.2
Mar-94              3158                 2714           102.7        Mar-99                   0                   1            118.9
Apr-94              2637                 2845           101.7        Apr-99                   0                 NA             119.5
May-94               824                 2298           104.8        May-99                   0                 NA             121.4
Jun-94              4678                 4083            98.5        Jun-99              24996                  NA             121.2
 Jul-94             1056                 1652            99.9         Jul-99             13681                  NA             114.6
Aug-94              1494                 1494           100.2        Aug-99                   0                 NA             109.8
Sep-94               789                  789            99.2        Sep-99              10195                  NA             106.4
Oct-94              1913                 1913            97.0        Oct-99                   0                 NA             104.1
Nov-94              1645                 1644            99.0        Nov-99              11328                  NA             102.2
Dec-94                 0                    1            99.8        Dec-99               3704                  NA             102.3
 Jan-95                0                    0            99.6         Jan-00              5753                  NA             107.4
Feb-95              1183                 1115            96.7        Feb-00                   0                 NA             110.2
Mar-95            16771                12116             86.6        Mar-00               9969                  NA             102.7
Apr-95              4986                 9710            84.3        Apr-00              13854                  NA             108.2
May-95               635                    0            84.6        May-00                   0                 NA             107.7
Jun-95               430                 1064            84.7        Jun-00                   0                 NA             106.2
 Jul-95              579                  579            88.4         Jul-00                  0                 NA             109.4
Aug-95              8174                 8174            97.5        Aug-00                   0                 NA             106.7
Sep-95            16831                16840             99.7        Sep-00                   0                 NA             108.2
Oct-95                 0                    3           102.0        Oct-00                   0                 NA             109.0
Nov-95                 0                    2           102.2        Nov-00                   0                 NA             110.4
Dec-95                 0                    3           103.4        Dec-00                   0                 NA             114.5



                                                                34
                  Table: Japanese Interventions and yen/dollar rates (continued)
          Japanese Interventions (100mil Yen)                                  Japanese Interventions (100mil Yen)
                                              Yen/Dollar Rate                                                      Yen/Dollar Rate
              Actual           Estimated                                           Actual            Estimated
 Jan-01                0                  NA            116.5         Jan-06                  0                NA             117.2
Feb-01                 0                  NA            117.4        Feb-06                   0                NA             115.8
Mar-01                 0                  NA            126.2        Mar-06                   0                NA             117.8
Apr-01                 0                  NA            123.6        Apr-06                   0                NA             113.8
May-01                 0                  NA            119.3        May-06                   0                NA             112.6
Jun-01                 0                  NA            124.7        Jun-06                   0                NA             114.4
 Jul-01                0                  NA            125.1         Jul-06                  0                NA             114.7
Aug-01                 0                  NA            118.9        Aug-06                   0                NA             117.4
Sep-01            31455                   NA            119.5        Sep-06                   0                NA             118.1
Oct-01                 0                  NA            122.5        Oct-06                   0                NA             116.9
Nov-01                 0                  NA            123.5        Nov-06                   0                NA             115.8
Dec-01                 0                  NA            131.7        Dec-06                   0                NA             119.1
 Jan-02                0                  NA            134.6         Jan-07                  0                NA             120.7
Feb-02                 0                  NA            133.4        Feb-07                   0                NA             118.5
Mar-02                 0                  NA            132.8        Mar-07                   0                NA             117.8
Apr-02                 0                  NA            128.6        Apr-07                   0                NA             119.5
May-02            21174                   NA            124.3        May-07                   0                NA             121.7
Jun-02            18750                   NA            119.5        Jun-07                   0                NA             123.2
 Jul-02                0                  NA            119.9         Jul-07                  0                NA             118.6
Aug-02                 0                  NA            118.4        Aug-07                   0                NA             115.8
Sep-02                 0                  NA            121.7        Sep-07                   0                NA             114.8
Oct-02                 0                  NA            122.6        Oct-07                   0                NA             115.4
Nov-02                 0                  NA            122.5        Nov-07                   0                NA             111.2
Dec-02                 0                  NA            118.8        Dec-07                   0                NA             111.7
 Jan-03             6781                  NA            119.9         Jan-08                  0                NA             106.5
Feb-03            10614                   NA            118.1        Feb-08                   0                NA             103.7
Mar-03              5518                  NA            118.1        Mar-08                   0                NA              99.7
Apr-03                 0                  NA            119.0        Apr-08                   0                NA             103.9
May-03            38997                   NA            119.3        May-08                   0                NA             105.5
Jun-03              6289                  NA            119.8        Jun-08                   0                NA             106.2
 Jul-03           20271                   NA            120.6         Jul-08                  0                NA             107.9
Aug-03              4124                  NA            117.0        Aug-08                   0                NA             108.8
Sep-03            51116                   NA            111.5        Sep-08                   0                NA             106.1
Oct-03            16687                   NA            110.0        Oct-08                   0                NA              98.5
Nov-03            15872                   NA            109.6        Nov-08                   0                NA              95.5
Dec-03            26196                   NA            107.3        Dec-08                   0                NA              90.7
 Jan-04           68215                   NA            105.8         Jan-09                  0                NA              89.9
Feb-04            34766                   NA            109.2        Feb-09                   0                NA              97.6
Mar-04            45332                   NA            104.3        Mar-09                   0                NA              99.0
Apr-04                 0                  NA            110.5        Apr-09                   0                NA              98.6
May-04                 0                  NA            109.6        May-09                   0                NA              95.4
Jun-04                 0                  NA            108.8        Jun-09                   0                NA              96.4
 Jul-04                0                  NA            111.4         Jul-09                  0                NA              94.7
Aug-04                 0                  NA            109.2        Aug-09                   0                NA              93.2
Sep-04                 0                  NA            110.1        Sep-09                   0                NA              89.7
Oct-04                 0                  NA            106.0        Oct-09                   0                NA              90.1
Nov-04                 0                  NA            103.1        Nov-09                   0                NA              86.4
Dec-04                 0                  NA            102.7        Dec-09                   0                NA              93.0
 Jan-05                0                  NA            103.7         Jan-10                  0                NA              90.3
Feb-05                 0                  NA            104.6        Feb-10                   0                NA              88.9
Mar-05                 0                  NA            107.2        Mar-10                   0                NA              93.5
Apr-05                 0                  NA            104.8        Apr-10                   0                NA              93.9
May-05                 0                  NA            108.6        May-10                   0                NA              91.5
Jun-05                 0                  NA            111.0        Jun-10                   0                NA              88.5
 Jul-05                0                  NA            112.5         Jul-10                  0                NA              86.5
Aug-05                 0                  NA            110.6        Aug-10                   0                NA              84.2
Sep-05                 0                  NA            113.5        Sep-10              21249                 NA              83.5
Oct-05                 0                  NA            116.4        Oct-10                   0                NA              80.4
Nov-05                 0                  NA            119.8        Nov-10                   0                NA              83.7
Dec-05                 0                  NA            117.8        Dec-10                   0                NA              81.2



                                                                35
                Table: Japanese Interventions and yen/dollar rates (continued)




Note: The intervention amounts are in units of 100 million yen. The monthly yen/dollar rate is the Tokyo close rate

on the third to last business day for the period before April 1991, since the proxy is for settlement-based

interventions. After April 1991, we use the end-of-month New York close rate for the monthly yen/dollar rate.




                                                         36
