                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    QUANTUM PRICES

                                        Diego Aparicio
                                       Roberto Rigobon

                                     Working Paper 26646
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26646


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We are grateful to Glenn Ellison, Duncan Simester, Alberto Cavallo, and Ignacio Puente for
helpful discussions. We also thank Mariana Albano, Manuel Bertolotto, Vivek Bhattacharya,
Sara Ellison, Miguel Espinosa, Ricardo Fraiman, Renee Gosline, Paul Joscow, Chris Knittel,
Carolina Levinton, Juan Cristobal Lopez, Victor Martinez de Albeniz, John McCoy, Mateo
Montenegro, Chela Pedreschi, Pilar Posse, Drazen Prelec, Nancy Rose, Nader Tavassoli, Julian
Villanueva, Birger Wernerfelt, Mike Whinston, seminar participants at MIT and at the Golub
Center for Finance and Policy, and pricing managers in apparel, for helpful comments. Nicolas
Gomez del Campo and Gina Rey provided outstanding research assistance. All errors are our
own. Data and codes will be made publicly available. We welcome comments via email. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Diego Aparicio and Roberto Rigobon. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Quantum Prices
Diego Aparicio and Roberto Rigobon
NBER Working Paper No. 26646
January 2020
JEL No. D2,D22,D83,E31,L81,M3

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper studies pricing in the fashion retail industry. Online data was collected for
approximately 350,000 distinct products from over 65 retailers in the U.S. and the U.K. We
present evidence that a fair fraction of retailers implement an extreme form of price stickiness
that we describe as quantum prices: a large number of different products are priced using just a
small number of sparse prices, with price changes occurring rarely and in large increments.
Normalized price clustering measures are used to show that retailers use quantum prices within-
and across- categories, and this clustering is not explained by popular prices, ranges of prices,
assortment size, or digit endings. This pricing strategy is consistent with a behavioral model
where fewer prices makes price advertising more effective. An implication of this model is that
advertising is increasingly effective when the same prices are used across product lines, i.e. for
new products. Finally, quantum prices affect product introductions and price adjustment
strategies at the firm level, while it creates larger deviations of the law of one price and hinders
the computation of inflation at the macro level.


Diego Aparicio
IESE Business School
Carrer d'Arnus i de Gari, 3-7
Spain
daparicio@iese.edu

Roberto Rigobon
MIT Sloan School of Management
100 Main Street, E62-516
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
rigobon@mit.edu
1    Introduction
The Internet has had a fundamental impact on the way retailers engage with their con-
sumers. First, consumers often observe prices across locations, making geographical price
discrimination harder. Old brick-and-mortar retailers were small local monopolies that had
the ability to decide the prices and products' offerings, which implied that uniform prices
were rare. Second, and equally important, the internet allowed retailers to organize the data
differently. Since the Egyptian land register, created around 3000 BC -- the first known
land ownership record -- the data has been organized around two paradigms: geography
and socio-economic conditions. This structure is informative because a family's location or
economic conditions are good predictors of their customs and purchases. In other words,
it is an indicator of preferences. With the introduction of the internet, however, it is now
possible to directly observe consumers' behaviors. Every purchase, trip taken, website vis-
ited, music listened, movies watched, searches googled, are breadcrumbs left behind that
describe aspects of the personality and preferences. Therefore, clustering the data along the
actual behavior constitutes a better estimate of preferences.
        These two features have changed how retailers engage with customers. We study the
fashion industry and observe three distinct pricing behaviors, which we denote as follows:
Traditional, Platform, and Quantum Pricing strategies. Traditional pricing stores --such as
Louis Vuitton, Dolce Gabana, Ralph Lauren, Reiss-- focus on obfuscating prices from the
consumer. These retailers will often make prices the least salient attribute. In many cases,
products have no tags attached, or prices are carefully hidden from the shopping experience.
Platform pricing retailers --such as Amazon, Walmart, Wayfair, Google-- emphasize their
business in growing the network and thereby expanding its market share. They tend to have
two sources of revenues, namely an attractive mark-up to the product and the revenue from
utilizing the consumer information. Their prices are often decided by advanced algorithms
and their distribution is dense, almost continuous on a price line. The nature of the compe-
tition implies that few retailers can follow this approach because only a few can capture the
whole network. These two strategies have received considerable attention in the literature.
        Our paper is focused on characterizing and rationalizing a new form of pricing: the
Quantum Pricing strategy. The quantum pricing is followed by a vast number of firms, in-
cluding some of the leading and most successful retailers --such as Apple, Zara, H&M, Ikea,

    For example, Netflix might observe that two individuals have similar tastes for movies; although ages
and locations can be different, one is married, and the other one is not even thinking about the idea (Bennett,
Lanning, et al. (2007)).
    This behavior stands in sharp contrast with the traditional marketing literature. See Monroe (1973);
Dickson and Sawyer (1990); Lichtenstein, Ridgway, and Netemeyer (1993); Schindler (1991); Schindler and
Kirby (1997); Stiving (2000); Anderson and Simester (2003).

                                                      1
Bonobos, and Uniqlo. In order to maximize information recall and advertising effectiveness,
retailers tend to cluster prices massively. Even within narrowly defined categories (e.g., jeans)
products and prices are clustered along price points that are far from each other and that
are sticky over time. In fact, product introductions tend to occur at those price points, and
even in some occasions discounts are set to match those existing lower prices. We therefore
define quantum prices as the property of a firm's pricing strategy of using sparse, clustered,
and sticky values, to price large and diverse product lines.
        We study pricing strategies in the fashion industry in the U.S. and the U.K. We collect
online data from 54 retailers in the U.S. and 40 retailers in the U.K, with a total of close
to 230,000 and 190,000 distinct products, respectively. This represents a significant share
of the apparel, footwear, and accessories industries in both countries, and to the authors'
knowledge is the largest data collection effort in this sector. In order to study pricing, we
need to be able to identify which products are relatively similar to each other. To address this
problem, we design an unsupervised machine learning classifier that, reading HTML code
and product-level descriptions, allows us to classify each item into twelve categories that
are consistent across retailers and over time. The categories are: accessories, bags, bottoms,
dresses, jewelry, outerwear, shoes, sports, suits, tees, tops, and underwear. Broadly speaking,
we could interpret a retailer-category (e.g., Zara Underwear) as the relevant choice space of
a consumer who is a store buying a specific product.
        This paper makes three contributions, which we summarize as follows. First, we docu-
ment the existence of quantum prices or price clustering in the fashion industry. The stylized
fact is documented within retailer-categories as well as across retailer-category pairs. Note
that, because some categories are already relatively broad (e.g., sweaters and shirts are Tops),
our findings are lower bounds to what would be found using more narrowly defined cate-
gories. Descriptive evidence shows that the median store has 2,496 distinct items in the U.S.
and 2,678 items in the U.K., and the median store has 83 distinct prices in the U.S. and 60
prices in the U.K. The average probability that two items in a retailer-category have the same
price is close to 10%. And the average probability that two items from different categories

     The term is reminiscent of quantum mechanics, where the electrons jump from one level of energy to
another in discrete, non-divisible quanta. Prices in fashion retail can be very sticky, and move in discrete and
large quantities.
     Fashion retail represents a significant portion of the economy. The combined market of apparel, footwear,
bags, and accessories is about $380 billion sales in the U.S., and £55 billion sales in the U.K. The U.S. is the
second largest market, next to China, and accounts for about 20% of world sales in the sector. The internet
channel accounts for about 17% of sales, but is growing rapidly (2012-2017 CAGR of 20%). Estimates obtained
from Euromonitor industry reports dated 2017 and 2018.
     Related work using smaller datasets in online apparel are Cavallo, Neiman, and Rigobon (2014), Gorod-
nichenko, Sheremirov, and Talavera (2014).
     In our analyses we use a cross-section of items that excludes clustering from duplicates in terms of time,
color varieties, and sizes.

                                                       2
within a retailer have the same price is about 5%. These estimates already provide motivation
for the practice of using just a handful of prices for large and diverse assortments.
        A number of statistical techniques are used to test the robustness of the observed
price clustering. For example, clustering could be explained by a corporate policy to use $9
dollar endings. Thus we use a normalized price clustering index that removes the effects
from popular prices, price endings, ranges of prices, or number of products. The index is
a modification of the geographical concentration index introduced in Ellison and Glaeser
(1997). This measure takes the price distribution of each retailer-category, and controls for
shares of products concentrated on, for example, certain digit endings or popular prices
in the overall category. We find that about 25% of the retailer-categories have little to no
clustering, and this fraction increases to 45% when we control for price digits. Therefore,
rightmost digits account for a portion of the price clustering in the data; however, about half
of the remaining retailer-categories still exhibit statistically large clustering, including 22%
of them which are found to be remarkably concentrated. Price clustering is also observed
using an unsupervised machine learning approach. The method estimates the price clusters
in the data through a trade-off in the within-cluster variation and between-cluster variation.
We find retailers that concentrate prices in a few discrete clusters, and that price clusters
have economically meaningful differences between each other. The median price differential
between centroids (mid-points) is 30% and 21% in the U.S. and the U.K., respectively.
        Moreover, quantum prices are documented in the time-series. Using data collected
across collections, we show that the quantum prices are sticky and, in fact, retailers will
consistently introduce new products at those quanta. This suggests a new of menu cost
stickiness, i.e. a cost to opening a new price bucket in the distribution. The stickiness
is different from canonical menu cost models (e.g., Golosov and Lucas Jr (2007)), because
apparel products tend to have a short duration, often do not experience any price increase,
and the main pricing decision takes place at the time of a product introduction. This stickiness
stands in contrast to models that assume firms optimize prices from a relatively unrestricted
domain of positive numbers.
        These pricing observations are not oddities associated with isolated firms. Quantum
prices are observed in a wide range of retailers, and the data is representative of the apparel
industry in terms of revenue market shares, as well as in terms of the large firm heterogeneity.
The data includes department stores, luxury retailers, medium- to low- end pricing retailers,
and fast fashion. For example, the data includes Louis Vuitton, Forever 21, GAP, Walmart,
Victoria's Secret, and Zara. Moreover, all of the retailers sell online and offline; and the

      The size of some of these retailers is remarkable. For instance, Louis Vuitton had £16 billion sales in fashion
and leather goods; Uniqlo had $17 billion sales and operates over 3,000 stores in 18 countries; Inditex had e 25
billion sales and operates over 7,000 stores in 58 countries; Nike had $34 billion sales. Estimates obtained from

                                                         3
regular prices are the same in both channels. More importantly, some of the firms are
among the largest or most popular retailers worldwide, and pricing is hardly an improvised
managerial outcome.
        The second contribution is to present a simple framework that rationalizes quantum
prices. We discuss models à la convenient prices, demand uncertainty, and salience, and show
that their predictions cannot fully explain the stylized facts. Pricing in fast-turnover products
like apparel, and the relationship between advertising and the distribution of unique prices,
has received little attention. We propose a behavioral model where using fewer prices makes
price advertising more effective. And the advertising becomes increasingly effective when
the same prices are used not only within a category, but also across categories and even
across different seasons. In other words, there is a menu cost to introducing a new price (to
the price distribution) for product introductions. This menu cost, together with consumers'
costly price awareness, predicts few sticky prices. The model does not suggest that retailers
should always follow these strategies. For example, everyday low-price retailers, or high-end
retailers appealing to a wide customer base, are not expected to benefit from this strategy.
But it can be optimal for retailers that need to inform prices of fast turnover assortments to
price-sensitive consumers.
        Finally, we discuss macroeconomic implications of quantum prices. We discuss three
such implications. The price stickiness in quantum pricing will be a source of lumpy price
adjustments. We find suggestive evidence that, although quantum retailers use existing
prices for new products, they will change the product mix across price buckets. For example,
a retailer will put a larger (lower) fraction of new products into the more expensive (cheaper)
prices. Thus, the observed prices are the same but the proportion of products in each
bucket changes. Such form of price adjustment will affect the measurement of inflation. We
show that when retailers practice quantum pricing, a larger number of products sampled
are needed to better estimate the aggregate inflation rate. Quantum pricing produces more
noise and wider ranges of inflation estimates for a given subsample of products, compared
to when the prices are more uniformly distributed. Finally, we report large deviations from
the law of one price using matched products collected the same day between the U.S. online
store and the U.K. online store. A restricted price distribution relates to larger deviations in
relative prices.
        The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1.1 reviews the literature.
Sections 2 and 3 describe the online data and the classification methodology, respectively.
FY2017 annual reports.
     There are also relevant micro implications which are briefly mentioned. If prices belong to a discrete
and sparse space, products can be designed to hit specific points. Therefore, quantums affect the attributes
of product creation, the advertising strategies, and how to convey information about quality differences. See
Monroe (1979); Milgrom and Roberts (1986); Schindler (1991); Stiving (2000).

                                                     4
Sections 4 and 5 document price clustering. Section 6 discusses the advertising framework.
Section 7 discusses macro implications. And Section 8 concludes.


1.1   Related literature
This paper relates to several strands of literature. Methodologically, the motivation of using
online data to study pricing strategies, price stickiness, and price adjustment is similar to that
in Cavallo, Neiman, and Rigobon (2014), Gorodnichenko, Sheremirov, and Talavera (2014),
and Cavallo (2018). Our work contributes to these papers in that we document pricing in the
fashion retail industry, as well as novel forms of price stickiness using product-level data.
        The machine learning classifier to categorize products relates to previous efforts to
categorize unstructured online data. For example, Cavallo (2012), Cavallo and Rigobon
(2016), Aparicio and Bertolotto (2016), and Aparicio and Cavallo (2017) categorize online
products in order to construct price indices using CPI weights. Our work contributes to this
literature in that we have a richer and more representative amount of data in apparel, and are
able to construct specific sub-categories within apparel that are consistent across retailers,
time, and countries.
        Evidence of price points in the distribution of prices relates to a body of literature on
uniform prices in retail. There is work on uniform prices in retail chains (DellaVigna and
Gentzkow (2017)), online dynamic pricing (Weisstein, Monroe, and Kukar-Kinney (2013)),
managerial costs or consumer fairness concerns (Leslie (2004); Orbach and Einav (2007)),
consumer fairness concerns on prices for different sizes (Anderson and Simester (2008)),
homogenous consumer preferences for flavors (Draganska and Jain (2006)), adverse quality
signaling for lower-priced goods (Anderson and Simester (2001)). Our research provides
evidence that uniform pricing extends beyond varieties of the same good, and that such
price points have micro- and macro- implications.
        Our main framework of price advertising relates to an extensive literature in marketing
(Lal and Matutes (1994); Wernerfelt (1994); Simester (1995); Shin (2005); Rhodes (2014)).
However, these papers do not explore the fashion retail industry, which is characterized by
large assortments and fast-turnover products, and where the need (and the strategies) to
inform consumers are different from traditional retail. We contribute to this literature with a
framework that considers the effectiveness of the distribution of unique prices, and why for
some firms there is a menu cost to introducing new prices.
        We consider complementary explanations to quantum prices. One relates to demand
uncertainty (Ilut, Valchev, and Vincent (2016)); firms have used certain prices before, and
are reluctant to experiment with new prices. We also consider a case where consumers
face bounded rationality. For example, Hauser and Wernerfelt (1990); Iyengar and Lepper

                                                5
(2000); Alba, Hutchinson, and Jr. (1991); Roberts and Lattin (1997); Eliaz and Spiegler (2011);
Piccione and Spiegler (2012) study situations where the consumers' decision is affected by
price framing, price recall, price formats, or the size of the consideration sets.
        That firms limit the number of prices within a category due to overload or bounded
comparability concerns is not unreasonable given the surprising number of options in ap-
parel. For example, Forever 21 sells about 2,000 different styles of dresses on a given day.
Even in a narrower sub-category, like casual dresses, there are 450 options. Consumers
cannot possibly compare all product attributes; in fact, a consumer cannot even take more
than a few dresses to the fitting room. Therefore, we expect consumers to rely on decision
heuristics to screen out products. One alternative is that firms use few prices in order to
shift attention away from prices (Prelec and Loewenstein (1998)), which makes consumers
less price sensitive. This model predicts a portion of the observed price clustering; but may
not capture why prices are different across stores, but are the same across diverse items and
even across collections.
        Our evidence of price stickiness relates to a large literature on price stickiness in
retail, and managerial costs of updating prices. See, for example, Levy, Bergen, Dutta, and
Venable (1997); Blinder, Canetti, Lebow, and Rudd (1998); Zbaracki, Ritson, Levy, Dutta,
and Bergen (2004); Nakamura and Steinsson (2008); Klenow and Malin (2010); Bhattarai and
Schoenle (2014); Gorodnichenko, Sheremirov, and Talavera (2014); Ellison, Snyder, and Zhang
(2018). We show that the existence of quantum prices can be thought of as an extreme form
of price stickiness, and thus has implications for strategies of price adjustments, inflation
measurement, and frictions between countries.
        Price points in the distribution can be related to a literature that associates price
endings with consumer demand, price recall, or product perceptions. See Monroe (1973);
Dickson and Sawyer (1990); Lichtenstein, Ridgway, and Netemeyer (1993); Schindler and
Kirby (1997); Thomas and Morwitz (2005). Our work also relates to a growing strand
of literature on price endings or round prices in supermarket products and price rigidity
(Kashyap (1995); Levy, Bergen, Dutta, and Venable (1997); Knotek (2008, 2011); Levy, Lee,
Chen, Kauffman, and Bergen (2011); Ater and Gerlitz (2017); Snir, Levy, and Chen (2017)).
Although this paper studies a different industry, our findings support the view that final
digits account for a large share of the observed price clustering. But after controlling for
price endings a significant price clustering is observed.




                                              6
2    Online data
We collect online data from 53 fashion retailers in the U.S. and 40 retailers in the U.K. These
retailers are representative of the apparel market overall, i.e. we cover the largest firms in
terms of market share and a wide heterogeneity in terms of style, item composition, branding,
and consumers. See Appendix A.1 for the complete list of retailers.
       Online data is collected as follows. A script is designed to search the HyperText
Markup Language (HTML) public code of a retailer's website. The program automatically
stores the data of each item, including product description, ID, price, sale price, promotion
description, new arrivals indicator, and sales indicator. The ID is an item-specific identifier
assigned by the retailer. Products that come in different colors will often have the same
or very similar ID, which we use to keep only one of them. This allows to rule out price
clustering that would arise from near perfect substitutes. Additional details about collecting
online retail data can be found in Cavallo and Rigobon (2016); Aparicio and Cavallo (2017).
       Due to the large scope of retailers and computational limitations, we collect data once
per month during 6 months for most of the retailers, during 1 year for a subset of the retailers,
and during 2 years for a few of the latter retailers. The panel is not balanced across retailers
since the web-scraping script can occasionally fail. For the most parts of the analyses, we
concentrate on a cross-section of items across retailers from a 6 month period. This removes
any price clustering that could be driven by counting the same products multiple times.
       The apparel sector is characterized by some distinctive features. Products have a
short duration, which ranges from a few weeks to several months (e.g., Caro and Gallien
(2010); Cavallo, Neiman, and Rigobon (2014)). This likely produces an asymmetric price
stickiness during the life of a good. Products are introduced at a certain price p t 1 and often
do not experience any price increase. However, products do experience either temporal or
permanent discounts towards the end of the season. If discounts are permanent, items have
                                                 t >1 . And if discounts are temporal, the price will
a sale price until it is discontinued, p t 1 > p s
return to the regular price, p t 1 p t 3 > p s   t 2 . In this paper we focus on the regular price,

or introduction price, which we consider the most important pricing decision. Sales at the
full price account for the largest share of revenue (Ghemawat, Nueno, and Dailey (2003)).
Moreover, in the regulatory filings, firms often attribute lower financial returns to excessive
markdowns.




                                                 7
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                  US                    UK

          (i)      Time period                              March 2017 to        March 2017 to
                                                             May 2018             May 2018
          (ii)     Average months per retailera                   4.6                   4.5
          (ii)     Observationsb                                241,928              199,619
          (iii)    Retailers                                       54                   40
          (iv)     Distinct goods                               230,717              188,558
          (v)      Average distinct   goodsc                     4,278                 4,718
          (vi)     Distinct goods (10%pct.)                      1,279                 1,122
          (vii)    Distinct goods (90%pct.)                      7,463                13,800
          (viii)   Distinct pricesd                              1,126                  827
          (ix)     Distance between prices       (%)e              13                   13
          (x)      Average Items /    Prices f                     49                   87
          (xi)     Items / Prices (10%pct.)                        11                    9
          (xii)    Items / Prices (90%pct.)                        92                   192
          Notes: a Equal weight average across retailers. b Excludes duplicates in terms of product,
         category, country, retailer. For example, the same product collected in two different
         months will appear only once. c Equal weight average across retailers. d Equal weight
         across retailers. Average distinct prices rounded to the nearest integer. e Average distance
         across consecutive prices. Computed as equal weight average across retailers. f The U.K.
         data includes a larger fraction of retailers that sell large assortments, and therefore the
         ratio is larger than in the U.S.


        Table 1 provides summary statistics of the data coverage. We have a cross-section of
over 230,000 and 188,000 distinct products in the U.S. and the U.K., respectively. There are on
average over 4,000 distinct products in each retailer, but there is a large heterogeneity. The
10th and 90th percentile store has 1,279 and 7,463 distinct products in the U.S., respectively.
This illustrates the diversity in the retailers covered, since some fashion retailers sell very
few items (e.g., Hermes) while others sell extraordinary large assortments (e.g., Zara). There
is also heterogeneity in the relationship between prices and products. For example, the 10th
and 90th percentile store in the U.K. sells 9 and 192 products per price, respectively.


3    Classification
An initial requirement to identify what classes of products have certain prices. However,
scraped online data is not structured this way. Data is collected without labels, product


                                                        8
names are often inconsistent across retailers, and therefore we need classification rules that
can group similar items together. These classifications are necessary to study cross-section
and time-series pricing. For example, clustering that takes place at a popular price $x should
receive little weight; but what is a popular price must be learned from the overall category
price distribution across retailers.

                                    Table 2: Classification Summary

                                                                 US                    UK

           (i)     Average categories per retailer               11.5                 11.5
           (ii)    Observations to be   classifieda            505,522              450,468
           (iii)   Classification output (%)
                    Accessories                                  7.3                   6.7
                    Bags                                         6.1                   5.7
                    Bottoms                                      15.4                 13.6
                    Dresses                                      7.5                   7.3
                    Jewelry                                      4.1                   3.6
                    Outerwear                                    7.1                   8.1
                    Shoes                                        10.8                 11.7
                    Sports                                       3.9                   3.3
                    Suits                                        2.3                   2.5
                    Tees                                         13.7                 11.7
                    Tops                                         16.9                 18.9
                    Underwear                                    2.9                   5.7
                    Unclassifiedb                                2.2                   1.6
           (iv)    Retailer-Category   pairsc                    504                   372
           Notes: a Total number of observations excluding those that are duplicates in terms of
          product ID, month, category, retailer, country. b Observations that did not get classified
          are removed from the analysis. Unclassified observations are due to unrecognizable
          text (e.g. product descriptions or HTML text that do not contain useful information),
          or due to items that fall outside apparel (e.g., beauty products). c A retailer-category
          pair is the finest level of analysis.


        We construct a semi-supervised machine learning classifier, based on decision trees,
that groups items into twelve categories: accessories, bags, bottoms, dresses, jewelry, out-
erwear, shoes, sports, suits, tees, tops, and underwear. The approach is semi-supervised
because there is no unequivocal procedure to validate the classification. We rely on the re-
tailers' webpage categories and our interpretation of the product description to create these
classification rules. Moreover, due to the large quantity of data, we cannot manually assign

                                                      9
labels to every single product. Instead we design rules to check random portions of the data
or products that exhibit dissimilar characteristics to those in their group (e.g., items that are
too expensive in the category). See Appendix A.2 for additional details.
        The output is a classifier which can consistently categorize products across retailers
and across collections. Our approach relates to previous efforts in the literature using online
data for inflation measurement (Cavallo (2012); Cavallo and Rigobon (2016)), forecasting CPI
inflation (Aparicio and Bertolotto (2016)), and retail pricing (Aparicio and Cavallo (2017)),
although we focus on a significantly larger share of the clothing industry, and therefore
construct relatively narrow sub-categories.
        Table 2 provides summary statistics on the classification output. Line (iii) shows that
there is a fair fraction of products in each category. However, there is still space to sub-divide
overweighted categories like Bottoms or Tops. Line (iv) shows that there are in total 504 and
372 retailer-category pairs in the U.S. and the U.K., respectively.


4     Evidence of price clustering
This Section presents formal evidence of quantum prices or price clustering in fashion retail.
We show results using a series of clustering measures computed at the retailer or retailer-
category level.


4.1   Descriptive evidence
Table 1 showed that the data covers over 230,000 different items and 1,110 different round
prices in the U.S. This implies that there are about 200 items per price in the overall market.
This suggests that many items in the same retailer-category will have the same price.
       Figure 1 shows the probability that two distinct items in the same retailer-category
have the same price. The median probability is close to 10%. Some of these magnitudes
are surprisingly large when we consider that some categories are relatively broad, and thus
a lower bound to what we could find in more narrowly defined categories (e.g., Jeans as
opposed to Bottoms). Item misclassification should, in any case, push the probabilities
downwards. Therefore, for this probability to be this large it needs to be the case that even
different items like sweaters and shirts (or jeans and chinos), which belong to the same
category, have the same price.




                                               10
                       150




                                                                                            150
                       100




                                                                                            100
           Frequency




                                                                                Frequency
                       50




                                                                                            50
                       0




                                                                                            0
                             0   .1   .2     .3        .4   .5   .6   .7                          0   .1    .2           .3   .4   .5
                                            Probability                                                      Probability



                                           (a) US                                                          (b) UK

                                 Figure 1: Probability that two items have the same price

Notes: Histogram of the probability that two different items in the same retailer-category have the same price.
Probability calculated at the retailer-category level.


       Appendix A.3 shows results of this probability computed at the retailer level (across
categories). The average probability across retailers is 5.2% in the U.S. and 5.3% in the
U.K. Although magnitudes are much smaller, there is a fair amount of retailers that use
the same prices across categories. The heterogeneity in pricing across retailers is reinforced
in Appendix A.4. We find substantial variation of the probabilities (that two items in the
retailer-category have the same price) across the number of distinct products. For example,
there are many retailer-categories where the probability is 20%, and the number of distinct
product varies from less than 100 to over 1,000.


4.2    Normalized measure
Not all prices are equally good in practice. For example, a body of literature argues that
consumers practice left-to-right processing for multiple-digit prices, and due to processing
costs and lower returns to rightmost digits, consumers either drop-off rightmost digits or
overweight the left ones (e.g., Schindler and Kirby (1997); Thomas and Morwitz (2005)). For
these reasons, $19.99 might be perceived as having a lower price differential with respect to
$19.00 than with respect to $20.99. Therefore, we would like to measure price clustering
after controlling for prices that are popular in the category or the retailer, or that may arise
mechanically from the number of products or from a range of good prices.
   For evidence of price endings or round prices, see Kashyap (1995); Knotek (2011); Levy, Lee, Chen,
Kauffman, and Bergen (2011)).

                                                                           11
       We construct a normalized clustering index that builds on Ellison and Glaeser (1997).
The core of this index lies in comparing the observed price frequencies in a given retailer-
category against the observed price frequency in the overall category. Intuitively, we want to
penalize for clustering that occurs at certain prices (e.g., Zara Underwear) which are popular
in the category (Underwear). Formally, the index in the retailer-category i is defined as
follow:

                                         ¯
                                         b                                   ¯
                                                                             b
                                         b b (s i ,b   - x c , b )2 - (1 -   b b   x2
                                                                                    c ,b
                                                                                         )1/ Ni
                          index i                           ¯
                                                                                                             (1)
                                                            b
                                                 (1 -       b b   x2
                                                                   c ,b
                                                                        )(1 - 1/Ni )

       We bin the distribution of prices into buckets of 1 dollar (or 1 pound), i.e. prices are
rounded to the nearest integer. This allows to more conservatively control for price endings,
because prices like $19.90 and $19.50 will be treated as the same, and therefore penalized
according to the greater overall frequency of $20. In eq. (1), s i , b is the share of items in
retailer-category i at bucket b , and x c , b is the share of items in category c at bucket b . The
sum goes from the minimum price in category c , b c , to the maximum price in category c , b       ¯ c.
Finally, Ni is number of distinct products in retailer-category i , and the term N   1
                                                                                       i
                                                                                         controls for
the number of products.
       The index can be interpreted as the excess probability that two items in the same
group will have the same price, given the size of the retailer-category Ni , and the empirical
distribution of prices in the category. Because the index is normalized to be between 0 and
1, values close to 0 should be interpreted as retailer-categories not exhibiting excess price
clustering. Values above 0.025 indicate statistically large price clustering (Ellison and Glaeser
(1997)).
       The results are shown in the histogram in Figure 2. We find a fraction of retailer-
categories with no more than the expected clustering, as well as a fair share of cases with
medium to large clustering. The mean and median in the U.S. are 0.098 and 0.075, respectively,
both of which are considered large estimates of price concentration.
       The normalized measure is substantially larger than those that would be expected
if prices were drawn from a Normal or uniform distribution with the same empirical pa-
rameters. Prices out of the uniform distribution are restricted to 10 dollar multiples, which
increases its clustering and thus provides a stricter benchmark. See Appendix A.5 for addi-
tional evidence. The mean values are 0.010, 0.052, and 0.098 for the Normal, uniform, and

     Ellison and Glaeser (1997) measure geographic concentration across manufacturing firms in the U.S., and
would like to control for regions that are naturally better for certain industries (in our case, an industry is a
retailer-category).
     We find that the clustering results using eq. (1) and its modifications are quantitatively similar when
computed using subsets of retailers or reduced datasets within retailers.

                                                            12
data-based indices.




                                                                                   80
         100




                                                                                   60
    Frequency




                                                                              Frequency
                                                                                 40
    50




                                                                                   20
         0




                                                                                   0
                0 .05 .1 .15 .2 .25 .3 .35 .4 .45 .5 .55 .6 .65 .7 .75                    0   .05   .1   .15   .2   .25    .3   .35   .4   .45   .5   .55
                                   Clustering Index                                                             Clustering Index



                                   (a) US                                                                      (b) UK

                                             Figure 2: Normalized price clustering


       Note that eq. (1) compares each retailer-category price bin share against the category
price bin share (the first term in the numerator). We could, however, replace the category
price bin share, i.e. x c , b , with a series of alternative price market shares, and evaluate changes
in the clustering index. We discuss three alternatives.
       First, we could use the price shares that would be observed under a Normal distribu-
tion. We define x c , b ( b )- ( b - 1), where (·) refers to the CDF from a Normal distribution
with µ as the average price in the category and  as the standard deviation of the prices in
the category (equally weighed retailers). Clustering estimates are comparable to Figure 2,
and therefore shown in Appendix A.6 in the Appendix. The mean and median in the U.S.
are 0.106 and 0.083, respectively.
       Second, we could more severely control for prices and price levels (ranges of good
prices, or cheap and expensive products relative to others in the category) as follows. We run
retailer-category Poisson regressions of price counts on price, price squared, and category
shares.
                                 S i , b  i +  i ,1 bin i , b +  i ,2 bin 2
                                                                          i ,b + Xc ,b + ei         (2)

S i , b denotes the count of items in retailer-category i priced at bin b (instead of s i , b , which are
shares), bin i , b is the price bin b , bin 2i ,b
                                                  is the price bin squared, and X c , b are count of items
in category c priced at bin b . Once we estimate regression in eq. (2), we obtain predicted
counts, S  ^ i , b , and convert these to predicted shares, s                                             ^ i.
                                                              ^i , b , using the sum of predicted counts, N


                                                                         13
These predicted shares are used in eq. (1) instead of the price shares x c , b , and the normalized
index is recalculated. Counts of 0 items are ignored in the regressions, and forced to predict
a share equal to 0.
                150




                                                                                                     100
                                                                                                     80
                100
    Frequency




                                                                                                Frequency
                                                                                                      60
                                                                                                     40
                50




                                                                                                     20
                0




                                                                                                     0
                      -.05   0   .05   .1   .15    .2 .25 .3 .35     .4   .45   .5   .55                    0   .05   .1   .15    .2    .25    .3   .35   .4   .45   .5
                                                  Clustering Index                                                               Clustering Index



                                                  (a) US                                                                         (b) UK

                                                       Figure 3: Strict normalized price clustering

Notes: Histogram of the strict normalized price clustering index that controls for prices, ranges of prices, and
category counts. Index computed at the retailer-category level. Details in the main text.


       The results in Figure 3 show that some fraction of firms, after controlling for these
practices, have little to no clustering. But there is still a large number of retailer-categories
that exhibit substantial price clustering. We view this as the preferred specification that
captures the true price clustering in the data.
       The more features we include in a regression like eq. (2), the more stringent the
clustering measure, and therefore the smaller the excess price clustering that will be estimated
in the data. For instance, we can investigate the portion of the true price clustering that is
due to a firm having firm-category specific price endings policies. The third variant does
exactly this. We included price ending (integer) dummy variables in the regressions, i.e. the
terms 8   j 0  i ,E j End i , j . Estimates are shown in Appendix A.7. We now find a larger number
of retailer-categories with close to zero price clustering, suggesting that rightmost digits is a
relevant pricing concentration practice. However, half of the retailer-categories still exhibit
price clustering that cannot be attributed to price endings.




                                                                                           14
               Table 3: Summary statistics on the normalized clustering index

                                              Index (1)       Index (2)   Index (3)   Index (4)

                US
                (i)     Mean                      0.075        0.083       0.044       0.025
                (ii)    Median                    0.098        0.106       0.063       0.038
                (iii)   Percent of cases where:
                         <0                        0.2           0           0.8         3
                         [0, 0.025)                5.4           7.9        23.6        46.8
                         [0.025, 0.05)            23.6          19.4        34.5        27.8
                         > 0.05                   70.8          72.6        41.1        22.4
                UK
                (i)     Mean                      0.08          0.09       0.041       0.019
                (ii)    Median                    0.097        0.107       0.057       0.029
                (iii)   Percent of cases where:
                         <0                        0             0           0           5.6
                         [0, 0.025)                5.9           8.1        26.9        54.3
                         [0.025, 0.05)            19.4          18.5        33.3        24.7
                         > 0.05                   74.7          73.4        39.8        15.3

                Notes: Index (1) is the baseline normalized index in eq. (1). Index (2) is the
               normalized index using price bin shares from a Normal distribution. Index
               (3) is the preferred normalized index that controls for prices, range of prices,
               popular prices. Index (4) is similar to (3) and adds price ending dummies.
               Indices are defined in the main text.


       Table 3 provides summary statistics of the normalized price clustering indices. Note
that the indices decrease from (1) to (3) and (4) as we sequentially control for additional
pricing features. In some cases the clustering index can be slightly less than 0 if a retailer-
category exhibits less price clustering than what is expected. Extreme cases like these could
be retailer-categories where there is close to one price per product. Column (3) shows that
the mean and median of the preferred measure of price clustering is 0.044 and 0.063 in the
U.S., and 0.041 and 0.057 in the U.K., respectively. And there is a considerable fraction of
cases with clustering greater than 0.05, i.e. 41% in the U.S. and 40% in the U.K. Even in the
stringent case that controls for price endings dummies, the mean estimates are 0.038 in the
U.S. and 0.029 in the U.K.




                                                         15
                                  Table 4: Examples of price clustering

                                                          Items a
                                       Retailer           Prices     Prob.b      Index(1)c    Index (2)d

                US
        (i)     Low clustering
                                       Louis Vuitton      2.8           0.02       0.04         0.02
                                       Aritzia            8.5           0.05       0.05         0.03
        (ii)    Medium clustering
                                       Gap                20.5          0.16       0.11         0.05
                                       Victoria Secret    7.6           0.08       0.08         0.05
        (iii)   High clustering
                                       Bonobos            18.5          0.21       0.22         0.16
                                       Uniqlo             30.7          0.34       0.31         0.21
                UK
        (iv)    Low clustering
                                       Gucci              4.5           0.02       0.06         0.03
                                       Ralph Lauren       5.1           0.04       0.06         0.03
        (v)     Medium clustering
                                       Burberry           7.3           0.08       0.09         0.05
                                       HM                 75.1          0.15       0.08         0.05
        (vi)    High clustering
                                       Zara               85.7          0.2        0.13         0.07
                                       Uterque            13.2          0.17       0.19         0.12
        Notes: Selected retailers among those that exhibit low, medium, and high price clustering.
       The following measures are within-retailer across-category averages. a The number of distinct
       items per distinct price. b Probability that the price of two distinct items in the same category is
       the same. c Normalized clustering measure as defined in equation (1). d Preferred normalized
       measure that accounts for prices, ranges of prices, popular prices. Details in the main text.


        The results so far document that there are different classes of retailers in terms of
pricing behaviors. There is a group of retailers that exhibit little if any price clustering. In
fact, these might even exhibit less clustering than what we would expect given the price
distribution of the category. Many of these retailers fall into what we describe as traditional
or platform retailers. Examples are Louis Vuitton and Walmart, respectively. Another set of
retailers have price clustering explained by price levels, popular prices, or price endings, and
thus controlling for these brings the excess clustering down. A third set of retailers continues
to exhibit substantial clustering not driven by these features. These are the retailers which
clearly fall into the quantum pricing strategy. Table 4 provides selected examples of retailers
and their estimated clustering measures. Section 6 discusses why a retailer might benefit
from using a handful of prices.


                                                         16
       Our results suggest that price endings are a major driver of price clustering, and thus
contribute to prior literature (e.g., Stiving and Winer (1997); Schindler and Kirby (1997)).
However, we continue to find substantial price clustering after controlling for digit endings.
A few potential reasons might help explain why. First, the data includes all items in a large
share of the apparel industry. Price endings can be more prevalent in advertised items, but
when we consider entire catalogs we find that all digit endings are used. This is important
because it is unlikely that there is a kink in the demand in Abercrombie at the $8 ending but
at the $9 in Uniqlo, and such kink would not exist at $9 and $8, respectively. Second, price
endings are less commonly thought at the integer level (Thomas and Morwitz (2005)). This
would exacerbate price rigidity (from $29 to $39 there a 35% difference). In fact, about 51% of
the over 230,000 products in the U.S. have a non-zero decimal digit. Lastly, because sales are
commonplace in apparel, if price endings were important to revenue then one might expect
a similar strategy in sale prices. But many fashion retailers set sale prices as percentages
or direct price points; and other than a higher frequency of $9 in sales, we find no strong
relationship between price endings in regular prices and sales. See Appendix A.8.


4.3   Correlated clustering across categories and retailers
The clustering measures can also be computed within retailers and across categories, as
well as across retailers and within categories. For example, comparing prices between two
categories within the same retailer would estimate the extent to which there are correlated
quantum prices. We discuss three results.
       First, we compute the probability that two random items, in different categories but
in the same retailer, have the same price. This empirical probability is computed sampling
two items for every within-retailer category-category pair. In total there are 2,217 pairs in the
U.S. and 1,646 in the U.K. We find a surprising amount of correlated clustering, especially if
we consider that some categories are relatively broad (e.g., sweaters and shirts in Tops). For
example, in the U.S. there are over 500 retailer category-category pairs (about 25% of total)
with more than 5% estimated probability. In the U.S., the mean is 3%, the median is 2%,
and the 90th percentile is 10%; in the U.K., the mean is 5%, the median is 2%, and the 90th
percentile is 12%. See results in Appendix A.9.
       Second, we implement the normalized measure in eq. (1) within-retailer and across-
categories, as well as across-retailers and within-retailers. Estimates are expected to be lower
because items in two different categories cannot in general be more concentrated than they
are in their own category. The normalized measure of correlated clustering is based on a
modification of Ellison and Glaeser (1997); Ellison, Glaeser, and Kerr (2010), who estimate
geographic concentration across manufacturing plants from different industrial sectors. The

                                               17
normalized index is computed as follows:

                                                                  ¯
                                                                  b
                                                                  b b (s i ,b    - x b )(s j, b - x b )
                                              index ic, j                                       ¯
                                                                                                                                                    (3)
                                                                                                b
                                                                         1-                     b b   x2
                                                                                                       b

Where i and j denote two categories within the same retailer, and x b is the average price bin
share between the two categories at price bucket b . The sums go from the minimum to the
maximum prices observed in either category.




                                                                                       500
         800




                                                                                       400
         600




                                                                                          300
    Frequency




                                                                                   Frequency
     400




                                                                                200
         200




                                                                                       100
         0




                                                                                       0




                -.05   0   .05       .1       .15   .2      .25    .3                            -.05      0   .05         .1      .15   .2   .25
                                 Clustering Index                                                                 Clustering Index



                                 (a) US                                                                         (b) UK

                                             Figure 4: Correlated price clustering

Notes: Histogram of the normalized price clustering measure computed within-retailer and across-categories.
Clustering truncated at 0.3 for better visualization. Vertical line denotes the median correlated clustering.


       Figure 4 shows remarkable correlated clustering across categories. For example, there
are 325 category pairs (about 15%) with clustering above 0.05 in the U.S. The mean is 0.023
in the U.S and 0.031 in the U.K. This reinforces the evidence that some retailers use the same
prices for very different types of products. Appendix A.9 shows which category pairs tend
to be on average more correlated. The average is 0.018 and the median is 0.016, computed
across 74 category pairs in the U.S. (excluding same category pairs). For instance, dresses-
swimwear have a negative correlated clustering measure (-0.013), but dresses-tops (0.064) or
sports-tees (0.060) have large estimates. Note that this measure is only large when different
categories use the exact same price, not a similar price.
       Finally, we calculate the normalized correlated clustering index in eq. (3) within-

                                                                        18
category and across-retailers, in order to examine if retailers use the same prices for similar
items. Appendix A.10 indicates no evidence of correlated clustering across retailers. For
computational reasons the results are available for a random fraction of the retailers in each
country. There are in total 832 and 1,475 within-category retailer-retailer pairs in the U.S.
and the U.K., respectively. The estimates are close to 0 en both countries. For example, the
mean and median in the U.S. is 0 and 0.002, respectively. The lack of evidence echoes the
limited advantage of price endings. If some prices were particularly appealing to consumers
then one might expect different retailers concentrating on the same prices.
       In summary, we found a statistically large degree of price clustering within a retailer-
category, a significant but smaller degree across categories within the same retailer, and no
clustering across retailers within the same category. Appendix A.11 overlaps the clustering
measure distributions at the three levels.


4.4     Robustness: ML clustering
Previous analyses in this Section showed evidence of price clustering using predefined
buckets of prices. But are these price buckets economically meaningful? For instance, some
of these price buckets can be too close from each other, and we might want to consider those
as belonging to a same price cluster. We use an unsupervised machine learning approach to
address this question.
        We define a clustering index borrowing ideas from the popular k -means literature
(for a review see Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani (2001)) and from the CH index (Caliski
and Harabasz (1974)). See Appendix A.12 for methodological details. We define a ratio
          W C (n , k )
(k )            k
                    , which relates the within-cluster variation (a series of price buckets within
           BC ( k )
cluster k ) to the between-cluster variation (centroids k and k - 1). This method accomplishes
two things. First, it determines the optimal number of price clusters in the data according
to a standard trade-off. And second, we demand that clusters be separated at least 5% from
each other.
                                         
        Figure 5 shows the results of k i for all retailer-categories i in the U.S., the corresponding
average distance between consecutive centroids (in percentage), and the ratio of k  to the
maximum possible of clusters. Results for the U.K. are shown in Appendix A.12. Overall
we find results that are qualitatively similar to those in the previous analyses. We would
expect this because the strict normalized measure, defined in eq. (1) and eq. (2), also controls
for prices that are too close to each other.


      Due to the 5% threshold, the maximum number of clusters is not the number of distinct prices, i.e. #b .
                         log(b max /b min )
The maximum k  is           log(1.05)
                                              + 1.

                                                     19
            50




                                                                                60
            40




                                                                                   40
                30




                                                                          Frequency
       Optimal k*
      20




                                                                                20
            10
            0




                                                                                0
                     0   20         40        60          80   100                      0   .1   .2    .3       .4   .5   .6   .7
                         Mean distance between centroids (%)                                           k* / Max k*



                                   (a) US                                                             (b) US

                               Figure 5: Optimal number of price clusters in the data


       There is a large share of retailer-categories that exhibit medium to substantial price
clustering. These are captured by those having a low ratio of k  relative to the maximum
possible k . Then there is another set of cases that are poorly clustered, and tend to exhibit
large k  . And importantly, for the vast majority of the cases the price clusters tend to be
meaningfully separated from each other. Panel (a) shows many cases where the average
distance between centroids is between 10% and 30%. In fact, the mean and median average
distance between centroids is 70% and 21% in the U.S., and 67% and 21% in the U.K.,
respectively.


5          Pricing dynamics of price clustering
Section 4 showed evidence of price clustering in the cross-section. However, this clustering
fades if retailers simply select new quantum prices every time. We now show that the quan-
tum prices are very sticky across collections. Retailers are not only reluctant to create new
prices throughout the life of a product, but also use the same prices for product introductions.


5.1             New prices
Products in apparel are often characterized by little, if any, upward price changes and a
short product life. This raises the question of which prices are retailers choosing throughout



                                                                     20
collections.    In addition, there is substantial seasonality in prices, as measured by the
monthly inflation rate in clothing. The average absolute non-seasonally adjusted monthly
inflation rate is about 1.9% in the U.S. and 1.8% in the U.K. Therefore, a priori there
is no reason why we should not expect very different, seasonal prices as the assortment
composition varies over time. However, we find that the set of prices is remarkably stable.

                                         Table 5: Price stickiness

                                                                     m months after
                                                      m      1   m     2   m     3   m   4   m   5
                (i)   Share of common   pricesa
                       p 10%                           0.73      0.63      0.57      0.48    0.41
                       Median                          0.91      0.89      0.86      0.81    0.75
                       Average                         0.91      0.87      0.86      0.83    0.76
                       p 90%                           1.0       1.0       1.0       0.99    0.92
               Notes: Results are averages across retailer-categories in the U.S. a Ratio of com-
               mon prices (between the prices observed in the first month and month m ) to the
               prices in month m .


       We take the prices in each retailer-category's initial scraping month, and compare
these with the prices observed 1 to 5 months later. This measures the likelihood that retailers
use different prices over time in a given category. Table 5 shows a significantly large share of
common prices, relative to the first month. The mean and median number of distinct prices
that each retailer uses in the initial month is 41 and 32 in the U.S., and it is 49 and 30 in the
U.K., respectively.
       The estimates can be interpreted as follows. The share of common prices measures the
ratio of common prices (between the first month and m months after) to the distinct prices
in month m . For example, in half of the retailer-categories over 75% of the prices observed 5
months later were exactly the same to those in the first month.


5.2    Product introductions
The results in Table 5 include both products whose price is changing as well as prices from
new products. Table 6 replicates the analysis but only for product introductions in each of

     We document that the mean product life is 3.1 months in the U.S. and 3.2 months in the U.K. In addition,
we document asymmetric frequencies of price changes. Only 5.3% of the products have a regular price change,
whereas close to 70% experience a sale price. Estimates are comparable to Nakamura and Steinsson (2008) and
Cavallo, Neiman, and Rigobon (2014). See Appendix A.16.
     See Appendix A.17. Estimates during 2017-2019 obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (U.S.) and
Office for National Statistics (U.K.).

                                                      21
the 1 to 5 following months.
        We find that the vast majority of products are introduced at the existing prices. For
example, the average probability that a new product in month 5 comes in at an existing price
is 0.91. Moreover, the 90th percentile probability is 1, which means that there is a fair share
of retailer-categories pairs where there is no single product introduction with a new price.
Similar results are found in the U.K. retailers (Appendix A.18).

                                    Table 6: Product introductions

                                                                         m months after
                                                     m       1   m       2   m       3   m       4   m       5
                (i)   Prob introducing a new
                      good at existing pricesa
                       p 10%                          0.61       0.53         0.48       0.55        0.60
                       Median                         0.96       0.96         0.93       0.93        0.92
                       Average                        0.96       0.93         0.91       0.93        0.91
                       p 90%                             1           1           1           1           1
                Notes: Summary statistics on the probabilities across retailer-categories in the
               U.S. a Probability that the price of a product introduction in month m was among
               the observed prices in the first month.


       We now study whether the price stickiness probabilities (line (i) in Table 6) are related
to the clustering measures. We run OLS regressions at the retailer-category level, where the
dependent variable is defined as the average of these m -based probabilities. Regressions are
run jointly for all group pairs in the U.S. and the U.K.
       Table 7 shows that the baseline clustering index (Section 4) is related to higher price
stickiness. Columns (1) to (3) show that higher price clustering relates to higher probabilities
that products will be introduced at the existing prices.
       We also find that measures of price advertising and fast-inventory turnover (fast-
fashion retailers) are related to a higher price stickiness. The price advertising indicator
was constructed as follows. Throughout 2017 and 2018 we enrolled in e-mail newsletters from
most of the retailers, and recorded whether these included price points or not (promotions in
terms of percentages that did not include price points were classified as non price advertisers).
We also complemented the newsletters with a simple online exercise: for each retailer we
checked whether the landing page included price points or not. These two sources are
surprisingly similar. According to this measure, 36% of the retailers in the data engage


     The results are similar for the remaining clustering measures. See Appendix A.19 for additional specifica-
tions.

                                                      22
in price advertising. Fast-fashion retailers are identified following Caro and Martínez-de
Albéniz (2015) and industry reports.

                            Table 7: Predictors of quantum stickiness

                                                   (1)        (2)         (3)
                       VARIABLES                  prob .     prob .     prob .
                       Probability of product introduction at existing price


                       Cluster indexa            0.590***   0.570***   0.528***
                                                 (0.179)    (0.176)     (0.176)
                       Price ad                             0.0412**
                                                            (0.0191)
                       Fast fashion                                    0.0542***
                                                                       (0.0197)


                       log (N )                   YES        YES         YES
                       Country FE                 YES        YES         YES
                       Cat. FE                    YES        YES         YES
                       Observations                782        782        782
                       R2                         0.260      0.271      0.274
                       Notes: a Normalized clustered index that controls for pop-
                      ular prices, price ranges, and number of products. Price
                      advertising and fast fashion are binary indicators as de-
                      scribed in the main text. Standard errors clustered at the
                      retailer-country level. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



6     Theories of quantum prices
A variety of models can rationalize different aspects of price clustering as an optimal pricing
strategy. We first discuss a behavioral advertising model, and then outline four alternative
frameworks.


6.1   Advertising effectiveness
We propose a simple model in partial equilibrium where price clustering makes advertising
more effective. And it is increasingly effective when the same prices are used over time, i.e.
in product introductions. This suggests that there is a menu cost to introducing new prices.
      Apparel companies invest substantially on media advertisement (Ghemawat, Nueno,



                                                  23
and Dailey (2003); Wall Street Journal (2017)). However, only some retailers are salient
about prices. Just consider two opposite examples. In Uniqlo, prices have a central role in
advertising and signage strategies. This is true online as well as in brick-and-mortar stores.
Prices are prominently displayed in the ads, promotions, and signs across the store. In fact,
there are employees (runners) who go around the store rearranging items such that prices,
sizes, and colors are in the right location and visible to the consumer. Louis Vuitton, on
the other hand, makes prices the least possible salient attribute. Price labels are carefully
obfuscated, you often need to ask for help to a merchant, there are no markdown racks, and
prices are never displayed in the ads.
       Although there is extensive literature on whether and how the advertising should
include prices (Lal and Matutes (1994); Simester (1995); Anderson and Simester (1998); Shin
(2005); Bagwell (2007)), the distribution of unique prices, the stickiness, and the role of
memory has received little attention. A relevant exception is Rhodes (2014), which introduces
a model where consumers update beliefs on prices based on the advertised prices.
       Consider a retailer that sells a multi-product assortment C . Let C be defined as follows.

                            C  ( x 1 , 1 , . . . , x 1 , N1 ) , . . . , ( x M , 1 , . . . , x M , N M )

x i , m is product i in category m and Nm is the number of products in this category. Then N
N1 + . . . + NM denotes the number of products in the catalog. The cost of advertising is g (A),
where A denotes the number of distinct prices and products included in the advertisement.
We can think of A as bits of information competing for a space in the ad. As illustrated in
Appendix A.13, with or without prices, newsletters only advertise a handful of items.
           There are two types of consumers. A fraction  are price-sensitive, of which ps are
informed and (1 - ps ) are only aware through advertising. And a fraction (1 -  ) are quality-
sensitive ( qs are informed). Consumers' product or price memory, or brand positioning
awareness, fades over time but is updated with new advertisements. Recall, r , decays
exponentially. An initial ad reaches r1 r0 of the (1 - ) uninformed. In the next period, if
no new ad is seen, then r t r0  t -1 ; and when the same ad is seen, then r t r0  t -1 (1 -  ) + ;

     For example, Abercrombie & Fitch Co. and Victoria's Secret each spent 3% of net sales in paid advertise-
ments.
     See Appendix A.13 for visual examples of ads with and without prices. One image advertises 35 jeans at
$35 each; the second image advertises bags without prices.
     Louis Vuitton prices are visible in the webpage. Goyard is an extreme example of traditional price
obfuscation. Goyard produces luxury bags, but neither the products nor the prices are displayed online.
In fact, the webpage makes the following statement: "Goyard products are available exclusively at Goyard
boutiques worldwide. Goyard does not engage in any form of e-commerce."
     For evidence on price recall, see Monroe (1973); Dickson and Sawyer (1990); Lichtenstein, Ridgway, and
Netemeyer (1993); Monroe and Lee (1999). See Brown (1969) for early evidence that consumers associated
low-price advertising with general low prices.

                                                                24
where ,  < 1.




                            r5
                                                                                       p3
          Price awareness




                                                                          Firm price
                            r1


                                                                                       p2


                                                                                       p1
                                                                                         p1        p2                p3
                                 t   1           t 5
                                                 Time                                         Frictionless optimal price

                                         (a) Price recall                                     (b) Switching prices

                                                    Figure 6: Price recall and advertising

Notes: Panel (a) shows the relationship between price awareness and advertising. At time t 5, the retailer
can advertise a different price (red) and achieve r1 awareness, or advertise the same price (blue) and increase
awareness to r5 . Fewer prices allows to more effectively advertise different products together, and, if done over
time, to more consistently build a price positioning. Panel (b) shows three advertised prices p1 , p 2 , p3 . The
retailer will stick to the advertised price p1 and, if switching to a different price, it will jump discretely to p2
which has been used before.


       Panel (a) in Figure 6 illustrates the case. An initial ad of x , p reaches r1 price awareness.
Price recall starts fading afterwards until the retailer sends out a new advertisement. If the
retailer advertises a new price, p , awareness jumps back to the r1 level; while advertising
the old price, p , it increases to r5 . This can be thought of as a menu cost to introducing a
new price; it is the cost of giving away the price positioning that has been achieved through
signage and advertising.




     Bananas at Trader Joe's is an extreme case of building price reference. The price, 19 cents each, has been the
same for years (Forbes (2018)). And modyfying this price will not go unnoticed. See also Voss, Parasuraman,
and Grewal (1998), and references therein, for a discussion of price expectation, brand loyalty, and repurchase
behavior.
     One might be tempted to jam or saturate the consumer with advertising to boost recall, but this is likely to
increase dissatisfaction. This can be related to the empirical evidence on pulsing, i.e. advertising that oscillates
from high to low levels (Dubé, Hitsch, and Manchanda (2005)).

                                                                     25
       The problem of the firm is to choose prices and advertising as follows:

                         Nm
              max             (p im - c im )    ps + (1 - ps )1( i m  A)      Dps (p i m )+
               A,p
                 ~
                     m   i
                                                                                                    (4)
                (p i m - c i m ) (1 -  )   qs + (1 - qs )1( i m  A)    Dqs ( p i m ) - g (A)


where p i m and c i m are the price and cost of product i in category m ; 1(i m  A) is an indicator
variable if product (or price) i m was included in the advertisement. For tractability D j (p i m )
is a linear demand, 1 - b j p i m , for j ps , qs .
        The model allows for simple predictions that reflect institutional details of price setters
in the industry. For example, when consumers are price-sensitive and informed, retailers do
not cluster prices. Platform strategy retailers (e.g., Walmart's every day low prices), focus on
getting the lowest price, and therefore have no incentives to stick to price points over time.
When consumers are price-sensitive, uninformed, and advertising is costly, firms cluster
prices. Retailers like Uniqlo and Zara will use few prices for advertising efficiencies, and it
will be costly to use different prices for new products. When retailers have both price- and
quality- sensitive consumers, firms will not cluster prices. Retailers like Ralph Lauren and
Armani have low/high labels and a wide price distribution to attract a broad customer base.
We formalize some of these cases as follows.

Result 1. In a single-period two-product problem, for a set of parameters where consumers are
                                                                                
price-sensitive and advertising is costly, it is optimal to cluster prices: p1 p2 .
        Details in Appendix A.15.

        In Result 1, the retailer clusters prices but also restricts the product space. The retailer
could produce a high-quality product; but its core demand is price-sensitive, and therefore
it is better off selling low-price products at the same price. Price clustering allows to more
efficiently inform consumers about cross-section of products.

Result 2. In a single-period two-product problem, for a set of parameters where there are price- and
                                                                    
quality- sensitive consumers, it is not optimal to cluster prices: p1 < p2
                                                                         
                                                                           .
       Details in Appendix A.15.

       In Result 2, the retailer produces high-end and low-end products to appeal to both
types of consumers. This resembles the standard vertical differentiation solution.

Result 3. In a two-period two-product problem, for a set of parameters where consumers are price-
sensitive and uninformed, and there are advertising efficiencies over time, it is optimal to use sticky
         t1    t2
prices: p1    p2   p.

                                                    26
        Details in Appendix A.15.

       In Result 3, the retailer overcomes uninformed consumers using sticky prices. A new
product is introduced in each period at the same price. Sticky prices allow to build brand
or price awareness. The effect is expected to be larger with more products (cross-section
information gains).

Result 4. In a two-period problem, two products in t1 and one product in t2 , for a set of parameters
where consumers are price-sensitive and uninformed, it is optimal to switch price to advertised prices:
 t2    t1
p3   p2   .
       Details in Appendix A.15.

         In Result 4, the retailer is first selling two products at different prices (costs are such
       t1     t1 
that p 1   < p2   ). In the second period, the retailer faces unanticipated increased cost for a new
                                                   t2     t1 
product. Instead of setting the frictionless p3        < p2   , it is optimal to jump to the advertised
  t1 
p2 . This is illustrated in Panel (b) in Figure 6. The retailer jumps between advertised prices
instead of introducing new prices.
         A behavioral model with price memory and advertising costs can rationalize price
clustering within- and across- categories. And predicts a reluctance to introduce new prices
over time, even for product introductions. In fact, price adjustments should be lumpy: if
switching a portion of new products to a different price, these will jump to an existing
clustered price. In Section 7 we discuss evidence of price stickiness.


6.2    Convenient prices
We now consider a model following Knotek (2008) where there are convenient prices. These
are prices that for different reasons facilitate a transaction (e.g., round numbers to avoid
change in coins). This generates demand kinks at prices that a retailer is more likely to use.
These can also be thought of as price cliffs, which generate discontinuous drops in demand.
We modify the model to multi-product, multi-category retailers. Consider a firm that sells
Nm products in category m . Each period t 1, 2, . . . there is an optimal set of prices, p m , t (),
that the firm would like to set in the absence of frictions, e.g. corporate policies on prices
points, consumers' reaction to price digits.  denotes a set of state variables such as marginal
costs, competitors' prices. The firm incurs a loss, n (p , ), when setting prices that are not
optimal. In addition, there is a set of convenient prices, p # ; and there is a loss, h (p , p # ),


     Prices that are "better" than others can more generally be related to a literature on price endings, convenient
prices, or round prices (Kashyap (1995); Blinder, Canetti, Lebow, and Rudd (1998); Anderson and Simester
(2003); Knotek (2008); Levy, Lee, Chen, Kauffman, and Bergen (2011); Knotek (2011)).

                                                        27
associated to setting a price p that is not convenient. Each period, the firm's profits are:

                               n
                                                                                                                      -1
       t (p , p , )
                #
                                    p i m - c i m q i (p i ) - n (p i m , ) - h (p i m , p # ) - A i m 1( p i m   p itm  )   (5)
                          m   i 1

where A i , t is a menu cost to a price change. The problem of the firm is to choose the set of
prices p that satisfies:

                    ~ , p # , ) , where V ( p , p # , )  max t (p
      p  arg max V (p                                           ~ , p # , ) +  E V (p
                                                                                    ~ , p # , )                              (6)
                    p
                    ~                                                   p
                                                                        ~


        When the menu cost is small, convenient prices are far apart, or the inconvenience loss
are small, the firm sometimes charges inconvenient prices, p  ~ p # . But when these are large
costs, the firm jumps from one price to another. Appendix A.14 illustrates this scenario.
        A model like this would predict some price clustering. In Section 4 we documented
that some firms rely on price endings to cluster prices products within- and across- categories.
And the model would predict price rigidity at more convenient prices. However, the quantum
prices that we observe are often far apart from each other, which the model predicts should
lead to less clustered prices. This model does not capture why the set of clustered prices
and the digit endings are different across retailers; or why some retailers are not clustering
prices at all, including retailers positioned in similar price ranges. In addition, we do not
find evidence that price endings in regular prices are related to endings in sale prices.


6.3    Demand uncertainty
It is possible to rationalize price clustering is as an optimal strategy to overcome demand
uncertainty. Ilut, Valchev, and Vincent (2016) presents a model where ambiguity-averse
retailers face an uncertain demand. Firms use demand at previously observed prices to
update priors on future demand, which generates kinks in the expected profits, and therefore
a discrete and sparse distribution of prices. We modify the model to multi-product retailers
as follows. The firm faces a demand for product i , expressed in logs, as follows:

                                     q (p im ,t )   g (p im ,t ) + z im ,t + x (p m ,t )                                     (7)

where p i m , t is the price of product i in category m at time t . There are three components
in (7). g (p i m , t ) is a known time-invariant function. For example, g (p i m , t ) a m ,0 - a m ,1 p i m , t ,
where a m ,0 and a m ,1 are unknown parameters and can vary across categories. z i m , t is an iid
time-specific price-insensitive shock, e.g. certain styles become more fashionable and receive
higher demand. And x (p m , t ) is an unknown function, but that firms learn about using past

                                                            28
observations; it is common to products in the same category. Therefore, the firm's time t
profits are:
                                                  n
                                     t                 (Pi m - C i m ) e q ( p i m , t )                     (8)
                                             m   i 1

In this model, retailers observe total quantities sold, q (p i m , t ), but not its underlying com-
ponents. The retailer is uncertain about the distribution where x (p m , t ) has been drawn.
However, it considers a set of priors, 0 ; and each prior in 0 is a Gaussian Process
distribution. Firms decide prices at time t with information on the history of quantities
q t -1  [ q (p1 ), · · · , q (p t -1 )] and its corresponding prices p t -1 [ p1 , · · · , p t -1 ]. The retailer
updates expected demand conditional on ( q , p ).       t - 1 t - 1

       The result of this model is that retailers are averse to experimenting with new prices.
Firms have used prices p t -1 in the past, and use these to form beliefs that attenuate demand
uncertainty. And these kinks in the expected profits would predict a reluctance to change or
introduce new prices. Appendix A.14 illustrates this case.
       This framework provides several predictions that are consistent with the evidence. In
Section 7 we show that fashion items rarely experience price increases, and a large set of
retailers use the same prices, observed months ago, for new products. The pricing strategy
also exhibits price memory, i.e. if there are price adjustments, when the distribution is very
clustered, these price changes are more likely to occur between the set of previously observed
prices. However, the model is a single-product monopolist; and it is unclear why retailers
that sell hundreds or thousands of products do not experiment with some products. In
addition, it does not capture the cross-section price clustering and the large heterogeneity
in price distributions across retailers (e.g., why only some retailers are averse to demand
uncertainty).


6.4    Salience and price sensitivity
A demand-side behavioral explanation can be that price clustering makes consumers less
price sensitive. This can be articulated in a model where consumers are boundedly rational,
and because there is limited ability to compare all possible attributes, consumers use heuris-
tics to reduce consideration sets prior to making a decision. See, for example, Eliaz and
Spiegler (2011); Piccione and Spiegler (2012); Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2013, 2015).
        Decision heuristics in apparel are not unrealistic. On a given day, Forever 21 can sell
over 2,000 different dresses; during three months Zara offers 10,000 unique products. It is

     Ilut, Valchev, and Vincent (2016) consider a single-product monopolist, and focus on scanner data in
supermarkets and convenience stores.Their results need not translate to a different industry such as fashion
retail where a brand's assortment tends to be substantially larger.

                                                         29
unfeasible for a consumer to compare prices, colors, styles, and sizes available for all possible
options. In fact, there is a limited number of items you can bring to the fitting room. This
may explain why retailers that sell large assortments do not simply group all jeans together
in one spot and all sweaters in another spot.
         Consider a model where consumers follow a two-stage decision process. First, con-
sumers' attention overweights the most salient attribute of the choice set. And then con-
sumers decide the best product from a menu based on the selected attribute. Interestingly,
this model can be applied within- and across- retailers. Consider first the former case.
         Consumers evaluate N products in a choice set C  (x1 , p 1 ) , · · · , (x N , p N ) , where x
captures the horizontal differentiation of a product and p is the price. The relevant choice
set, C , is defined by all the products in the same category. Let (x ¯, p
                                                                        ¯ ) be the reference product
                                     x
                                    i i            p
                                                  i i
with average attributes x    ¯  N       and p¯  N     . In the first stage, consumers decide the
screening attribute. Assume consumers pick x if there is more variation in x than in p , and
pick p otherwise. When many different products have the same price, consumers focus on
the horizontal attribute x . This allows to shift attention away from prices, and possibly make
consumers less price sensitive.
         The model can include more than one retailer. The consumer evaluates N products
from a choice set C  (x i , p i ) , where i  N , and N is the number of distinct products in
one category, across retailers in a relevant price range. Consider N 3 and two firms located
in a circular city choose attributes (x , p ). Firm 1 sells two products {(x1 , p1 ), (x 2 , p2 )} and
firm 2 sells product {(x 3 , p3 )}. There can be multiple equilibria but there is one where firm 1
chooses to cluster prices, p1 p2 , while x 1 x 2 x3 , to soften price competition. Attributes
are such that there is more variation in x than in p , and therefore consumers choose the best
product from the menu according to x . Intuitively, firm 1 could increase p2 but would trigger
firm 2 to cut p3 .
         We documented price clustering within-retailer within-category, which could be in-
terpreted as an effort to shift attention away from prices, especially in large assortments.
Interestingly, the model allows to have consumers in certain price ranges to be more price
sensitive than others, e.g. price sensitivity diminishes for more expensive, high-quality
goods, and therefore high-end retailers have less incentives to cluster prices. In unreported

      Moreover, there is evidence that in certain domains having too many choices can deter purchases or
reduce consumer satisfaction (Iyengar and Lepper (2000)). Whether and how choice overload manifests often
depends on consumers' articulated preferences, how choices are displayed or removed, frequency of purchase,
and search costs (e.g., for a review see Scheibehenne, Greifeneder, and Todd (2010); Chernev, Böckenholt, and
Goodman (2015)). The effects of adding more options are therefore a priori ambiguous.
      This is similar to the salience function (·) in Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2013). Variation in the x
attribute can be related to how dense or sparse is the produce space (Bertini, Wathieu, and Iyengar (2012)).
      See also Kaul and Wittink (1995) for a discussion of price advertising and price sensitivity. Shifting
attention away from prices can temporarily avoid the cost of paying (Prelec and Loewenstein (1998)).

                                                       30
regressions, we find that the clustering measures in Section 4 are lower for more expensive
retailers (as measured by the median price in their assortment). But the model does not
capture why retailers use the exact same prices and not just similar prices; or why retailers
use the same prices across categories. In addition, many of the price clustered retailers dedi-
cate efforts in actually making prices salient: large signage costs, price image featured in the
stores, and price advertising campaigns. It is possible that building a price image allows to
form a store-specific reference price, and what draws attention to price is seeing a different
price. This price image can also serve as a commitment or signaling device to lower price
competition between stores. These extensions could be captured including an advertising
channel to the model.


6.5   Managerial inattention
A supply-side explanation to quantum prices could be managerial costs of setting prices for
a large number of products. We could think of a pricing problem where each unique price
represents a state, or a scenario, and it is costly for managers to strategize on multiple states
(Fershtman and Kalai (1993); Bloom and Van Reenen (2007)). Such managerial inattention is
exacerbated when the number of products is large, when there are frequent sales, and when
collections arrive faster, because pricing decisions have to be made more frequently and on
large assortments.
       For example, fast-fashion retailers have shorten design-to-shelve times to a few weeks
(Ghemawat, Nueno, and Dailey (2003); Cachon and Swinney (2011)). Quantum prices al-
lows to streamline the pricing process for short-cycle products which are constantly being
replaced by new ones. Similarly, fewer prices allows to reduce managerial costs associated to
markdown pricing. In fact, we have found evidence that fast-fashion retailers tend to exhibit
larger price clustering measures, as well as larger measures of price stickiness introductions.
       However, the price clustering measures control for the number of products, and price
clustering is observed in both small and large assortment retailers. Clustering prices is
not necessarily a less demanding task. Price tags have to be printed for all new products,
and therefore the managerial cost of setting a new price or an old price should be about the
same. Managerial inattention could, however, affect price stickiness of price changes (Ellison,
Snyder, and Zhang (2018)). Finally, many of the quantum strategy retailers are among the
most popular and profitable firms worldwide. And given the size of these retailers (see
Section 1 for a few examples), pricing is hardly left improvised.




                                               31
6.6    Summary
Table 8 summarizes the clustering predictions. The models of convenient prices, demand
uncertainty, salience, and inattention (6.2-6.5) predict forms of price clustering that are
consistent with the data. These can generally account for within- category clustering and
price change stickiness, but are limited in predicting across- category clustering, sticky
product introductions, and the large heterogeneity in pricing behaviors across retailers.
        In general, 6.2-6.5 do not capture the adverting role in setting prices. Retailers often
sell large and diverse assortments, often of short duration, and branded products gives them
control over the final price. Rretailers are in the constant need of informing consumers about
new collections, and doing so is costly. One strategy is to pick a niche of prices and stick to
these for different products and over time. In fact, Section 7 shows that retailers engaging in
price advertising or price clustering are more likely to use the same prices over time, even for
product introductions. Consistent with the advertising model, this suggests a menu cost to
introducing new prices which is different from the traditional within-product price change
stickiness due to menu costs, staggered contracts, or price point rigidity (Nakamura and
Steinsson (2008); Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008); Blinder, Canetti, Lebow, and Rudd (1998)).
See Appendix A.15 for potential extensions on the advertising model.
                 .25




                                                                                            .15
                 .2




                                                                                             .1
                                                                              Probability
           Probability
              .15




                                                                                            .05
                 .1
                 .05




                                                                                             0
                         0      50           100             150   200                             No                     Yes
                                     Rounded Average Price                                                   Price ad



                               (a) Average price                                                  (b) Price advertising

                             Figure 7: Relationship between clustering and advertising

Notes: The clustering measure is the probability that two items in the same retailer-category have the same price
(Section 4). Panel (a) shows the relationship between the average price (rounded to the nearest 10 multiple) and
price clustering. Panel (b) shows the relationship between price advertising and clustering. Price advertising
indicator as defined in the text. Error bars are SEMs.


        In Panel (a) Figure 7 we show that clustering decreases with the average price; con-

                                                                         32
                                                   Table 8: Theories of quantum prices

                                    Clusteringa      Advertised Productsb      Expensive/Cheapc       Across Retailersd      Stickinesse

      Advertising                   Within- and          Higher                 Higher for                  +/-              Few price
                                      across-          clustering               low-price                                     changes,
                                     category                                    retailers                                  sticky intro-
                                                                                                                              ductions
      Convenient prices             Within- and           +/-                       +/-                Same prices            Few price
                                      across-                                                                                  changes
                                     category
      Demand uncertainty              Within-             +/-                       +/-                Same prices           Few price




33
                                      category                                                                                changes,
                                                                                                                            sticky intro-
                                                                                                                              ductions
      Salience and sensitivity        Within-            Higher                 Higher for                  +/-                  +/-
                                      category         clustering               low-price
                                                                                 retailers
      Managerial inattention        Within- and           +/-                   Higher for             Same prices            Few price
                                      across-                                  low-revenue                                     changes
                                     category                                    retailers
      Notes: Model predictions in terms of clustering dimensions (columns). a Expected form of price clustering. b Expected clustering for
     advertised products. c Expected clustering across cheap or expensive retailers. d Expected observed prices across retailers. e Expected
     forms of price stickiness.
sistent with the notion that firms use clustering when faced with more price-sensitive con-
sumers. We also find evidence that price advertising is related to statistically significant
higher clustering measures. Visual evidence is showed in Panel (b) Figure 7. Similar results
are obtained using regressions of the price clustering measures on the price advertising
indicator, and controlling for number of products, categories, and country.


7    Macroeconomic implications: A case study
Sections 4 and 5 showed that quantum strategy retailers use a handful of prices for large
and diverse assortments, and that such strategy is sticky over time. Section 6 discussed that
quantum pricing can be an optimal strategy to increase advertising effectiveness. Moreover,
because price recall and brand perceptions are costly to build and depend on past prices, the
advertising becomes increasingly effective when the same prices are used over time.
       What are the macroeconomic implications of quantum prices? A formal study of the
matter is beyond the scope of this paper due to data limitations. First, we have focused on
the fashion retail sector only. Addressing this question requires gathering datasets across
different industries. The data collected by national statistical offices, however, is not a good
source for this purpose because very few items from each store are actually sampled. Our
approach has been to collect all the available items within a store and only by doing so
we were able to report the existence of quantum prices. The second limitation is that we
lack units sold. Future research should study the relationship between quantum prices and
consumer behavior. However, for illustrative purposes in this section we study the macro
implications as if the data from a couple of stores were representative of the aggregate.
The purpose is to explore potential macroeconomic implications using a case study of two
retailers. We first show suggestive evidence of price adjustment strategies, and how this
introduces noise in measuring aggregate inflation. Finally, we show deviations from the
Law of One Price using matched products between the U.S. and the U.K.

     Quantum prices can be interpreted as an extreme form of price stickiness. The stickiness is different from
canonical time-dependent or state-dependent models. In time-dependent models, the timing of price changes
is exogenous, and in state-dependent models, firms choose when and by how much to change prices due to
menu costs (Klenow and Kryvtsov (2008)). In this paper, quantum price stickiness is interpreted as closer to
state-dependent pricing, because firms decide how to change prices given quantum prices, or how to introduce
a new quantum price. But still it suggests a new form of menu cost, namely the cost of introducing a new price.
For evience on price stickiness in retail see, for example, Mankiw (1985); Levy, Bergen, Dutta, and Venable
(1997); Blinder, Canetti, Lebow, and Rudd (1998); Nakamura and Steinsson (2008); Klenow and Malin (2010);
Kehoe and Midrigan (2015); Gorodnichenko and Talavera (2017); Cavallo (2018).
     We have found anecdotical evidence of comparable pricing practices in electronics, personal care products,
and services such as cable, phone, hotels, insurance, and financial services. We have not seen similar behaviors
in perishables, fuel, education, and health care. Still, the macroeconomic implications obviously depend on
how prevalent quantum prices are in each of these sectors and also at the aggregate level.

                                                      34
7.1                    Product mix and inflation measurement
Inflation in the U.S. and the U.K. has been hovering around 2%, and input prices often
experience large price swings. Although we lack unit costs in the data, it is reasonable
to assume that cost shocks are expected, to some degree, to impact final prices. And we
have documented that a fraction of fashion retailers tend to use existing prices for product
introductions. Therefore, one might ask, how retailers adjust their average prices with a
constrained price grid.


                                                                                                                  2018                                                                                                                                     2018                                                                                                                                               2018
                                                                                                                  2019                                                                                                                                     2019                                                                                                                                               2019
                  40




                                                                                                                                        40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 40
                  30




                                                                                                                                        30




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 30
   Products (%)




                                                                                                                         Products (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Products (%)
                  20




                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                  10




                                                                                                                                        10




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 10
                  0




                                                                                                                                        0




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                       9.9   12.9   14.9   19.9   24.9   29.9   34.9   39.9   49.9   59.9   69.9   79.9   89.9   99.9                        95   97.5 98.05 99.5   102   105   108.5   110   116    125   130   140   148   150   165   170   180   188   195                        16   32   40   49   58   65   72   80   90 99.5 115   148   180   220   260   298   348   398   450   548   698   898   1195

                                                                Prices                                                                                                                              Prices                                                                                                                                  Prices



                                           (a) Uniqlo US                                                                                            (b) Ralph Lauren US                                                                                                               (c) Ralph Lauren US (Full)

                                                                                                                         Figure 8: Price adjustment

Notes: Panels (a) and (b) show the price distribution of the same categories and time periods in Uniqlo U.S.
and Ralph Lauren U.S., respectively. The bars sum up to 100% each year. Data from the same month is used
across the two years to account for seasonality. Results are similar using different months or years.


       We focus on a case study using two stylized retailers: Uniqlo and Ralph Lauren. Panel
(a) in Figure 8 compares the prices observed in Uniqlo U.S. between the same categories
over two years (same month). Uniqlo, which is characterized by strong measures of price
clustering (Table 4), appears to adjust prices by changing shares of products in the existing
prices. In fact, quantum prices are so sticky that over 90% of the change in the price
distribution occurs via modifying the product shares in the old prices. This evidence is
consistent with the advertising model that predicts, in price advertisers or price-sensitive
retailers, large and discrete price jumps for product introductions.
       On the other hand, in Panel (b) showing Ralph Lauren U.S., prices are spread out
across many points in a price grid. In fact, the price range showed is restricted for comparison
purposes; the entire price distribution is significantly wider (Panel (c)). This is consistent
with retailers which serve both price- and quality- sensitive consumers, and thus implement

     For example, cotton prices increased 20% year-on-year as of April 2018. But then prices decreased 26%
year-on-year as of July 2019. See Financial Times (2018); Bloomberg (2018, 2019).

                                                                                                                                                                                              35
different labels or quality ladders to appeal aspirational entry-level consumers at lower price
points, as well luxury- or status- seeking consumers at very high prices (Moon, Herman,
Kussmann, Penick, and Wojewoda (2004); Han, Nunes, and Drèze (2010); Kapferer and
Bastien (2012)). In this example, changes in the price distribution are more evenly split
between shares in the same prices and new price buckets (close to 50% each).
                                   15




                                                                                                                             15
          YoY Inflation Rate (%)




                                                                                                    YoY Inflation Rate (%)
                                   10




                                                                                                                             10
                                   5




                                                                                                                             5
                                   0




                                                                                                                             0
                                   -5




                                                                                                                             -5

                                        0.1   0.2   0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9                                      0.1   0.2    0.3   0.4   0.5   0.6    0.7   0.8   0.9
                                                            Subsample Size                                                                             Subsample Size


                                                      (a) Uniqlo US                                                                           (b) Ralph Lauren US

                                                                        Figure 9: Measuring inflation

Notes: Panels (a) and (b) show the estimated inflation rates in Uniqlo US and Ralph Lauren US, respectively,
obtained through simulating an increasing percent of sampled products. Products are sampled with no
replacement. Each specification is repeated 10,000 times. Lines denote the 5th, 10th, 25th, 50th, 75th, 90th, and
95th percentile of the inflation estimate. For instance, the top line denotes the 95th percentile of the distribution
of inflation rate estimates across each subsample size.


       For the computation of the aggregate inflation instead of using the full distribution
from Ralph Lauren we use a much tighter set (Panel (b)). Notice that the price distribution in
Uniqlo expands prices from 9.9 to 99.9 (so a tenfold increase) while the smaller set from Ralph
Lauren expands from 95 to 195. A smaller relative spread, but similar nominal spread. Even
though both distributions are about 100 dollars wide, Uniqlo has significantly less possible
prices than Ralph Lauren. These lumpy distributions introduce a friction that affects the
sampling error when measuring inflation. For concreteness in the exposition, we focus on
the two stylized retailers. We begin by observing that, year on year, both retailers exhibit an
approximately 5% inflation rate in a relatively similar price range. Since products tend to
have a short life, the inflation rate is computed using average prices (Aparicio and Cavallo
(2017)). Suppose we sample a given percent of products, how does quantum prices affect the
computation of inflation?


                                                                                               36
        We find that the existence of price clusters leads to a significantly larger noise and
wider range of inflation estimates. In other words, a representative subsample requires a
larger number of products to obtain a sensible inflation rate. The reason is that when prices
are distributed continuously many prices can change by a small amount, and therefore the
average inflation does not require to collect many of those individual prices. However, when
the store follows a quantum strategy, the distribution becomes more discrete, and sampled
observations will either have zero or large inflation.
        We compute the inflation rate using a sample of 10% to 95% of the products. We then
obtain the percentiles of the distribution in each of the sample specifications. Although both
retailers exhibit a similar year-on-year inflation rate, price clusters introduce more noise and
a wider range of inflation estimates. This effect is consistently observed across the ladder of
sampling. For instance, with a subsample of 25%, the 10th- and 90th- percentile inflation rate
is -2.2% and 11.7% in Uniqlo, compared to -0.5% and 10.2% in Ralph Lauren, respectively. The
standard deviation in this specification is 31% larger with price clustering (4.3% compared
to 3.2%, respectively). See Figure 9. Panels (a) and (b) show the inflation estimates in Uniqlo
and Ralph Lauren, respectively.

7.1.1   Price advertisers

The observation about the changes in the price distribution can be extended to more retailers.
We use data on all retailers for which we have one year of data and thus comparable seasons
year-on-year. The change in the price distributions in each retailer-category is decomposed
as follows. Let w i ,1 and w i ,2 denote the shares of products located in price i (no rounding) in
time 1 and time 2, respectively. The change in the price distribution is decomposed into:

              p max
                       | w i ,2 - w i ,1 |         | w i ,2 - w i ,1 | w 1  w 2      +           | w i ,2 - w i ,1 | w 1  w 2      (9)
          i    p min
                                             shares of products in same prices           shares of products in different prices


The term in the left computes the sum of the absolute differences between the shares of
products in the price buckets with observations in both periods.The term in the right com-
putes the sum of the absolute differences located in prices that are observed in only one of
the periods. We then compute the fraction that each term represents in the price change
distribution. The measure is computed for all retailer-categories.
       The median proportion of the shares in the same price bins is 0.6, and tends to be
larger for price clustered and price advertiser retailers. Figure 10 shows that the fraction
of the change in prices through existing prices is significantly higher for retailers that price
advertise. The mean share is 0.45 for non price advertiser retailers and 0.80 for price adver-

                                                                     37
tisers. Appendix A.20 shows the histogram of the proportion accounted for the left term in
eq. (9).

                                                                                   1




                                    Share of Price Changes through Common Prices
                                                                                   .8




                                                                                   .6




                                                                                   .4




                                                                                   .2




                                                                                   0
                                                                                             No                           Yes
                                                                                                           Price Ad




                      Figure 10: Changing product mix and price advertising

Notes: Shows the average change in the price distribution that comes through modifying shares of products in
the old prices. The measure is first calculated for all retailer-categories and then the average is reported across
price- and non price- advertiser retailers. Error bars are SEMs.


         We propose a second measure of support in the distribution across periods. Similarly,
w i ,1 and w i ,2 denote the shares of products located in price i (no rounding) in time 1 and
time 2, respectively. The minimum support in the price distribution can be computed as:

                                                                                            p max
                                                                                                     min (w i ,1 - w i ,2 )     (10)
                                                                                                      w
                                                                                        i    p min


For every single price in the distribution of the retailer-category, we identify the minimum
share of products located at that price (between the first and second period). For instance, if
w 12.4,1 0.15 and w12.4,2 0, then we obtain 0. We then sum these minimum shares across
all possible prices. The results are similar to Figure 10. The average support for non price
advertisers is 44% and for price advertisers it is 78%.
        Pricing through product mix can be a source of lumpy price adjustments, i.e. either
very small or very large. Appendix A.20 shows larger lumpy price adjustments for price

     We also decompose the change in the average price between the 2017/2018 collections into the change in
price for the products using common prices, and the change in price for products using different prices. We
compute the absolute value of the sum of these two terms, and obtain the fraction accounted by each term.
The mean and median of the share of the price change due to existing prices is 0.51 and 0.53, respectively. This
measure is statistically higher for price advertiser retailers, i.e. the observed changes in the average prices is
driven by the existing prices.

                                                                                                          38
advertising retailers. Lumpy adjustments predict either 0 or economically large changes,
which is what the Figure shows. For example, over 50% of the retailer-category pairs in
price advertising retailers have exactly 0 change in the median price (compared to less than
20% for non-price advertising retailers). The average absolute change, conditional on being
different from zero, is 21% and 13% for price and non-price advertisers, respectively.


7.2    Law of one price
One alternative for fashion retailers to reduce the frictions from quantum pricing is to design
items to hit specific prices. The ability to learn costs and/or demand and modify assortments
is an advantage that is often not feasible for traditional retailers that sell the same product
lines over time. In fact, fast-fashion retailers are known to have short time-to-market and to
efficiently manage inventories and styles within the season (Ghemawat, Nueno, and Dailey
(2003); Caro and Gallien (2007, 2012); Caro and Martínez-de Albéniz (2015)).
        However, multi-national retailers cannot perfectly produce for a specific quantum
price. First, quantum prices are different across countries, and within a country prices
are separated by non-trivial price increments. Second, there are exchange rate movements
which implies that products will not be introduced at the targeted prices. And third, there
are country-level taste differences. Therefore, despite lower price setting costs in fashion
retail (i.e., products are new and price tags need to be printed), price clustering is expected
to generate good-level deviations from the law of one price (LOP). The data allows to test for
product-level LOP because each product has a unique ID which can be utilized to perfectly
match the same product in the U.S. online store and the U.K. online store on the same day.
        The implications in terms of LOP can be visualized in Figure 11. We focus on the styl-
ized retailers Uniqlo and Ralph Lauren. In particular, we compute the percent of products
assigned to each combination of U.S. dollars and U.K. prices. Darker regions indicate a larger
share of products assigned to a given bucket. We pool all products throughout the collection
period. The heatmaps can be related to the price distributions in Figure 8. Panel (a), which
corresponds to Uniqlo, depicts large and discrete price increments between prices. In fact, a
handful of buckets are enough to characterize Uniqlo's pricing across countries. In contrast,
Ralph Lauren in Panel (b) exhibits a richer range of prices to accommodate exchange rate
and taste changes.
     We calculate the change in the median price, in absolute value, in the same retailer-category, the same
month (hence season), between two consecutive years. Similar results are obtained computing the median price
change between product replacements. Replacements are matched using the closest introduction in terms of
price.
     Overall, using data from all retailers, we find large good-level deviations from the LOP. The mean absolute
good-level deviation is 0.20 log points. We also find that products introduced in the first price bucket in each
retailer-category in the U.S. are in general not priced in similar price buckets in the U.K. See Appendix A.21.

                                                      39
                        (a) Uniqlo                                    (b) Ralph Lauren

                                     Figure 11: Law of One Price

Notes: Panels (a) and (b) show a heatmap that represents the proportion of matched products allocated in each
combination of U.S. dollars and U.K. pounds. In both panels the color key goes from the same range of 0% to
20% of products. Darker regions indicate larger proportion of products in a price bucket.


       Finally, we quantify these intuitions by running a fixed-effects regression of relative
prices and evaluating the residuals. In particular, we regress Relative i , t        + t + i , t ,
where Relative i , t denotes pUK / pUS (the product-level ratio of U.K. and U.S. price). Monthly
fixed effects are included to control for exchange rate movements. Confirming our visual
impressions in Figures 8 and 11, quantum pricing relates to large deviations from the law of
one price. The MSE is 67.8% larger in Uniqlo's, compared to Ralph Lauren's case.


8    Conclusions
This paper used a novel dataset with over 350,000 different products from over 65 retailers
in the U.S. and the U.K. to study pricing strategies in the fashion retail industry. The data
collection combines three pieces that are rarely available together: (i) a large scale cross-
section of products that are representative of the heterogeneity in the sector; (ii) a time-series
of collections; and (iii) thousands of matched products across countries.
       We show evidence that a fraction of retailers practice what we define as quantum
prices: prices that are sparse, clustered, far apart from each other, and assigned to large and
diverse assortments. Price clustering can be articulated as an optimal pricing strategy to


                                                     40
increase advertising effectiveness. This form of pricing represents a remarkable source of
price stickiness, suggesting a menu cost to introducing new prices, which has implications for
product introductions, lumpy price adjustments, inflation measurement, and international
pricing frictions.
        There are additional implications not analyzed in this paper, which we view as inter-
esting areas of research. The fact that products are introduced at sticky prices suggests that
retailers might nonetheless redesign product attributes to target specific prices. A body of
literature in marketing and operations highlights the retailers' ability to optimize assortments
via learning demand (Caro and Gallien (2007, 2010); Cachon and Swinney (2011)). However,
learning the optimal price distribution has received little attention. Future research should
explore relationships with cost shocks, differences across industries, product line design,
and consumer decisions.




                                              41
References
A     , J., J. H         ,    J. L. J . (1991): "Memory and Decision Making," in Handbook of Consumer
    Behavior, ed. by H. Kassarjian, and T. Robertson, pp. 1­49. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

A          , E. T.,    D. I. S       (1998): "The role of sale signs," Marketing Science, 17(2), 139­155.

        (2001): "Price discrimination as an adverse signal: Why an offer to spread payments may hurt
    demand," Marketing Science, 20(3), 315­327.

           (2003): "Effects of 9 price endings on retail sales: Evidence from field experiments," Quanti-
    tative marketing and Economics, 1(1), 93­110.

         (2008): "Research note--does demand fall when customers perceive that prices are unfair?
    The case of premium pricing for large sizes," Marketing Science, 27(3), 492­500.

A         , D.,       M. I. B           (2016): "Forecasting inflation with online prices," International
    Journal of Forecasting, forthcoming.

A          , D.,    A. C           (2017): "Targeted price controls on supermarket products," The Review
    of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

A     , I.,     O. G         (2017): "Round prices and price rigidity: Evidence from outlawing odd
    prices," Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, 144, 188­203.

B        , K. (2007): "The economic analysis of advertising," Handbook of industrial organization, 3,
    1701­1844.

B         , J., S. L    ,     . (2007): "The netflix prize," in Proceedings of KDD cup and workshop, vol.
    2007, p. 35. New York, NY, USA.

B       , M., L. W      ,    S. S. I        (2012): "The discriminating consumer: Product proliferation
    and willingness to pay for quality," Journal of Marketing Research, 49(1), 39­49.

B         , S.,   R. S           (2014): "Multiproduct firms and price-setting: Theory and evidence
    from US producer prices," Journal of Monetary Economics, 66, 178­192.

B    , M.,        P. J. K       (2004): "Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices," Journal of
    political economy, 112(5), 947­985.

B        , A., E. R. C        , D. E. L     ,     J. B. R  (1998): Asking about prices: a new approach to
    understanding price stickiness. Russell Sage Foundation.

B       , N.,    J. V R         (2007): "Measuring and explaining management practices across firms
    and countries," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1351­1408.

B            (2018): "Apparel Retailers, Finally Recovering, Eye Cotton Prices Warily," June 1, 2018.

         (2019): "Cotton Crash Looks Set to Deepen as Stockpiles Keep Growing," July 9, 2019.


                                                   42
B        , P., N. G        ,      A. S        (2013): "Salience and consumer choice," Journal of Political
    Economy, 121(5), 803­843.

         (2015): "Competition for attention," The Review of Economic Studies, 83(2), 481­513.

         (2017): "Memory, attention, and choice," NBER WP No. 23256.

B       , F. E. (1969): "Price image versus price reality," Journal of Marketing Research, pp. 185­191.

C        , G. P.,    R. S      (2011): "The value of fast fashion: Quick response, enhanced design,
    and strategic consumer behavior," Management science, 57(4), 778­795.

C           , T.,     J. H         (1974): "A dendrite method for cluster analysis," Communications in
    Statistics-theory and Methods, 3(1), 1­27.

C     , F.,   J. G      (2007): "Dynamic assortment with demand learning for seasonal consumer
    goods," Management Science, 53(2), 276­292.

         (2010): "Inventory management of a fast-fashion retail network," Operations Research, 58(2),
    257­273.

         (2012): "Clearance pricing optimization for a fast-fashion retailer," Operations Research, 60(6),
    1404­1422.

C     , F.,    V. M          - A           (2015): "Fast fashion: business model overview and research
    opportunities," in Retail supply chain management, pp. 237­264. Springer.

C        , A. (2012): "Online and official price indexes: measuring Argentina's inflation," Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 60(2), 152­165.

C         , A. (2018): "Scraped data and sticky prices," Review of Economics and Statistics, 100(1).

C         , A., B. N      ,    R. R         (2014): "Currency unions, product introductions, and the
    real exchange rate," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2), 529­595.

C         , A.,    R. R        (2016): "The Billion Prices Project: Using online prices for measurement
    and research," The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(2), 151­178.

C        , A., U. B            ,    J. G         (2015): "Choice overload: A conceptual review and
    meta-analysis," Journal of Consumer Psychology, 25(2), 333­358.

D       B    , A. J., K. B. M    ,     J. M. M G        (1981): "Consumer perceptions of comparative
    price advertisements," Journal of Marketing Research, pp. 416­427.

D       V    , S.,     M. G           (2017): "Uniform pricing in us retail chains," The Quarterly Journal
    of Economics, forthcoming.

D        , L. (1981): "Laws of the iterated logarithm for order statistics of uniform spacings," The
    Annals of Probability, pp. 860­867.


                                                     43
D         , P. R.,   A. G. S        (1990): "The price knowledge and search of supermarket shoppers,"
    The Journal of Marketing, pp. 42­53.

D          , M.,      D. C. J    (2006): "Consumer preferences and product-line pricing strategies:
    An empirical analysis," Marketing science, 25(2), 164­174.

D     , J.-P., G. J. H   ,      P. M             (2005): "An empirical model of advertising dynamics,"
    Quantitative marketing and economics, 3(2), 107­144.

E      , K.,    R. S           (2011): "Consideration sets and competitive marketing," The Review of
    Economic Studies, 78(1), 235­262.

E        , G.,   E. L. G       (1997): "Geographic concentration in US manufacturing industries: a
    dartboard approach," Journal of political economy, 105(5), 889­927.

E       , G., E. L. G    ,     W. R. K     (2010): "What causes industry agglomeration? Evidence
    from coagglomeration patterns," American Economic Review, 100(3), 1195­1213.

E       , S. F., C. M. S      ,     H. Z      (2018): "Costs of Managerial Attention and Activity as a
    Source of Sticky Prices: Structural Estimates from an Online Market," NBER WP24680.

F            , C.,    E. K       (1993): "Complexity considerations and market behavior," The RAND
    Journal of Economics, pp. 224­235.

F            T      (2018): "Cotton jumps as storm Alberto brings heavy rain to growing areas," May
    29, 2018.

F       (2018): "15 Revelations from Trader Joe's podcast, from the parking lots to deer stew," June 7,
    2018.

F           , J., T. H     ,    R. T            (2001): The elements of statistical learning, vol. 1. Springer
    series in statistics New York.

G           , P., J. L. N      ,    M. D       (2003): ZARA: Fast fashion, vol. 1. Harvard Business School
    Boston, MA.

G         , M.,     R. E. L        J (2007): "Menu costs and Phillips curves," Journal of Political Economy,
    115(2), 171­199.

G         , G.,         R. R         (2008): "Sticky borders," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2),
    531­575.

G                  , Y., V. S         ,    O. T          (2014): "Price setting in online markets: Does IT
    click?," Journal of the European Economic Association.

G                , Y.,   O. T        (2017): "Price setting in online markets: Basic facts, international
    comparisons, and cross-border integration," American Economic Review, 107(1), 249­82.

H     , Y. J., J. C. N ,     X. D      (2010): "Signaling status with luxury goods: The role of brand
    prominence," Journal of Marketing, 74(4), 15­30.

                                                      44
H        , J. R.,   B. W            (1990): "An evaluation cost model of consideration sets," Journal of
    consumer research, 16(4), 393­408.

I    , C. L., R. V   ,     N. V      (2016): "Paralyzed by fear: Rigid and discrete pricing under
    demand uncertainty," NBER WP No. 22490.

I     , J., H. M     , M. O. R     ,      H. R (2005): "PPP strikes back: Aggregation and the real
    exchange rate," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(1), 1­43.

I        , S. S.,   M. R. L        (2000): "When choice is demotivating: Can one desire too much of a
    good thing?," Journal of personality and social psychology, 79(6), 995.

K             , G.,      R. S. W   (1995): "Empirical generalizations from reference price research,"
    Marketing science, 14(3_supplement), G161­G169.

K          , J.-N.,  V. B       (2012): The luxury strategy: Break the rules of marketing to build luxury
    brands. Kogan page publishers.

K        , A. K. (1995): "Sticky prices: New evidence from retail catalogs," The Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 110(1), 245­274.

K      , A.,     D. R. W         (1995): "Empirical generalizations about the impact of advertising on
    price sensitivity and price," Marketing Science, 14(3_supplement), G151­G160.

K       , P.,     V. M          (2015): "Prices are sticky after all," Journal of Monetary Economics, 75,
    35­53.

K         , P. J.,  O. K           (2008): "State-dependent or time-dependent pricing: Does it matter
    for recent US inflation?," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(3), 863­904.

K        , P. J.,   B. A. M         (2010): "Microeconomic evidence on price-setting," in Handbook of
    monetary economics, vol. 3, pp. 231­284. Elsevier.

K       , E. S. (2008): "Convenient prices, currency, and nominal rigidity: Theory with evidence from
    newspaper prices," Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(7), 1303­1316.

          (2011): "Convenient prices and price rigidity: cross-sectional evidence," Review of Economics
    and Statistics, 93(3), 1076­1086.

L    , R.,      C. M        (1994): "Retail pricing and advertising strategies," Journal of Business, pp.
    345­370.

L       , P. (2004): "Price discrimination in Broadway theater," RAND Journal of Economics, pp. 520­541.

L     , D., M. B    , S. D  ,     R. V       (1997): "The magnitude of menu costs: direct evidence
    from large US supermarket chains," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(3), 791­824.

L     , D., D. L , H. C    , R. J. K           ,     M. B      (2011): "Price points and price rigidity,"
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(4), 1417­1431.


                                                    45
L            , D. R., N. M. R        ,     R. G. N             (1993): "Price perceptions and consumer
    shopping behavior: a field study," Journal of marketing research, pp. 234­245.

M       , N. G. (1985): "Small menu costs and large business cycles: A macroeconomic model of
    monopoly," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 100(2), 529­537.

M           , P.,     J. R        (1986): "Price and advertising signals of product quality," Journal of
    political economy, 94(4), 796­821.

M         , K. B. (1973): "Buyers' subjective perceptions of price," Journal of marketing research, pp. 70­80.

         (1979): Pricing: Making profitable decisions. McGraw-Hill New York.

M         , K. B.,   A. Y. L (1999): "Remembering versus knowing: Issues in buyers processing of
    price information," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 27(2), 207­225.

M      , Y., K. H      , E. K          , E. P     ,     S. W           (2004): "Burberry," Harvard Business
    School, Case 9-504-048.

N           , E.,    J. S         (2008): "Five facts about prices: A reevaluation of menu cost models,"
    The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(4), 1415­1464.

O        , B. Y.,    L. E      (2007): "Uniform prices for differentiated goods: The case of the movie-
    theater industry," International Review of Law and Economics, 27(2), 129­153.

P         , M.,      R. S          (2012): "Price competition under limited comparability," The quarterly
    journal of economics, 127(1), 97­135.

P       , D.,     G. L               (1998): "The red and the black: Mental accounting of savings and
    debt," Marketing science, 17(1), 4­28.

R        , A. (2014): "Multiproduct retailing," The Review of Economic Studies, 82(1), 360­390.

R        , J. H.,     J. M. L      (1997): "Consideration: Review of research and prospects for future
    insights," Journal of Marketing Research, pp. 406­410.

S             , B., R. G           ,     P. M. T     (2010): "Can there ever be too many options? A
    meta-analytic review of choice overload," Journal of Consumer Research, 37(3), 409­425.

S           , R. M. (1991): "Symbolic meanings of a price ending," ACR North American Advances.

S          , R. M.,       P. N. K     (1997): "Patterns of rightmost digits used in advertised prices:
    implications for nine-ending effects," Journal of Consumer Research, 24(2), 192­201.

S     , J. (2005): "The role of selling costs in signaling price image," Journal of Marketing Research, 42(3),
    302­312.

S         , D. (1995): "Signalling price image using advertised prices," Marketing Science, 14(2), 166­188.




                                                      46
S     , A., D. L ,        H. A. C       (2017): "End of 9-endings, price recall, and price perceptions,"
    Economics Letters, 155, 157­163.

S        , M. (2000): "Price-endings when prices signal quality," Management Science, 46(12), 1617­1629.

S        , M.,      R. S. W      (1997): "An empirical analysis of price endings with scanner data,"
    Journal of Consumer Research, 24(1), 57­67.

T        , R. (1985): "Mental accounting and consumer choice," Marketing science, 4(3), 199­214.

T        , M.,      V. M         (2005): "Penny wise and pound foolish: the left-digit effect in price
    cognition," Journal of Consumer Research, 32(1), 54­64.

T           , R., G. W         ,     T. H       (2001): "Estimating the number of clusters in a data set
    via the gap statistic," Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology), 63(2),
    411­423.

V     , G. B., A. P           ,     D. G      (1998): "The roles of price, performance, and expectations
    in determining satisfaction in service exchanges," The Journal of Marketing, pp. 46­61.

W      S       J         (2017): "Fashion Ads, a Last Bastion of Print, Are Going Digital," January 25,
    2017.

W          , F. L., K. B. M   ,    M. K      -K        (2013): "Effects of price framing on consumers'
    perceptions of online dynamic pricing practices," Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 41(5),
    501­514.

W             , B. (1994): "Selling formats for search goods," Marketing Science, 13(3), 298­309.

Z           , M. J., M. R   , D. L , S. D     ,    M. B       (2004): "Managerial and customer costs
    of price adjustment: direct evidence from industrial markets," The review of Economics and Statistics,
    86(2), 514­533.




                                                       47
A     Appendix

A.1     Retailers

                                        Table 9: List of Retailers

                                 US                                      UK

                  Abercrombie, Adidas, Aero-                Adidas, All Saints, Armani,
                  postale, All Saints, Ameri-               Benetton, Bershka, Burberry,
                  can Eagle Ann Taylor, Ar-                 Calvin Klein, Coach, Dior,
                  itzia, Armani, Banana Repub-              Dolce Gabana, Esprit, For-
                  lic, Benetton, Bonobos, Brooks            ever, Forever 21, Free Peo-
                  Brothers, Burberry, Calvin                ple, Gucci, Hermes, H&M,
                  Klein, Club Monaco, Coach,                Kiabi, Lacoste, Levi's, Louis
                  Dolce Gabana, Dr Martens,                 Vuitton, Mango, Marks and
                  Eddie Bauer, Express, Fendi,              Spencer, Massimo Dutti, Next,
                  Forever, Free People, Gap,                Nike, Oysho, Primark, Pull
                  Gucci, Guess, Hermes, Hol-                and Bear, Ralph Lauren, Reiss,
                  lister, JCrew, Kenneth Cole,              Scotch and Soda, Stradivarius,
                  Lacoste, Levi's, Louis Vuit-              Tommy Hilfiger, Uniqlo, Ur-
                  ton, Massimo Dutti, Michael               ban Outfitters, Uterque, Vans,
                  Kors, Nike, Old Navy, Pen-                Versace, Zara
                  guin, Primark, Ralph Lau-
                  ren, Reitmans, Scotch and
                  Soda, Other Stories, Tal-
                  bots, TJMaxx, Tommy Hilfiger,
                  Ugg, Uniqlo, Urban Outfitters,
                  Vans, Versace, Victoria Secret,
                  Walmart, Zara
                              20



                                        50


                                                  0


                                                             0




                                                                             00
                                                10


                                                           20




                                                                           10




                                         Median Price ($, in logs)

                                   Figure 12: Retailers in a price line

Notes: For each retailer in the U.S. we compute the median price of the cross-section of distinct items. This
diagram reflects the range of prices covered in the data.


                                                      48
A.2     Algorithm to classify products into categories
We categorize products using decision trees for classification. For a review see Friedman,
Hastie, and Tibshirani (2001). The core objective is to provide a consistent approach to
categorize products across retailers and across collections (over time) such that when new
data is collected, the same classifier (or a slight improvement of it, after training with new
data) can be used to assign products into the existing categories.
       The classifier takes two main features: the description of the product and the retailer-
specific category-related tags, both of which are retrieved from the HTML code of the website.
The classifier takes the words contained in both elements and, based on a user-defined
hierarchy and word frequency, it assigns products into twelve categories (and an `unclassified'
group). The hierarchy is important because if some items are collected next to a `sandals'
category HTML tag, then these products are very likely to be Shoes. The frequency is relevant
because it takes into account that similar items should be categorized in the same group. For
example, items that are solely described as `denim' are more likely to be jeans, and therefore
will be assigned to the Bottoms category.
       The classifier raises a flag when the price of the item is disproportionally different
from what we expect in the category, or when many similar items are not being categorized,
and the decision tree is fine-tuned to start classification over. In addition, random samples
of the data in each retailer are manually observed to verify that the categories assign in fact
correspond to those products.
       It is useful to note that the main clustering results are not sensitive to classification
errors. In fact, if anything, classification errors present lower bounds to price clustering
(precisely because a misclassified product will likely introduce a price-off the distribution of
prices in the category). Moreover, the categories are relatively broad, which also means that
price clustering would be higher under narrower categories. Moreover, the main results of
the paper are found using random portions of the data or random subsets of retailers.
       In order to obtain a gauge a sense of accuracy, we sample random items from several
retailers (100 each), which corresponds to close to 10% of the distinct retailers. We obtain
an error rate of 96.2%. This magnitude can be interpreted as follows. For every 100 random
items in the sample, close to four products have been assigned to the wrong category. For
example, a short sleeve vest that has been classified as `Tees'.




     However, also note that too narrowly defined categories will present a barrier to comparing products
across retailers. For instance, if firm A sells backpacks and firm B sells totes, having those as separate categories
will prevent us from comparing pricing behaviors across retailers for these set of items, even though they are
very similar.

                                                         49
A.3     Retailer-Level Probability




                                                                                      15
                       15




                                                                                      10
                       10
           Frequency




                                                                          Frequency
                                                                                      5
                       5
                       0




                                                                                      0
                            0   .05    .1           .15   .2   .25                         0   .05                 .1   .15
                                        Probability                                                  Probability



                                      (a) US                                                   (b) UK

                                Figure 13: Probability that items have the same price

Notes: Histogram of the probability that two items, from any category in the same retailer, have the same price.
Probability calculated at the retailer level. Vertical line depicts median probability.




                                                                     50
A.4               Dispersion in Retailer-Category Probability




                                                                            .5
          .8




                                                                            .4
          .6




                                                                                .3
    Probability




                                                                      Probability
       .4




                                                                     .2
          .2




                                                                            .1
          0




                                                                            0
                  0     500         1000          1500   2000                        0   500         1000          1500   2000
                              Distinct Products                                                Distinct Products



                              (a) US                                                           (b) UK

                         Figure 14: Probabilities of same price and distinct products

Notes: Relationship between the probability that two items in the retailer-category have the same price and the
number of distinct products. The number of products is restricted to 2,000 for better visualization.




                                                                51
A.5     Normalized Clustering Using Different Benchmarks




                              250
                              200
                                150
                         Frequency
                        100   50
                              0




                                      0           .1                  .2          .3
                                                       Clustering Index

                                          Normal Dist.           Uniform Dist.    Data



                  Figure 15: Normalized clustering against pricing benchmarks

Notes: We compute normalized clustering indices following equation (1). We compare the retailer-category
level indices in the data with those that would be generated if prices were drawn from a Normal or Uniform
distribution. Prices from the Normal distribution are rounded to the nearest integer. Prices from the Uniform
distribution are rounded to the nearest integer multiple of ten. This conservatively assumes that firms can only
price in 10-dollar increments.




                                                          52
A.6                 Normalized Clustering Relative to Normal Distribution
              150




                                                                                        60
              100




                                                                                           40
  Frequency




                                                                                  Frequency
              50




                                                                                        20
              0




                                                                                        0
                    0    .1   .2   .3      .4       .5   .6   .7   .8   .9                      0   .05   .1   .15    .2    .25    .3   .35   .4   .45   .5
                                        Clustering Index                                                             Clustering Index



                                        (a) US                                                                       (b) UK

                        Figure 16: Normalized price clustering relative to a Normal distribution




                                                                             53
A.7              Normalized Clustering with Price Endings




                                                                                           100
         100
     Frequency




                                                                                      Frequency
                                                                                         50
    50   0




                                                                                           0
                 -.05   0   .05   .1   .15     .2    .25   .3   .35   .4   .45                    -.05   0   .05   .1      .15     .2    .25   .3   .35   .4
                                        Clustering Index                                                                Clustering Index



                                       (a) US                                                                           (b) UK

                                                 Figure 17: Normalized price clustering

Notes: Histogram of the normalized measure of price clustering that controls for prices, price levels, popular
prices, and last digits. Details in the main text.




                                                                                 54
A.8           Price Endings



              15000

                                                                                                                               10000

              10000
      Items




                                                                                                              Items
                                                                                                                                        5000
               5000




                             0                                                                                                                  0
                                              0   1     2      3     4      5    6     7     8   9                                                  0   1       2     3     4     5     6    7   8   9
                                                            Ending Integer Digit                                                                                    Ending Integer Digit

                                                              (a) US                                                                                                (b) UK

                                                                                     Figure 18: Price endings

                                                      Notes: Number of distinct items priced at each ending integer digit.
                              9




                                                                                                                            9
                              8




                                                                                                                            8
                                          7




                                                                                                                                        7
                Ending Digit (Sale Price)




                                                                                                              Ending Digit (Sale Price)
                                    6




                                                                                                                                  6
                               5




                                                                                                                             5
                        4




                                                                                                                      4
                  3




                                                                                                                3
                              2




                                                                                                                            2
                              1




                                                                                                                            1
                              0




                                                                                                                            0




                                              0   1    2       3     4      5      6     7   8       9                                      0       1   2      3     4      5      6     7   8   9
                                                            Ending Digit (Regular Price)                                                                    Ending Digit (Regular Price)



                                                                   (a) US                                                                                        (b) UK

                                                            Figure 19: Price endings in regular and sale prices

Notes: Heatmap of the relationship between items at each ending integer digit in regular prices and sale prices.




                                                                                                         55
A.9        Correlated Clustering: Within-Retailer, Across-Categories

             1000




                                                                                                           600
             800




                                                                                                           400
                600
         Frequency




                                                                                               Frequency
       400




                                                                                                           200
             200
             0




                                                                                                           0
                      0   .05   .1   .15     .2   .25               .3   .35   .4   .45                          0   .05   .1      .15       .2      .25   .3   .35   .4
                                            Probability                                                                                  Probability



                                       (a) US                                                                                      (b) UK

                      Figure 20: Probability of same price within-retailer and across-category

Notes: Histogram of the probability that two items from two different categories in the same retailer have the
same price. Probability computed from each category pair within a retailer.



                                                       underwear

                                                             tops

                                                             tees

                                                            swim
                                                                                                                                value
                                                            suits
                                                                                                                                    0.15
                                           Category




                                                           sports
                                                                                                                                    0.10
                                                           shoes

                                                       outerwear
                                                                                                                                    0.05
                                                          jewelry                                                                   0.00
                                                         dresses

                                                         bottoms

                                                            bags

                                                      accessories
                                                                               ts
                                                                                s
                                                                      bo gs

                                                                      dr ms

                                                                       je s
                                                                      te ry



                                                                        sp s


                                                                              its
                                                                              im

                                                                              es

                                                                      de ps
                                                                        sh r




                                                                                r
                                                                            ea




                                                                            ea
                                                                             ie




                                                                            se




                                                                            oe
                                                                            or
                                                                    ou el




                                                                          su
                                                                          ba




                                                                          sw

                                                                           te

                                                                    un to
                                                                          or


                                                                         tto




                                                                         rw




                                                                         rw
                                                                        es

                                                                         w
                                                                  s
                                                               es
                                                               c
                                                            ac




                                                                                     Category


                                                      Figure 21: Same prices across categories

Notes: We compute the average of the correlated clustering measure at the category-category level across
retailers in the U.S. Darker regions indicate different categories that have shares of products at the same prices.




                                                                                          56
A.10                    Correlated Clustering: Across-Retailers, Within-Category
                150




                                                                                      150
                100




                                                                                      100
    Frequency




                                                                          Frequency
                50




                                                                                      50
                0




                                                                                      0
                      -.1   -.05        0           .05   .1   .15                          -.1   -.05    0           .05   .1   .15
                                       Clustering Index                                                  Clustering Index



                                       (a) US                                                            (b) UK

                                   Figure 22: Normalized correlated clustering across retailers

Notes: Histogram of the normalized correlated price clustering measure. The statistic is calculated within-
category for each retailer-retailer pair. For computational reasons the results are based on a random half of the
retailers. Vertical line depicts the median clustering estimate. Overall there is no evidence that retailers are
using the same prices for similar items.




                                                                     57
A.11     Scope of Clustering




                               20
                               15
                           Percent
                           10  5
                               0




                                     -.1        0              .1             .2          .3
                                                         Clustering Index

                                           w/Ret w/Cat          w/Ret a/Cat        a/Ret w/Cat



                                      Figure 23: Scope of price clustering

Notes: Histogram overlapping the baseline clustering measure at the three levels: within a retailer category;
across categories within retailer; and across retailers within category.




                                                           58
A.12      Robustness: ML clustering
We first motivate the analysis implementing the GAP statistic (Tibshirani, Walther, and Hastie
(2001)). This method compares the within-cluster variation to the within-cluster variation
that one would observe if points were uniformly distributed. In addition to having a relevant
name for fashion retail, the statistic has the benefit of potentially estimating one cluster in
the data. But interestingly, price points in the price distribution are so dispersed that the
                             
method tends to estimate k i      #{ b i }, that is, the optimal number of clusters k  is found to be
equal to the number of distinct prices in each retailer-category.
        To avoid this problem we define a clustering index borrowing ideas from the k -means
literature (for a review see Friedman, Hastie, and Tibshirani (2001)) and from the CH index
(Caliski and Harabasz (1974)). First, we normalize prices in each retailer-category dividing
prices by the median price. Second, we run the k -means algorithm to find the optimal k 
clusters; where k  {1, · · · , #b }, i.e. k could be as large as the number of prices. We take
the estimated clusters, and compute the average within cluster absolute distance, W C (n k , k ),
and the average between cluster absolute distance, BC (k ).
                                        W C (n , k )
        We define the ratio  (k )        k
                                             . Both the numerator and the denominator decrease
                                     BC (k )
for each additional cluster. But because the price clustering problem is univariate, and will
select as many clusters as prices are in the data, for each k we compute the minimum between-
                                                        ce ntroid i (k )
cluster percent distance, d min (k )  mini             ce ntroid i -1 ( k )
                                                                              - 1 , i  (2, · · · , k ) . We ignore ratios
 (k ) for which d min (k ) < 5%, and set the           optimal k 
                                                        as the corresponding k to the smallest
ratio of the surviving ones. That is, k                           ^ )}, where k
                                             min {  (2), · · · , (k           ^ is the maximum k
such that its distance with the previous cluster k - 1 is at least 5%.
        Intuitively, this approach provides two advantages. First, it determines the opti-
mal number of price clusters in the data, where optimal refers to the traditional ratio of
within-cluster dispersion to between-cluster dispersion. And second, the optimal clusters
are constrained to have a meaningful difference in economic terms. For example, if we ob-
served items at $58 and $59 we would like to consider these as belonging to a same cluster
of price buckets.
        Figure 24 shows the results for the U.K. Results for the U.S. are shown in Figure 5 in
the main text.




    We also measured clustering borrowing the concept of largest uniform spacings (Devroye (1981)). The
index is defined as the ratio of the sum of k -th largest spacings (price differentials) and the sum that would be
expected under a uniform distribution. Ratios above 1 would suggest price clustering. Again we find a large
number of retailer-categories with significantly large price clustering. Results not shown.

                                                            59
         40




                                                                           50
                                                                           40
         30




                                                                              30
                                                                       Frequency
    Optimal k*
        20




                                                                      20
         10




                                                                           10
         0




                                                                           0
                 0   20         40        60          80   100                     0   .1   .2         .3       .4   .5   .6
                     Mean distance between centroids (%)                                          k* / Max k*



                              (a) UK                                                             (b) UK

                           Figure 24: Optimal number of price clusters in the data

Notes: Results from the unsupervised machine learning approach to estimate price clusters in the data. Results
for the U.K. are similar to those in the U.S. (Figure 5). Consistent with previous analyses, there is substantial price
concentration, and concentration takes places in clusters that have economically meaningful price differences.
See Section 4.4 for additional details.




                                                                 60
A.13     Advertising Examples




                      (a) Abercrombie                          (b) Gucci

                                  Figure 25: Advertising examples

Notes: Examples from digital newsletters. Panels (a) and (b) show newsletters with and without price adver-
tising, respectively.




                                                    61
A.14      Convenient Prices and Demand Uncertainty




      E t (q (p ))                                            E t ( q (p ))




                           p1      p2        p3                                      p1     p2         p3
                                  Price                                                    Price
                     (a) Convenient prices                                    (b) Demand uncertainty

           Figure 26: Price clustering due to convenient prices or demand uncertainty

Notes: Panel (a) shows demand kinks at certain convenient prices for two different products. A model
following Knotek (2008) would generate clustering at better prices or price endings. This is consistent with
some retailers whose clustering is driven by digit endings. Panel (b) shows the expected demand curves for
two different products in the same category. Following Ilut, Valchev, and Vincent (2016), a retailer that is averse
to experimenting with new prices will update its beliefs based on the three observed prices. This generates
kinks in the expected profits which induces the retailer to choose the same prices for different products or for
new products.




                                                        62
A.15      Advertising effectiveness
A.15.1    Result 1

Consumers are price-sensitive (  1) and uninformed ( ps 0). Thus the retailer advertises
prices and products to attract price-sensitive consumers (A  2). We solve for the optimal
prices in three cases: (a) a single product; (b) two products at different prices; (c) two products
at the same price. Consider g (A)  A2 . When advertising is costly, the firm is better off in
scenario (c): produces two products and clusters prices.
         In case (a), the firm maximizes profits, (p 1 ) (p1 - c1 )  ((1 - ps )1(i                    1  A)) 
(1 - b ps p1 ) -  A . Then, p 1
                       2          
                                        1/2(1/b ps + c1 ). Profits evaluated at the optimal price are,
(p 1 ) (1/2)(1/ b ps - c 1 )  (1/2 - b ps c1 /2) -  A2 .
      

         In case (b), the problem is to maxp1 , p2 ( p1 , p 2 )         (p1 - c1 )  ((1 - ps )1(i            1 
A))(1- b ps p1 )+( p2 - c 2 )((1- ps )1( i 2  A))(1- b ps p2 )-  A . We obtain p1 1/2(1/ b ps + c1 )
                                                                        2                  

and p2  
            1/2(1/b ps + c 2 . Therefore, ( p1
                                               , p2
                                                    ) (1/2)(1/ b ps - c 1 )(1/2 - b ps c 1 /2) + (1/2)(1/ b ps -
c 2 )  (1/2 - b ps c2 /2) -  A2 .
         In case (c), the problem is to maxp ( p ) (p - c1 )  ((1 - ps )1(i 1  A))  (1 - b ps p ) +
(p - c2 )  ((1 - ps )1( i 2  A))  (1 - b ps p ) -  A2 . We obtain p  1/2(1/ b ps + (c 1 + c2 )/2).
Therefore, ( p  ) (1/ b ps - ( c1 + c2 )/2)  (1/2 - b ps (c1 + c 2 )/4) -  A2 .
         When advertising is sufficiently costly, ( p  ) > ( p1        
                                                                         ) and ( p  ) > ( p1      
                                                                                                   , (p2
                                                                                                       
                                                                                                         )). For
example, evaluate at c1           0.2 , c 2  0.3, b ps    0.25. It is optimal for the firm to sell two
products at the same price.

A.15.2    Result 2

There is an equal share of price- and quality- sensitive consumers (  0.5); and both types
are informed (ps qs 1). Therefore, advertising is useless (A 0). We are interested in
obtaining optimal prices for two cases: (a) two products at the same price; (b) two products
at different prices. The firm is better off in scenario (b).
        In case (b), the problem is maxp1 , p2 ( p1 , p 2 ) ( p1 - c1 )    ps  (1 - b ps p1 ) + ( p2 - c2 ) 
  qs (1 - b qs p 2 ). Optimal prices are, p1
                                               (1/2)(1/ b ps + c 1 ) and p 2
                                                                           
                                                                              (1/2)(1/ b qs + c 2 ). The
firm produces a high-cost (high-quality) good to quality-sensitive consumers and a low-cost
good to price-sensitive consumers. Profits in (b) are higher than what would be obtained
selling two products at the same price. It is not optimal to cluster prices.

A.15.3    Result 3

Consumers are price-sensitive (  1) and uninformed ( ps 0). Therefore, the retailer must
engage in advertising to reach consumers. And it sells one product in two periods, and these

                                                      63
products are different. The firm considers three cases: (a) advertises in t 1 and not in t 2;
(b) advertises different prices in each period; (c) advertises the same price in t 1 and t 2.
         Assume no present value discounting. In case (a), the problem is maxp1 , p2 r (p - c1 ) 
(1 - b 1 p1 ) + (r  )( p2 - c 2 )  (1 - b2 p2 ), where subscripts denote time t . We obtain prices
p t (1/2)(1/ b t + c t b t ). Profits are a r (1/2 b - c1 /2)  (1/2 - c1 b /2) + ( r  )  (1/2b - c 2 /2) 
(1/2 - c 2 b /2) -  A2 , where A           2 because (x1 , p 1 ) are advertised one time at t                  1. For
simplicity b t is the same in both periods.
         In case (b), the problem is maxp1 , p2 r (p - c 1 )  (1 - b 1 p1 ) + (r )( p2 - c2 )  (1 - b 2 p2 ). Optimal
prices are the same as (a). Profits are b r (1/2 b - c 1 /2)  (1/2 - c 1 b /2) + (r )  (1/2 b - c2 /2) 
(1/2 - c 2 b /2) -  A2 , where A 4 because advertises attributes (x t , p t ) in both periods. Note
that, in t 2, firm reaches the same fraction r of the uninformed.
         In case (c), we solve for the same price in two periods, namely maxp r (p - c 1 )(1 - b1 p ) +
( r  (1 -  ) + )( p - c2 )(1 - b 2 p ). We obtain p  [ r (1 + bc 1 ) + (r  (1 -  ) +  )(1 + bc 2 )][2b (r + r  (1 -
 ) +  )]-1 . And profits are ( p  ) r (p  - c1 )(1 - b 1 p  ) + (r  (1 -  ) +  )(p  - c 2 )(1 - b 2 p  )-  A2 ,
where A 4 as case (b).
         The intuitions are as follows. When advertising is costly (large ) and the rate of
recall loss is small (large  ), the retailer advertises in the first period to reach uninformed
consumers and sets optimal prices in each period (case (a)). When advertising is not too
costly and initial recall is large enough ( r ), the retailer advertises optimal prices in each
period (case (b)). But when recall loss is large and the advertising gains from sticky prices
are large ( ), it is optimal to use the same price for different products over time.
         We note that in simulations case (b) tends to dominate cases (a) and (c). This is
expected because case (b) allows to flexibly adjust prices to cost shocks. However, sticky
and clustered prices are expected to become more important once we include cross-section
advertising efficiencies.

A.15.4    Result 4

Consumers are price-sensitive (  1) and uninformed ( ps 0). In the first period, c 1 , c2 , and
advertising cost  are such that is it optimal to set two different prices as opposed to clustered
prices. Profits with different prices are t1 (p1  
                                                   , p2
                                                        ) (r /2)[(1/ b - c1 )  (1 - bc 1 ) + (1/ b - c2 )  (1 - bc 2 )]-
 A , where A 4. Profits with clustered prices are t1 (p1
    2                                                                   
                                                                       p2 ) r (1/2b + c2 /4 - c 1 3/4) 
(1/2 + b (c1 + c 2 )/4) + r (1/2b + c1 /4 - c 2 3/4)  (1/2 + b (c 1 + c2 )/4) -  A2 , where A 3. In
t 1, optimal prices yield t1 ( p1  
                                    , p2
                                       
                                         ) >  t1 ( p 1
                                                          
                                                         p2 ).


       We could also imagine a demand curve that reacts to price changes, even if the products are different. For
example, the uninformed fraction reached by the advertisement in t 1 overreacts if prices are higher in t 2:
q (p2 ) 1 - bp2 if p2  p1 , or a - bp2 otherwise. See the discussion in Appendix A.15.5.

                                                         64
         In the second period, the retailer sells a single new product. Suppose that the retailer
did not anticipated higher costs, and that c1 < c3 < c2 . Thus the frictionless price p3 would
     t1       t2      t1 
be p1     < p3    < p2    . There are three cases: (a) sets a new optimal price and advertises
accordingly; (b) uses the advertised price p1 from t 1; (c) uses the advertised price p2 from
t 1.
         In case (a), profits are t2 (p3    
                                             )   r /4 b (1 - c3 )2 -  A2 . Cases (b) and (c) are similar
in that the retailer takes advantage of the information gains from using advertised prices.
Profits are t2 ( p3 p t    j
                             1
                               ) r (r  (1 -  ) +  )  ( p j - c3 )  (1 - bp j ) -  A2 , for j 1 , 2. Even if c 3
increases, for a large range of parameters of advertising gains and costs, the retailer is better
                                                                      t1 
off deviating from the frictionless price and jumping to p2               . Note that if we include products
from t 1, there are more incentives (due to cross-section advertising effectiveness) to stick
to advertised prices.

A.15.5    Additional discussion

The model can be extended in several dimensions. It allows to include the role of promotions
or markdowns. Because price advertising increases price awareness, a sale price itself is
informative (e.g., advertising sale prices, instead of percentage markdowns, are informative
of the size of the discounts). In fact, we find that retailers that price advertise also tend to
advertise sale prices.
       It also allows to incorporate changes in price sensitivity. Because price advertising
creates price point awareness, prices that are different to those expected by the consumer can
trigger antagonism or price sensitivity. For example, price signs can form cues to recall past
prices in the store (see Bordalo, Gennaioli, and Shleifer (2017) for recent work on memory
and choice). Therefore, a demand curve could react to changes in prices, and this reaction
could be larger for stores that advertise prices.
       Finally, a richer model should include the role of unadvertised items; e.g. how price
advertising and the price distribution affects the perception of non-advertised products. On
the one hand, advertising low prices that are not representative can be judged as misleading
and reduce repeat purchases, or anchor unadvertised higher-priced items as too expensive.
On the other hand, advertising high prices can simply demotivate consumers from buying.
See Monroe (1973); Della Bitta, Monroe, and McGinnis (1981); Thaler (1985); Kalyanaram
and Winer (1995).




                                                      65
A.16      Price Changes in Apparel
We use a panel data of 51 retailers in the U.S. and 37 retailers in the U.K for which we have
between 2 and 7 months of data. In order to more conservatively identify the same product
over time, we re-define an ID as a unique retailer, category, product name, and HTML code
combination.

                           Table 10: Product duration and price changes

                                                                         US     UK

                            Product durationa
                            (i)      Mean                                3.1    3.3
                            (ii)     Median                              3.1    3.3
                            Products with a price change (%)
                                     Regular priceb
                            (iii)    Mean                                5.3    7.5
                            (iv)     Median                              1.9    3.7
                                     Sale    pricec
                            (v)      Mean                                69.1   57.6
                            (vi)     Median                              74.4   58.1
                            Size of sale (%)
                            (vii)    Meand                               38.7   41.8
                            (viii)   p 75e                               44.6   49.0
                            Notes: a Product duration measured in months, calcu-
                           lated for retailer-categories with at least 3 months of
                           data. b Percent of products for which we observed a price
                           change in the regular price (between the last and first ob-
                           servation). c Percent of products for which we observed
                           a sale. d Mean size of markdown, conditional on a sale,
                           and as percent of the regular price. e 75th percentile size
                           of markdown. The estimates assign equal weight to each
                           retailer-category.


       Table 10 shows statistics that are consistent with the folk wisdom about apparel. First,
products are generally short lived. The mean product duration is 3.1 months in the U.S.
and 3.2 months in the U.K. However there is large heterogeneity; over 10% of the goods in
the U.S. have a duration of less than 2 months, and another 10% have mean duration over 5
months. This suggests that a set of products would have exhibited longer duration if our

     In order to account for censoring, the duration is computed for items that could have been observed for at
least 3 months. The product duration goes up to 3.4 months conditional on items for which we have at least 4
months of data. The magnitudes found here are comparable to those in Cavallo, Neiman, and Rigobon (2014),
who also use online prices for a longer time period from two retailers. For example, the authors find a mean
duration of 12 weeks in H&M.

                                                       66
data collection had covered a longer time period. Figure 27 reports the histogram of average
product duration across retailer-categories.
       Second, there are asymmetric price changes. Only an average 5.3% of the products
have a regular price change, whereas close to 70% of the products experience a sale price.
Therefore regular prices are very sticky in apparel, and if we observe which types of items
tend to experience price increases, these are a reduced subset of longer lived items (e.g.,
accessories, jewelry). That markdowns are frequent (lines (v) and (vi) in Table 10) is relevant
to a discussion about the extent to which ignoring discounts can overstate the estimates of
price change rigidity using regular prices (Bils and Klenow (2004); Nakamura and Steinsson
(2008); Kehoe and Midrigan (2015)).
                60




                                                                           50
                                                                           40
                40




                                                                              30
    Frequency




                                                                      Frequency
                                                                           20
                20




                                                                           10
                0




                                                                           0




                     1   2               3               4   5                     1   2             3               4   5
                             Average Duration (Months)                                     Average Duration (Months)



                                 (a) US                                                        (b) UK

                                      Figure 27: Histogram of average product life

Notes: Histogram of average product life in each retailer-category. Because the product duration is computed
for items that could have been observed at least three months, this measure is right censored for products that
should have been captured in a longer scraping period. The measure is particularly informative for the cases
where the duration is shorter than five months.


      These magnitudes are comparable to stickiness estimates in Nakamura and Steinsson (2008), who finds
a median frequency of 3.6% price changes (excluding sales) and 87.1% of price changes due to sales, in the
apparel sector.
      There are a few caveats to comparing regular and sale prices which merit research on its own. Sale prices
can be temporary, in which case we neglect price increases that take the form of prices reverting to the original
regular price, although preliminary observations at the time of data collection suggest that this is not common.
Sales behavior can be different online and offline (the latter which we do not capture). The large percentage
of items on sale may not be observed in the offline stores for two reasons. It is not rare for retailers to apply
online-exclusive offers. And some retailers deliberately move most of the sales to the online channel, and keep
little markdowns in-store.

                                                                 67
A.17     Inflation in Apparel


                           4




                                                                                                  4           2
                                      2
           Monthly Inflation Rate (%)




                                                                                   Monthly Inflation Rate (%)
                                                                                                0
                       0




                                                                                  -2
                           -2




                                                                                                  -4
                           -4




                                  Jan-17   Jul-17     Jan-18   Jul-18   Jan-19                            Jan-17   Jul-17     Jan-18   Jul-18   Jan-19
                                                       Month                                                                   Month



                                                    (a) US                                                                  (b) UK

                                                    Figure 28: Monthly inflation rate in apparel

Notes: Figure shows non-seasonally adjusted monthly inflation rates (%) in apparel. Obtained from the Bureau
of Labor Statistics (U.S.) and Office for National Statistics (U.K.).




                                                                             68
A.18   Prices Over Time

                               Table 11: Price stickiness (U.K.)

                                                               m months after
                                                m      1   m   2   m   3   m    4   m    5
                   Panel (A)
            (i)    Share of common pricesa
                     p 10%                       0.76      0.70     0.64    0.52     0.52
                     Median                      0.94      0.90     0.87    0.82     0.73
                     Average                     0.95      0.92     0.89    0.83     0.74
                     p 90%                         1         1        1       1      0.92

                   Panel (B)
            (ii)   Prob introducing a new
                   good at existing pricesb
                     p 10%                       0.67      0.55     0.54    0.50     0.68
                     Median                      0.98      0.97     0.97    0.94     0.91
                     Average                     0.97      0.94     0.94    0.93     0.92
                     p 90%                         1         1        1       1       1
            Notes: Results are averages across retailer-categories in the U.K. a Ratio of
           common prices (between the prices observed in the first month and month m )
           to the prices in month m . b Probability that the price of a product introduction
           in month m was among the observed prices in the first month.




                                                  69
A.19   Introduction Price and Price Clustering

                    Table 12: Predictors of quantum stickiness

                                              (1)        (2)        (3)
                  VARIABLES                  prob .    prob .      prob .
                  Probability of product introduction at existing price


                  Cluster indexa            0.476*     0.454*     0.449*
                                            (0.243)    (0.234)    (0.237)
                  Price ad                            0.0441**
                                                      (0.0198)
                  Fast fashion                                   0.0652***
                                                                 (0.0198)


                  log (N )                   YES        YES        YES
                  Country FE                 YES        YES        YES
                  Cat. FE                    YES        YES        YES
                  Observations                782       782         782
                  R2                         0.234     0.247       0.255
                  Notes: a Normalized clustered index that controls for
                 popular prices, price ranges, digit endings, and number
                 of products. Price advertising and fast fashion are bi-
                 nary indicators as described in the main text. Standard
                 errors clustered at the retailer-country level. *** p<0.01,
                 ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                             70
A.20      Price Adjustments




                                             15
                                             10
                                   Percent
                                             5
                                             0




                                                   0       .2           .4            .6           .8         1
                                                                              Share




                Figure 29: Changing shares of products in existing price buckets

Notes: For each retailer-category in the U.S. and the U.K. for which we have one year of data, we compare the
price distribution between summer 2017 vs. summer 2018. Histogram shows the portion of the change in the
price distribution that takes place via adjusting shares of products in the existing price buckets. Vertical line
depicts the median share.
                                              50
                                              40
                                              30
                                   Percent
                                              20
                                              10
                                              0




                                                   0   5        10     15      20       25         30    35
                                                                  Change in Median Price (%)

                                                                   Price Ad                No Price Ad




                                  Figure 30: Lumpy price adjustments

Notes: Shows the histogram of the absolute percentage change in the median price of the same country-retailer-
category, same month, between two consecutive years. For instance, one observation is the % change in the
median price in HM-Shoes (U.S.) between a given month in 2017 and the same month the following year.
Histogram computed separately for price advertising and non-price advertising retailers. Price changes above
an absolute 40% are removed.




                                                                        71
A.21             Law of one price
Figure 31 shows good-level deviations from the law of one price. Prices in the U.K. are
inclusive of VAT (value added tax). Therefore we adjust regular prices in the U.S. by the
average state sales tax of 5.1%. State-level sales taxes were obtained from the Tax Foundation.
The same product is matched between the U.S. and the U.K. online stores. We first restrict
to products introduced in the first price bucket in each retailer-category of the U.S. in May
2017. The first price bucket is defined as items within a 10% difference to the minimum price
in each group pair. This allows to compare whether products introduced in the lowest price
buckets in the U.S., were also introduced in similar price buckets in the U.K. Panel (a) in
Figure 31 shows that, in general, this is not the case. Products are introduced in a wide range
of cheaper and expensive prices in the U.K. This suggests that, as discussed in the main text,
costs are unlikely a mechanical cause to price clustering.



                                                                                   15
         25
         20




                                                                                   10
           15
    Percent




                                                                         Percent
         10




                                                                                   5
         5
         0




                                                                                   0




                .5   .6        .7         .8         .9   1   1.1                       -1   -.8   -.6    -.4   -.2    0    .2   .4   .6   .8   1
                                 Price UK / Price US                                                                  RER



                          (a) Products in bin 1                                                          (b) All products

                              Figure 31: Histogram of deviations to law of one price

Notes: Panel (a) shows a histogram of the ratio of the U.K. price to the U.S. price for all matched products. The
ratio is computed for items introduced in May 2017 in the lowest 10% price bin of each retailer-category in the
U.S. The vertical line depicts the average nominal £/$ exchange rate of 0.77. Panel (b) shows a histogram of the
good-level real exchange rate. Vertical line depicts the median log deviation.


       Panel (b) in Figure 31 extends the analysis to all products, price buckets, and time
periods. In this case, we compute the good-level real exchange rate (RER) for each good i ,
which is defined as RER i log( p i ,UK ) - eUS,UK - log( p i ,US ); where eUS,UK denotes the log
of the value of the (average monthly) nominal exchange rate between the US and the UK.


                                                                    72
Values close to 0 would indicate no deviation to the LOP. Once again, we find a large fraction
of items that differ in prices by over 0.3 log points. The mean and median absolute good-level
RER is 0.201 and and 0.196 log points, respectively. These are considered relatively large
deviations from the law of one price. See recent studies using micro data, e.g. Imbs, Mumtaz,
Ravn, and Rey (2005); Gopinath and Rigobon (2008); Cavallo, Neiman, and Rigobon (2014);
Gorodnichenko and Talavera (2017).




                                             73
