                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      REAL EFFECTS OF SEARCH FRICTIONS IN CONSUMER CREDIT MARKETS

                                        Bronson Argyle
                                       Taylor D. Nadauld
                                       Christopher Palmer

                                       Working Paper 26645
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26645


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020

We thank our discussants Paul Calem, Anthony DeFusco, Paul Goldsmith-Pinkahm, Steven
Laufer, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel; seminar, conference, and workshop participants
at Berkeley, Boston Federal Reserve, BYU, CFPB, Chicago Federal Reserve, Duke, FDIC,
Housing-Urban-Labor-Macro Conference, Imperial, LSF, MIT, NBER Household Finance,
NYU, OSU, Oxford, Philadelphia Federal Reserve, Red Rock Finance Conference, San Francisco
Federal Reserve, UNC, and the WFA; and John Campbell, Claire Celerier, Glenn Ellison,
Maryam Farboodi, Amy Finkelstein, Brigham Frandsen, Peter Ganong, Kyle Herkenhoff, Lars
Lefgren, Andres Liberman, Brigitte Madrian, Adrien Matray, Adair Morse, Holger Mueller,
Hoai-Luu Nguyen, Andrew Paciorek, Jonathan Parker, Brennan Platt, Tobias Salz, Amit Seru,
David Sraer, Bryce Stephens, Johannes Stroebel, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Stephen Zeldes, and
Jonathan Zinman for helpful conversations. Tommy Brown and Sam Hughes provided excellent
research assistance. Palmer thanks the Fisher Center for Real Estate and Urban Economics for
support. An anonymous information-technology firm provided the data. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26645.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Bronson Argyle, Taylor D. Nadauld, and Christopher Palmer. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Real Effects of Search Frictions in Consumer Credit Markets
Bronson Argyle, Taylor D. Nadauld, and Christopher Palmer
NBER Working Paper No. 26645
January 2020
JEL No. D12,D83,E43,G21,L11

                                          ABSTRACT

We establish two underappreciated facts about costly search. First, unless demand is perfectly
inelastic, search frictions can result in significant deadweight loss by decreasing consumption.
Second, whenever cross-price elasticities are non-zero, costly search in one market also affects
quantities in other markets. As predicted by our model of search for credit under elastic demand,
we show that search frictions in credit markets contribute to price dispersion, affect loan sizes,
and decrease final-goods consumption. Using microdata from millions of auto-loan applications
and originations not intermediated by car dealers, we isolate plausibly exogenous variation in
interest rates due to institution-specific pricing rules that price risk with step functions. These
within-lender discontinuities lead to substantial variation in the benefits of search across lenders
and distort extensive- and intensive-margin loan and car choices differentially in high- versus
low-search-cost areas. Our results demonstrate real effects of the costliness of shopping for credit
and the continued importance of local bank branches for borrower outcomes even in the mobile-
banking era. More broadly, we conclude that costly search affects consumption in both primary
and complementary markets.

Bronson Argyle                                   Christopher Palmer
Department of Finance                            MIT Sloan School of Management
Brigham Young University                         100 Main Street, E62-639
Provo, UT 84602                                  Cambridge, MA 02142
bsa@byu.edu                                      and NBER
                                                 cjpalmer@mit.edu
Taylor D. Nadauld
Department of Finance
Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah 84602
taylor.nadauld@byu.edu
1       Introduction
Some of the most important questions in household finance center around how credit-market
imperfections affect consumption.1 In this paper, we demonstrate the special role that
financing search frictions play in determining the equilibrium consumption of durables. When
demand is elastic, search frictions in one market not only affect equilibrium quantities in that
market but also the demand for complementary goods, resulting in an efficiency loss that is
obscured by popular search models' assumption of inelastic demand. We provide evidence
that costly search in consumer credit markets leads to interest-rate dispersion across similar
loans and can affect extensive- and intensive-margin loan and durable consumption choices.
To our knowledge, we are the first paper to quantify how search frictions affect consumption.
    We begin by extending a search model with elastic demand to a credit-market setting to
demonstrate theoretically how financing search costs could affect the distribution of markups,
equilibrium credit and durables outcomes, and welfare. Next, using administrative data on
2.4 million auto loans extended by 326 different financial institutions in every state and
loan application data on 1.3 million potential loans from 41 institutions, we establish four
main empirical facts.2 First, there is significant price dispersion for the same credit product
across providers--most borrowers in our data could access significantly dominating loan
offers if they queried two additional financial institutions. Second, such search appears costly,
and borrowers' propensity to search for loans with better terms is lower in areas likely to
have higher search costs. Third, the segment of the auto lending market we study does
not feature pure risk-based pricing; we observe large interest-rate discontinuities at various
lender-specific credit-score (FICO) thresholds. Fourth, consumer financing and durable-
goods purchasing decisions respond to the resulting interest-rate dispersion around these
lending thresholds more in high- versus low-search-cost areas.
    We focus on the market for automobile-secured loans for several reasons. The tight
link between credit-supply shocks and the demand for cars (Benmelech et al., 2017) gives
the car-loan market aggregate importance and a plausible setting to look for credit-market
search frictions affecting final-goods consumption. Auto debt is the third-largest category
of consumer debt (ranking ahead of credit cards), with over 114 million outstanding loans
(0.89 per U.S. household) comprising $1.32 trillion in aggregate auto debt (NY Fed, 2019).
Most car purchases are financed (Bartlett, 2013), and vehicles represent over 50% of total
    1
      See, for example, influential work on the role of adverse selection in consumer credit markets (Adams,
Einav, and Levin, 2009), the importance of credit constraints in explaining high marginal propensities to
borrow and consume out of credit (Gross and Souleles, 2002), and the inhibition of credit expansions to the
household sector (Scharfstein and Sunderam, 2016; Agarwal et al., 2017).
    2
      As noted by Allen, Clark, and Houde (2019), the ability to observe rejected price quotes afforded by
our application data is novel in the empirical search literature.


                                                     1
assets for low-wealth households (Campbell, 2006). From an empirical-design standpoint,
auto loans are a relatively homogeneous credit product and can be described completely by
their interest rate, term, and amount. Focusing on the large segment of used-car loans not
intermediated by the car seller allows us to test for credit- and product-market linkages in
a non-mechanical setting. Finally, auto loan markets are quite local. The median borrower
in our sample borrowing directly from a lender (as opposed to indirect loans originated via
auto dealers) originates a loan from a branch that is within a 15-minute drive of her home,
whereas the median worker in the United States commutes 26 minutes to work. The stylized
fact that direct auto loan markets are more local than labor markets motivates our inquiry
into the distortions that physical search frictions might cause in consumer debt markets.
    Our empirical strategy features a setting where potential gains to search are high and
quasi-randomly assigned. We document large discontinuities in offered loan terms around
FICO thresholds within lending institutions.3 On average, borrowers just above an insti-
tution's FICO threshold are offered loans with interest rates 1.27 percentage points lower
than otherwise similar borrowers just below a FICO threshold. Importantly, the location
of the thresholds along the FICO spectrum varies across institutions; while some thresholds
seem more popular than others, there is no consensus set of thresholds used by a plurality
of lenders. We further show that borrowers on the high-markup side of a threshold at one
institution are more likely to find a significantly better price from another draw of their local
price distribution than their fellow borrowers on the low-markup side at the same institution.
This within-lender, across-borrower variation in the returns to search provides a laboratory
to test how borrowers with a high return to additional search differentially change their
behavior in markets where search costs are high.
    Figure 1 provides examples of such interest-rate discontinuities for three different credit
unions in our data with detected discontinuities using the lending policy rule estimation
procedure described in section 6.2. As discussed in section 6.3 below, the observed FICO
thresholds isolate supply-side changes in loan characteristics from demand-driven factors
under the assumption that demand-side factors (e.g., preferences, income, financial sophisti-
cation) are not likely to also change discontinuously at quasi-random FICO thresholds that
vary across institutions within the same geography. Moreover, borrowers are unlikely to
know their precise FICO score that will be used in pricing or the location of pricing disconti-
nuities across lenders. We support this assumption of quasi-randomly assigned markups with
evidence that ex-ante borrower characteristics (including age, gender, ethnicity, application
debt-to-income ratio (DTI), application loan size, and the number of loan applications per

   3
     Lending policies that jump discontinuously at various FICO thresholds appear to exist in 173 of the
326 lending institutions in our sample.


                                                   2
FICO bin) are balanced around FICO thresholds.4
   We discuss potential aspects of shopping for a loan that may have particular utility
costs associated with them in section 7.1 below; the process often entails time, effort, and
stress--each of which may be in short supply while simultaneously shopping for a car. We
show that borrowers on the expensive side of FICO thresholds reject high-interest-rate loans
more often when the number of nearby alternative lenders is high. Using the physical branch
locations of every bank and credit union in the United States, we calculate the number of
financial institutions within a 20-minute drive from each borrower as a proxy for search
costs.5 We find that differences in loan take-up rates across FICO thresholds are smaller
for borrowers in high-search-cost areas. Borrowers who would presumably have to exert
more effort to search for a loan with better terms are more likely to accept the loan pricing
they are offered even though these terms are strongly dominated by nearby alternatives.
Matching borrowers across loan applications to different lenders, we verify that borrowers
are more likely to submit multiple loan applications when our search-cost measure is low.
These results on price dispersion and search behavior are inconsistent with a simple story
of market concentration leading to high markups, and we show in an appendix our results
hold even in relatively high-competition markets.
   What impact does sharp variation in loan pricing for otherwise identical borrowers have
on borrower outcomes? On average, borrowers quasi-randomly offered expensive credit pur-
chase cars that are two months older, spending an average of $345 less, with stronger effects
in high than low-search-cost areas. The balance of borrower characteristics across FICO
thresholds suggest that borrowers quasi-randomly drawing high loan markups would also
like to purchase a more expensive and newer car had they not been offered higher interest
rates. To attribute these conditional-on-origination consumption outcomes to search fric-
tions, we rule out selection in loan take-up correlated with borrower-level demand shocks
bu further verifying the balance of borrower characteristics and ex-post borrower outcomes.
Post-origination changes in credit scores and ex-post loan performance do not change dif-
ferentially across discontinuities, consistent with our theoretical model and suggesting that
borrowers who accept high markups are not likely to have fundamentally different constraints
or preferences. Taken together, our evidence suggests that search costs represent a meaning-
ful market friction that enables the persistence of equilibrium price dispersion and ultimately

   4
      To compare outcomes conditional on origination, we further demonstrate that borrower characteristics
and ex-post credit outcomes are also balanced across FICO thresholds in the origination sample.
    5
      In Appendix A, we consider a series of robustness tests to address potential omitted variables that could
be correlated with our measure of physical search costs. In Appendix B, we estimate search costs using the
structural search model of Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) to support our use of nearby lender density as a
measure of search costs.

                                                      3
distorts durable consumption.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. After contextualizing our work in several
related literatures in section 2, section 3 uses a model of costly search with elastic demand
for both loans and durables to make several empirical predictions motivating our empirical
analysis. Section 4 details the administrative data we use throughout the paper, including
an analysis of its representativeness. Section 5 documents price dispersion in the market
for auto loans. Section 6 introduces our regression-discontinuity identification strategy to
isolate exogenous variation in the benefits to search using lender pricing rules. In sections 7
and 8, respectively, we present evidence that consumers' propensity to search is correlated
with measures of search costs, and we estimate the effects of costly search on loan and
durable-purchase outcomes. Section 9 concludes.

2       Related Literature
In this section, we motivate our work in the context of literatures on search frictions, auto
loans, and FICO-based discontinuities.
    Theories of costly search since Stigler (1961) suggest that under many conditions, when
agents find it costly to solicit the full menu of offered prices, equilibrium prices will feature
price dispersion.6 In a credit market, for example, lenders can expect to originate loans at
positive markups because a randomly arriving borrower will not exert effort sufficient to find
better rates given the equilibrium distribution of interest rates. Much of the follow-up to the
original Stigler (1961) model modeled sequential search by shoppers with full information
about the distribution of available prices (e.g., Stahl, 1989). Particularly relevant is the
model of Reinganum (1979) we build on below that generates price dispersion without the
search-cost heterogeneity required by Stahl (1989) by assuming inelastic demand and seller-
cost heterogeneity.
    Several recent papers feature alternative formulations of consumer search. De Los Santos,
Hortaçsu, and Wildenbeest (2012) examine online shopping behavior and find support for
fixed sample size search instead of the optimal stopping rule of sequential search models.
Ellison and Ellison (2009) present evidence consistent with sellers obfuscating to increase
search costs via the opacity of the product characteristics and prices menu. Zhu (2012)
models the penalty buyers or sellers may face when they return to a previously obtained
quote and thereby signal the level of surplus in the transaction. Salz (2017) demonstrates
the welfare effects of intermediaries in search markets. While our setting does not allow us
to cleanly distinguish between competing models of search, our estimated gains from search

    6
    For a comprehensive survey of the theoretical and empirical search and price dispersion literature, see
Baye, Morgan, and Scholten (2006).


                                                    4
exceed typical measures of the opportunity cost of time, suggesting perhaps that potential
borrowers are unaware of the degree of price dispersion in the auto-loan market.
   Multiple empirical papers establish the existence of equilibrium price dispersion and
connect it to evidence that consumer search is costly in a given domain--see Baye, Morgan,
and Scholten (2006) for an overview. Relevant to our use of natural variation in the returns
to search, Sorenson (2000) documents dispersion in prices of prescription drugs that are
driven by variation in the financial return to greater search intensity. In consumer finance,
Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) find large dispersion in the fees charged by mutual funds
tracking the same index that are driven by search frictions. Woodward and Hall (2012)
document that mortgage borrowers overpay for mortgage broker services due to a reluctance
to shop for mortgages. In a series of papers on the Canadian mortgage market, Allen,
Clark, and Houde (2014a, 2014b, 2019) document price dispersion, demonstrate its response
to market concentration, and quantify the consumer surplus loss from inelastic borrowers
paying higher prices. Alexandrov and Koulayev (2017) also document price dispersion in
mortgage rates and provide survey evidence that close to half of consumers do not shop
for a mortgage before origination and are generally unaware of price dispersion.7 Stango
and Zinman (2015) use a self-reported measure of shopping intensity to explain variation in
price dispersion in the credit-card market. Relative to the literature on price dispersion and
search intensity that often models consumers as having inelastic demand for a final good,
our setting allows for measurement of the real effects on consumption quantities that can
result from costly search.
    Recent work by Agarwal et al. (2019) shows that in the cross section, intensive loan
search is correlated with higher interest rates, running counter to the standard prediction
that search and selected prices are inversely correlated. Agarwal et al. (2019) explain this
with a model of borrower private information about the returns to search--low credit-worthy
borrowers search until they find a lender who offers them an advantageous interest rate,
albeit higher than the rates offered without search to (observably) high-quality borrowers.
In our setting, the quasi-random assignment of our regression-discontinuity design effectively
allows us to abstract away from cross-sectional variation in private information and rely on
the conceptual argument that for a given borrower, the relationship between search and
interest rates should be negative.
    We are not the first paper to exploit FICO-based discontinuities in treatment variables.
Keys et al. (2009 and 2010) find that the probability of securitization (and thus loan screen-

   7
    See also related evidence in Adams, Hunt, Palmer, and Zaliauskas (2019) and Bhutta, Fuster, and
Hizmo (2019) that many consumers underestimate the benefits and overestimate the costs of shopping for
deposit products and mortgages, respectively.

                                                  5
ing) changes discontinuously at a FICO score of 620. Bubb and Kaufman (2014) provide
evidence for other discrete FICO thresholds in the mortgage underwriting process, including
detailing the likely genesis of threshold-based policies. More recently, Laufer and Paciorek
(2016) evaluate the consequences of minimum credit-score thresholds for mortgage lending,
Agarwal et al. (2017) use FICO-based discontinuities in credit limits to estimate heterogene-
ity in marginal propensities to borrow and lend, and Aneja and Avenancio-León (2019) use
credit-score discontinuities to document that ex-convicts with higher credit limits are less
likely to recidivate. Building on this collection of papers that use FICO-based discontinu-
ities as natural experiments or explicitly study their consequences, we are the first to identify
credit-score-based discontinuities in pricing rules and to link those discontinuities to price
dispersion, costly consumer search, and effects on final-good consumption.
   Finally, we contribute to a growing literature studying the automobile-loan market and
the frictions therein, including Attanasio, Goldberg, and Kyriazidou (2008), Adams, Einav,
and Levin (2009), Busse and Silva-Risso (2010), Einav, Jenkins, and Levin (2012 and 2013),
and Grunewald, Lanning, Low, and Salz (2019). Two companion papers use a similar dataset
to study the importance of loan maturity and payment sizes in the market for cars and car
loans. Argyle, Nadauld, Pratt, and Palmer (2018) find that payment-size shocks arising
from shocks to maturity affect bargaining outcomes and are capitalized into transaction
prices. Argyle, Nadauld, and Palmer (2019) document behavioral frictions associated with
household debt decision making, showing that even unconstrained households make high-
stakes debt decisions based on a monthly category-specific household budget. In contrast, in
this paper, we focus on the industrial organization of local credit markets, highlighting the
importance of search frictions in sustaining price dispersion and documenting how interest-
rate markups affect substitution patterns in the market for cars. In at least one respect,
the identification strategies of Argyle et al. (2018) and Argyle et al. (2019) rely on the
search frictions documented in this paper; the various nonlinear lender policies exploited for
identification by those papers would have no effect in a perfectly competitive market where
consumers are fully informed of all prices.

3    Search Model with Elastic Demand
In this section, we illustrate how search frictions in the market for one good can reduce
consumption in both that market and the market for complements, lowering aggregate wel-
fare. We study the specific case of costly search in a credit market and consider downstream
effects on durable consumption, but our results apply more broadly to the demand for any
complementary products. As emphasized above, most of the modern empirical search lit-
erature--including recent work on consumer credit--assumes inelastic consumer demand.


                                               6
Instead, we extend the elastic-demand search model of Reinganum (1979) to a credit-market
setting.8 We then demonstrate that in this model, an increase in search costs leads to higher
interest-rate markups, smaller loan sizes, and less durable consumption being purchased.
Finally, we highlight the welfare loss from search frictions that is obscured by models which
assume inelastic demand. Applying this model to our specific empirical setting, we map our
identification strategy to objects in the model to generate a set of empirical predictions that
we test below.
Borrowers
A set of borrowers with measure 1 are ex-ante identical with indirect utility U that is quasi-
linear in wealth W and depends on the prices of loans r and durable goods p. Indirect utility
is given by
                                       U (r, p, W ) = V (r, p) + W,                                        (1)

where V (·, ·) is the indirect utility of consuming the consumption bundle of loan and durables
chosen when facing prices r and p.9 However, instead of inelastic demand, we assume that
demand for loans and durables slope downwards such that V (·, ·) is strictly decreasing in
both its arguments. Further distinct from many search models, note that we do not implicitly
assume the cross-price elasticities to be zero. In our setting, for example, it is likely that
car loans and car services are strong complements. Without loss of generality, we model
the demand curves for loans and durables resulting from borrower utility maximization as
having constant own- and cross-price elasticities. This means individual demand for loans q
can be represented as
                                          q (r, p) = a · rr · prp ,                                        (2)
and demand for durables x can be represented as x(p, r) = b · pp · rpr .10 Assuming loans and
durables are normal goods (i.e., with positive income elasticities), r and p will be negative
given that V (·, ·) is downward sloping in demand such that as interest rates or prices fall,
borrowers will take out larger loans q and consume more durables x. Given that the set of
borrowers is measure 1, q (·, ·) and x(·, ·) also represent market demand curves.

Borrower Search Borrowers know the distribution of interest rates F (·) on a closed in-
terval of support [r, r] but not the precise location of each rate. Borrowers can access every
   8
       In the model of Reinganum (1979), elastic demand combined with cost heterogeneity on the seller side
is sufficient to support price dispersion in equilibrium even without Stahl-like (1989) heterogeneity in search
costs. Because of elastic demand, sellers still offer dispersed prices even though sellers know buyers' search
costs and reservation prices.
     9
       As in other models of search for financing, we abstract away from credit risk for clarity.
    10
       We represent durables as a composite good x mapping all durable goods onto a scalar measure of durable
consumption.


                                                      7
lender by drawing uniformly from the distribution of lenders but incur a search cost k for
each quote they obtain. When their current quote is r0 , the expected utility gain of one
additional search is              Z     r0
                                             [V (r, p)   V (r0 , p)]dF (r)   k.                         (3)
                                    r

As shown by De Groot (1970) and Lippman and McCall (1976) in this setup, optimal search
behavior will constitute a reservation price m(k ) above which borrowers will be unwilling to
take out a loan and below which, demand will be given by (2). Absent any cost of obtaining
an additional price quote, all borrowers would be able to find the lowest-cost provider offering
r.
  Characterizing the gains from search using the indirect utility function in (3) is important.
When there is elastic demand and negative cross-price elasticities, estimators that infer k
purely from price dispersion (e.g., Hong and Shum, 2006) will be biased estimates of true
search costs. For example, in our setting, replacing the indirect utility terms V (r, p) V (r0 , p)
in the integrand with r r0 will implicitly assume that the only consequence of failing to
search is paying a higher markup. However, when demand is elastic, the utility loss associated
with a given markup will be different from the size of the markup itself. Intuitively, given
that the consequence of a higher price paid for one good also includes the utility loss from
lower consumption of complementary goods, the search cost need to rationalize equilibrium
markups is larger than would be suggested by the size of that markup in isolation. In our
specific setting, inferring search costs simply from the distribution of markups would fail to
account for the fact that the borrower would be paying both the interest rate markup and
the disutility of a cheaper and older car.
Lenders
A continuum of lenders indexed j 2 J with J having measure 1 are otherwise identical
but each have constant marginal costs cj per $1 lent, which are continuously distributed
according to distribution function G(·) with positive density almost everywhere on a closed
interval of support [c, c] and c > c.11 Without loss of generality, assume c  cr /(1 + r ).12
Lenders are perfectly informed of k , m(k ), and F (·). Their objective is to choose an interest




  11
      We assume a continuum of lenders such that perfect competition would prevail in the absence of search
costs. In our setting, it is straightforward to imagine lenders with heterogeneous costs of lending based on
heterogeneity in deposit competition, etc.
   12
      Below, we show that this condition ensures that all lenders participate in the market in equilibrium.
Otherwise, some lenders would exit because their marginal costs would exceed borrowers' reservation price,
in which case the statement could be made about the support of remaining lenders' costs.

                                                          8
rate rj to maximize expected profits j , given by
                                8
                                <(r      cj )q (rj , p)E (Nj ) for rj  m(k )
                                     j
                   max E (j ) =                                                                    (4)
                    rj          :0                             for rj > m(k )
where Nj is the mass of borrowers that each take out q (rj ) in debt from lender j when facing
rj .
Equilibrium
This setup lends itself to a pure-strategy Nash Equilibrium defined by a profit-maximizing
lender pricing rule rj 
                        , an optimal borrower reservation price m(k ), and a distribution of
interest-rates Fm(k) (r) generated by firms' optimal pricing rule with credit-market price dis-
persion arising from the cost heterogeneity of firms and the elasticity of demand.13 Here, we
offer a sketch of the proof as it closely follows Reinganum (1979).
    Fixing p, the borrower search indifference condition pins down the reservation price m(k ),
which satisfies             Z    m(k)
                                        [V (r, p)   V (m(k ), p)]dFm(k) (r) = k,                   (5)
                             r

where Fm(k) (r) is the endogenous distribution of interest rates given reservation price m(k ).
Note that (5) means that in equilibrium, the reservation price will depend not only on search
costs, but also in how interest rates paid affect the utility received from the corresponding
loan sizes and durable consumption through V (·, ·).
   By De Groot (1970), there exists an optimal reservation price in this setting given firms'
prices corresponding to optimal borrower search behavior. In equilibrium, firms will not
charge above this reservation price and, given the borrower search indifference condition (5),
markups will adjust such that each borrower will be indifferent between searching again and
accepting the first randomly queried rate quote. Accordingly, borrowers will be uniformly
distributed across lenders and, given the relative measures of the sets of borrowers and
lenders, E (Nj ) = 1. The lender's problem is then
                                                                      r rp
                                  max E (j ) = max (rj          cj )arj p                          (6)
                                    rj                rj

whenever rj  m(k ). Holding durables prices p fixed, the first-order condition for (6) is
satisfied when rj = cj r /(1 + r ). However, because lenders face zero demand and make zero
profits when offering an interest rate rj > m(k ), lenders charge
                                 8
                                 < c j r   if cj r /(1 + r ) < m(k )
                             
                            rj = r +1                                .
                                 :m(k ) if c  /(1 +  ) m(k )
                                                      j r        r

  13
    Note that while many of the predictions of our model could be generated by a model of oligopolistic
competition, such models do generally not feature price dispersion.


                                                           9
Given that c  cr /(1 + r ), all firms will make positive profits and no firms will exit. This
pricing rule induces a continuous distribution of equilibrium interest rates in the market
almost-everywhere on [r, m(k )] with a point mass at r = m(k ) and a CDF given by
                                 8
                                 <G[r(1 +  )/ ] for r  r < m(k )
                                            r  r
                     Fm(k) (r) =                                     .                 (7)
                                 :1                 for r = m(k )
Given the distribution of interest rates (7) resulting from firms' best response to borrow-
ers' reservation price, (5) holds, borrowers will not deviate from their reservation prices,
and borrowers will have insufficient incentive to search further given search costs k . Each
borrower will originate a loan of size q (rj
                                           
                                             , p) with j drawn randomly from J . Then for a
given search cost k , the reservation price, the pricing rule, and the interest-rate distribution
         
(m(k ), rj , Fm(k) (·)) constitute an equilibrium.
Welfare Consequences of Costly Search
Unlike standard search models with inelastic demand, the equilibrium markups described
above will be characterized by an aggregate welfare loss relative to the zero-search-frictions
case. The deadweight loss has three components in our setting. First, because of each lender's
monopoly power, Bertrand pricing fails and lenders other than the lowest-cost lender are
able to survive in equilibrium. Second, each lender is able to mark up her cost cj to charge
monopoly prices r (cj ). Third, because of elastic demand, each borrower demands less than
she would if she faced r = c. The deadweight loss is the difference between the surplus under
the first best and the surplus under the costly search equilibrium and is given by
                    Z c Z q(c,p)                      Z c Z q(r (c),p)
           DW L =                (r(q ) c) dqdG(c) +                   (c c) dqdG(c)      (8)
                      c   q (r  (c),p)                     c   0

where r(q ) is inverse demand, q (c, p) is the quantity lent by a monopolistic lender with
                                         m

constant marginal cost c, and q  (c, p) is the quantity that would prevail under perfect com-
petition with interest rates set to the lowest cost provider's marginal cost c. The outer
integral of each term aggregates the deadweight loss over all lenders' marginal costs, dis-
tributed according to measure G(·).
    Figure 2 illustrates the division of surplus and welfare loss given a single lender with cost cj
charging the monopolist's price rj (cj ) using a logarithmic scale for ease of exposition. Under
the first best, lenders other than the lowest-cost provider exit and r = c such that borrower
surplus is the triangle bounded by log inverse demand log r(q ) and the horizontal line log r =
log c. Without search costs, given the large number of lenders, perfect competition would
prevail and there would be no lender surplus. Under the costly search equilibrium, borrowers
arriving at lender j face an interest rate of rj (cj ), demand q (rj (cj ), p), and have the borrower
surplus labeled BS in Figure 2. Under costly search, lenders would earn a lender surplus of

                                                 10
monopoly rents denoted LS in Figure 2 equal to log q (rj (cj ), p)  (log rj (cj )   log cj ) where
the first term is the monopolist's markup and the second term is the monopolist's quantity.
This non-zero lender surplus under costly search provides a positive rationale for sellers to
endogenously differentiate, obfuscate, or otherwise increase switching or search costs (see
also Ellison and Ellison, 2009; Allen, Clark, and Houde, 2019; Adams et al., 2019).
    The first term in (8) is the usual Harberger's triangle bounded by the demand curve
and the marginal cost curve between the monopolistic equilibrium quantity and the efficient
quantity. The inside integral of this term is labeled DW LA in Figure 2 and represents the
deadweight loss from loan sizes that are smaller than the first best given marginal costs cj
because of search-cost­induced markups. The outside integral of this first term adds the
region denoted DW LB in Figure 2, which is the additional surplus lost from the first-best
quantity and price being even higher and lower, respectively, than when the borrowers can
find the lowest-cost lender. Note that when demand is inelastic as in many search models,
q (c, p) = q (r (c), p) for all c 2 [c, c] such that there is no aggregate welfare loss from too
little quantity being consumed due to search frictions, simply lost consumer surplus from
the transfer from buyers to sellers as in Allen, Clark, and Houde (2019).
    The second term in (8) is the loss of surplus from the inefficiency of lenders other than
the lowest-cost provider lending q (r (c), p) and is denoted DW LC in Figure 2. Because
interest rates would be lower in the first-best equilibrium, even the inframarginal q (r (c), p)
dollars that are lent out in both the first best and the costly search equilibrium provide lower
aggregate surplus under costly search. Some of this would be a transfer from borrowers to
lenders (rj (cj ) cj ) and is the source of the lender surplus, but some of it would be lost
altogether (cj c).

3.1       Comparative Statics and Testable Predictions
We use the context of the model above to establish several comparative statics that will
serve as predictions for our empirical work.14 Notably, several of the predictions below
are inconsistent with models of imperfect competition arising from market concentration.
In particular, while high market concentration can sustain markups in many equilibrium
models (and thereby affect complementary demand), such models do not generally feature
price dispersion across sellers for a single borrower type. Conversely, search costs need
not generate price dispersion--see, for example, the Diamond (1971) Paradox, wherein all
sellers charge the monopoly price. However, even in models where search does not cause
price dispersion, the comparative statics below that show quantity distortions from the
combination of markups and elastic demand would still hold. Still, that we do find price

  14
       In what follows, we hold the unit price of durables p fixed.


                                                       11
dispersion is useful for distinguishing search and market concentration explanations for our
findings.

Price dispersion and loan markups increasing in search costs If search costs are
exogenously higher for all borrowers in a market, then the amount of price dispersion rises
because m(k ) is increasing in k . To see this note that for k 0 > k , the corresponding reservation
price m(k 0 ) must still satisfy
                           Z m(k0 )
                                    [V (r, p) V (m(k 0 ), p)]dFm(k0 ) (r) = k 0 .                (9)
                              r

Given that V (r, p) V (m(k ), p) > 0 since V is decreasing in its first argument and r < m(k ),
this equation will only be satisfied for k 0 > k for m(k 0 ) > m(k ). Price dispersion should
therefore be higher in markets where search costs are higher. Given that a smaller range
of pure monopolistic markups rj  
                                   are censored by the reservation price, this means average
markups are weakly increasing in search costs and strictly increasing for a strictly positive
mass of lenders with costs satisfying m(k ) < cj r /(1 + r ), i.e., costs sufficiently high to be
censored by reservation price m(k ).15
    In the empirical section below, we proxy for the search costs kg of consumers in market
g using the density of nearby lenders. For markets characterized by a low number of nearby
lenders for the typical consumer, we hypothesize search costs will be higher. Our model
therefore predicts that price dispersion will be greater and average loan markups will be
higher in such areas relative to areas with a large number of nearby lenders.

Loan sizes decreasing in search costs Given that credit demand q (r, p) is decreasing
in r, the increase in markups generated by an increase in search costs decreases loan sizes.
Accordingly, in markets with fewer and geographically dispersed lenders, our model predicts
that loan sizes should be smaller.

Durables consumption decreasing in search costs Given that the demand for durables
x(p, r) is also decreasing in r, the increase in markups generated by an increase in search
costs decreases durable consumption. Thus, in higher search-cost places, we predict that
purchased car quality should be lower.

Welfare loss increasing in search costs and the elasticity of demand Using the
expression for deadweight loss in (8), we can demonstrate that the aggregate welfare loss from

  15
     One caveat in this setting is that if the reservation price is never binding, i.e., m(k ) > rr /(1 + r ),
then markups will be invariant to k and will depend only on demand elasticities.


                                                     12
search frictions will be increasing in search costs. Given that demand is strictly downward
sloping in interest rates, we have that inverse demand r(q ) > c whenever q < q (c, p) such that
the inner integrand in the first term of (8) is positive over the limits of the integral. Because
each lender's markups are weakly increasing in search costs, q (r (c), p) weakly decreases as
k increases, and the first term in the deadweight loss expression grows. Intuitively, as search
costs rise, lenders are able to charge larger markups, and because borrowers dislike both high
interest rates and the lower levels of durable consumption they end up with in equilibrium
when interest rates are high, utility falls. By the same argument, the second term of the (8)
is decreasing in k . However, because r(q ) > c for all q , the first term increases by more than
the second term decreases.
   The amount of welfare loss is also increasing in the elasticity of demand. As r increases,
demand becomes more sensitive to changes in prices and the gap between the limits of
the inner integral in the first term (8) grows. Moreover, the stronger the complementarity
between credit and durables, the larger the welfare loss from search. Given that demand
for cars falls when interest rates are higher, the cross-price elasticity of demand for cars
with respect to interest rates pr is negative. This means that indirect utility decreases with
markups both because borrowers dislike high interest rates and because they like durables.
Accordingly, as pr increases in magnitude, the costliness of higher interest rates is a larger
drop in durable consumption resulting in a larger deadweight loss.

Market shares invariant to markups when search costs are high When search
costs are sufficiently high, the Nash equilibrium described above will entail myopic shopping
with consumers borrowing from the first lender they query. Market shares will thus be
similar across lenders and invariant to markups. When search costs are sufficiently low,
lenders with higher markups will be punished with lower market shares. In the limit of
perfect competition, lenders with positive markups will have zero market share. We note,
however, that in practice other dimensions of product differentiation may prevent the exit
of higher-markup lenders. For example, our model provides a positive rationale for firms
to endogenously undertake obfuscation efforts as in Ellison and Ellison (2009) or invest in
brand loyalty effects as in Allen, Clark, and Houde (2019) to inhibit search across products
and capture the lender surplus depicted in Figure 2.

3.2    Identification
A challenge with evaluating the above predictions empirically is unobserved heterogeneity
across high- and low-search-cost areas. The ideal experiment would randomly assign search
costs across markets for identification. Instead, if we observe that loan sizes and car purchase


                                               13
prices are smaller in low-search-cost markets, this could be due to other unobserved demand
factors potentially correlated with search cost proxies, such as credit limits, income, financial
literacy, and preferences.
     To address this challenge, we will focus on quasi-experimental variation that randomly
assigns the first rate quote borrowers receive to be high or low, as we detail in section 6. This
approach essentially exploits variation in r0 in equation (3) to induce exogenous variation
among otherwise identical borrowers' returns to search. When search costs are low, the
first quote should not matter: given the equilibrium search conditions above, borrowers will
have a relatively low reservation price and markups will be lower. In other words, in low-
search-cost markets, we expect ex-ante identical consumers to have relatively similar ex-post
credit-market and product-market outcomes. In high-search-cost areas, borrowers will face
higher markups, but their high search costs will prevent them from searching further. Given
their downward sloping demand functions for loans and cars, these search-cost-supported
higher markups should lead consumers to have lower loan sizes and purchase prices.
    By comparing ex-ante identical borrowers in the same market, we can rule out demand
shifters correlated with search costs that affect the level of loan sizes and consumption.
Moreover, our regression-discontinuity tests in section 6.3 support the identifying exclusion
restriction that borrowers with different initial interest-rate quotes r0 on either side of rate
discontinuities are similar across a wide set of observables. If search costs are the driving
factor, then we would expect that being assigned a high r0 versus a low r0 should be of
less consequence in high versus low-search-cost markets. This strategy allows us to causally
attribute any difference in the difference between high- and low-markup borrowers across
low- and high-search-cost areas to search costs.

4        Data
We analyze the loan contract terms and auto purchasing decisions of 2.4 million individ-
ual borrowers in the United States from 326 retail lending institutions between 2005 and
2016. The loan data are provided by a technology firm that provides administrative data
warehousing and analytics services to retail-oriented lending institutions nationwide. The
majority of the loans in our data (98.5%) were originated by credit unions ranging between
$100 million and $4 billion in asset size, with the remainder originated by non-bank finance
companies.16 Borrowers from all 50 states are represented in the data, but the five largest
states in the data are Washington, Texas, California, Minnesota, and Tennessee.
    The dataset contains information capturing all three stages of a loan's life: application,

    16
     Our results are unchanged if we exclude loans from finance companies, which are generally of lower
credit quality.


                                                  14
origination, and ex-post performance, although we have loan application data for only ap-
proximately 1.3 million loans from 41 different institutions. The available loan application
data report borrower characteristics (ethnicity, age, gender, FICO scores, and debt-to-income
(DTI) ratios at the time of application), whether a loan application was approved or denied,
and whether it was subsequently withdrawn or originated. For originated loans, the data
additionally include information on loan amounts, loan terms, car purchase prices, and collat-
eral characteristics. Using Vehicle Identification Numbers (VINs), we learn about the make,
model and model year of the purchased car. We restrict our sample to direct loans (not
intermediated by a dealer) in an effort to address concerns that indirect loans are potentially
endogenously steered to specific financial institutions (perhaps because car dealers become
aware of lenders' pricing rules over time).17 Finally, to measure ex-post loan performance,
we observe a snapshot of the number of days each borrower is delinquent, whether individual
loans have been charged off, and updated borrower credit scores as of the date of our data
extract.
    Panels A, B, and C of Table 1 present summary statistics on loan applications, loan
originations, and measures of ex-post performance, respectively. As reported in Panel A of
Table 1, the median loan application in our data seeks approval for a six-year $20,000 loan at
a median interest rate of 4.00%.18 Borrowers applying for loans in our data have an average
credit score of 648 and an average DTI ratio of 26.0%. The percentage of loans approved
is 50.2%, with 65% of the approved borrowers subsequently originating a loan. Throughout
the paper we refer to the number of loans originated divided by the number of applications
approved for a particular group as the loan take-up rate. Panel B of Table 1 reports summary
statistics on loan originations. Compared with loan applications, originated loans have
smaller average sizes, similar interest rates, shorter terms, and are from more creditworthy
and less constrained borrowers. Average monthly payments for originated loans are $324 per
month with an interquartile range of $195.
    Panel C tabulates measures of ex-post loan performance. While the average loan is 23.4
days delinquent, most loans are current; the 75th percentile of days delinquent is zero and
only 2.1% of loans have been charged off (i.e., accounted as unrecoverable by the lender).
Defining default as a loan that is at least 90 days delinquent, default rates average 2.2%.
In untabulated results, we find that the default rate for sub-600 FICO borrowers is 6.8%,

  17
      The terms direct and indirect loans refer, respectively, to whether the borrower applied for a loan
directly to the lending institution or through an auto dealership that then sent the loan application to
lending institutions on the buyer's behalf. See Appendix Table A1 for summary statistics for the excluded
indirect loans.
   18
      Interest rates in the loan application data refer to approved loans, whether they were subsequently
originated or not.


                                                   15
compared to a default rate of 2.6% for borrowers with FICOs between 600 and 700 and 1.6%
for over-700 FICO borrowers. Lending institutions periodically check the credit score of their
borrowers subsequent to loan origination, creating a novel feature of our data. Summary
statistics for  FICO represent percent changes in borrowers' FICO scores from the time
of origination to the lender's most recent (soft) pull of their FICO score.19 Updated FICO
scores indicate that borrowers on average experienced a 1% reduction in FICO score since
origination, although borrowers with FICO scores below 600 on average realized a 5.7%
increase in FICO score.

Data Representativeness The bulk of our auto loan data come from credit unions and
seem broadly representative of that lending segment. Experian data from 2015 indicates that
credit unions originated 22% of all used car loan originations and 10% of new car originations
in the United States. In the auto loan data made available to our data provider by its
clients, roughly half are direct loans. Data from the New York Federal Reserve Consumer
Credit Panel (CCP) suggests that auto loans originated by credit unions and banks have
substantially lower default rates compared to loans originated by auto finance companies.
We discuss issues associated with online lending in section A.3.
    Credit-union borrowers do differ slightly from the average U.S. adult. Our sample con-
tains borrowers who are slightly older, less racially diverse, and of a higher average credit
quality than national averages. Over 41% of borrowers in our sample were between 45 and
65 years old at origination whereas 34% of the adult U.S. population is between the ages
of 45­65. Roughly 73% of our sample is estimated to be white, compared to an estimated
65% of adults in the 2015 American Community Survey.20 Borrowers in our data report
median FICO scores at origination of 711 over the full 2005-2016 sample period. The CCP
reports median FICO scores for originated auto loans of 695 during the period our sample
was collected. The representativeness of our sample should not limit our ability to draw
inference given that we rely on a regression discontinuity (RD) design that leans crucially
on an assumption of smoothness in borrower demographics across discontinuities at a given
institution. However, it is possible that the search behavior of the segment we study differs
from other segments of the population. That said, while borrowers in our data may have
different search costs than non-credit-union borrowers, our data still constitutes a very large
set of auto-loan borrowers.

  19
      The time between FICO queries varies by institution, but institutions that provide updated FICO
scores do so at least once a year such that conditional on having an updated FICO score, the amount of
time between the original FICO recording and the current FICO is roughly equal to loan age.
   20
      Borrowers do not report race at the time of loan origination, but most lenders in our sample estimate
minority status to document compliance with fair lending standards.


                                                    16
     A final external-validity issue involves the distribution of loan originations through time.
Over 70% of loan originations in our sample occurred between 2012 and 2015, despite a
sample period that runs from 2005 to 2016. The large increase in loans through time reflects
the increase in the client base of our data provider through time rather than auto credit
origination in general. CCP data shows that auto loan originations in the general population
have increased through time as well, from an aggregate outstanding balance of $725 billion in
Q1 2005 to just over $1.15 trillion in Q4 2016, but not at the rate reflected in our dataset. We
view the non-representative time series of our data as less relevant given our cross-sectional
identification strategy.

5        Documenting Price Dispersion
The model in section 3 describes sufficient conditions for equilibrium price dispersion to
persist in a credit market: heterogeneity in lender costs, positive search costs for borrow-
ers, and elastic borrow demand for credit. Under these assumptions, the distribution of
interest rates Fm(k) (·) defined in (7) will be nondegenerate and the law of one price will not
hold. Empirically diagnosing a market with dispersed prices requires ruling out any prod-
uct differentiation, i.e., establishing that differences in prices truly represent identical goods
being sold for different prices in the same market. While our main results rely on quasi-
experimental variation for identification, in this section, we provide evidence that significant
dispersion persists in the market for car loans even after nonparametrically controlling for
many dimensions of product heterogeneity.
     For any given borrower with an observable set of attributes, we estimate the spread
between that borrower's interest rate and the lowest available interest rate at another lender
in our data for another borrower with very similar attributes. To calculate this spread, we
group borrowers in the same Commuting Zone (CZ), six-month transaction date window,
five-point FICO bin, $1,000 purchase-price bin, loan maturity, and 10 percentage-point DTI
bin. We consider loans originated to borrowers within the same CZ  quarter  price 
FICO  maturity  DTI cell to be observably identical.21 Although there may be some
degree of residual heterogeneity within a cell, the magnitude of the variation we find is
sufficiently large that it would be difficult to explain solely with remaining borrower-level
heterogeneity within these borrower types. In particular, in roughly half of borrower-type
cells, the best rate in the cell is achieved by a borrower with a lower FICO and higher DTI
than other borrowers in the cell, suggesting that any coarseness in our borrower typology

    21
     While many borrowers in our data are in singleton cells (for whom we cannot calculate price dispersion)
because of the strictness of our matching criteria, the richness of our data coverage across hundreds of
providers provides us with thousands of cells with multiple borrowers.

                                                    17
cannot explain the residual rate variation. Moreover, our RD design below also establishes
the existence of large pricing disparities for arbitrarily similar credit risks. Note, too, that
because we do not observe interest-rate offers from lenders that are not clients of our data
provider, these spreads are lower bounds as having the universe of interest rates offered to a
given cell could only weakly decrease the best available rate for each type.
    Figure 3 plots the density of the spread to the best available rate in percentage points for
the 54% of borrowers who did not attain the best rate in their cell. The mean and median of
this distribution are 234 and 125 basis points, respectively. Including the 46% of borrowers
who are getting the best available rate given their borrower type, the average borrower in our
data is thus paying 1.3 percentage points more than an observationally equivalent borrower
at the same time in the same place. Simulating random markup draws from the distribution
implied by the density in Figure 3, we find that the average borrower would need to obtain
three price quotes to find the best available rate for that borrower's type.

Exclusivity of Credit Unions A credit union is a member-owned cooperative financial
institution that provides members with financial services. To satisfy the membership re-
quirement, credit unions typically incorporate a brief membership application into their loan
applications and require eventual borrowers to open a deposit account with a nominal mini-
mum balance. Because credit-union membership eligibility is often restricted to well-defined
groups, one concern is whether a given borrower could have joined the credit union providing
the corresponding best available rate in our data. For example, if the lowest available inter-
est rate for a particular cell was offered by a firefighters' credit union, then the borrower's
search cost to obtain an offer from such a credit union would not only involve finding the low
rate but also the costs associated with becoming a firefighter. To address this concern, we
recalculate the spread-to-lowest-available rate measures using a sample comprised entirely of
credit unions whose primary membership requirement is residence in a specified geographic
area. In other words, all borrowers in our CZ-based matched portfolios are eligible to become
a member at any of the credit unions included in their cell by virtue of living in the same
CZ as others in their cell. Our results are nearly identical after making this restriction. We
also note that the finance companies in our sample have no membership requirements.

6    Isolating Variation in the Benefits to Search
In this section, we introduce an empirical strategy designed to identify exogenous variation in
the benefits to search, which we will use subsequently to estimate the impact of costly search
on equilibrium outcomes in both credit and durables markets. We first isolate exogenous
variation in markups within lender and then demonstrate that such variation is predictive of


                                              18
the returns to search across lenders. As noted, individual-level heterogeneity in transacted
prices could be correlated with unobserved heterogeneity in search costs or taste shocks that
could plausibly be correlated with other outcomes or product characteristics. To address
this while estimating the effect of search-cost­induced markups on outcomes, we exploit
quasi-experimental within-lender markup variation in our data that serves as a laboratory
where the potential gains to search are quasi-randomly assigned across borrowers.
   Our regression-discontinuity (RD) design assigns otherwise nearly identical borrowers to
high or low offered interest rates. According to equation (3), a prospective borrower will
continue to search given initial quote r0 if the expected utility gain from searching exceeds
her search cost k . Facing a high initial quote r0 should be relatively inconsequential for
borrowers in markets with low search costs. Borrowers with high and low initial quotes r0
should have similar loan and durable-consumption outcomes in low-search-cost markets both
because such borrowers treated with high-markup initial quotes should be willing to search,
and because, as a result, equilibrium markups in low-search-cost markets should be smaller.
In high-search-cost markets, however, markups should be larger and borrowers should be
more reticent to undo them by searching more such that rate discontinuities should have
stronger effects on search behavior and borrowing and consumption outcomes in high versus
low-search-cost markets.

6.1    Detecting Discontinuities
Lenders make underwriting and loan pricing decisions based on information observable
("hard") and unobservable ("soft") to the econometrician (Liberti and Petersen, 2019). Our
ability to draw inference is complicated by the possibility that unobservables play a role
in jointly determining selection into application and origination, observed loan terms, and
subsequent loan performance. We address this possibility, and other potential omitted vari-
ables, with an RD design leveraging discontinuities in offered loan terms across several FICO
thresholds.
    Unlike the 620 FICO heuristic in mortgage underwriting first exploited by Keys et al.
(2009 and 2010) that affects screening at both the origination and securitization stages (Bubb
and Kaufman, 2014), we focus on discontinuities in loan pricing, i.e., the interest rate offered
to a borrower conditional on having a loan application approved by underwriting. Moreover,
unlike for mortgages, no industry standard set of thresholds exist in auto lending.22 Still,
while auto-loan lending institutions do not adhere to a common set of FICO cutoffs, the
use of discontinuous pricing at some point across the FICO spectrum is prevalent for more

  22
     Also in contrast to Keys et al. (2010), FICO thresholds observed in our data have little to do with
secondary markets given that most auto loans are retained by the lending institutions in our dataset.


                                                  19
than half of the lenders in our data. See Bubb and Kaufman (2014), Livshits, Mac Gee,
and Tertilt (2016), and Agarwal et al. (2017) for models of credit risk processing costs and
Al-Najjar and Pai (2014) for a model of overfitting that could each rationalize binning risk
types in pricing decisions. FICO discontinuities may have been incorporated into software
systems as a holdover from a time when pricing was done via rate sheets instead of automated
algorithms and could persist in part because costly consumer search prevents more accurately
risk-based pricers from gaining market share.23
    To illustrate the effect of FICO thresholds on equilibrium interest rates, we estimate
lender-specific interest-rate and loan-term policies nonparametrically. For each lender c in
our data, we characterize their lending policies across FICO bins with a set of parameters
{ kl } where k indexes FICO bins denoted Fk . Pooling loan-level data for loan i from lender
l, we estimate by regressing interest rates ril on a set of indicator variables for each 5-point
FICO bin Fk
                                     X
                               ril =      kl 1(F ICOi 2 Fk ) + "il                          (10)
                                           k

where "il includes all other factors that influence loan pricing for a given loan. The five-
point FICO bins begin at a FICO score of 500 where the first bin includes FICO scores in
the 500-504 range, the second bin includes 505-509, etc., up through FICO scores of 800.
The estimated coefficients on each FICO bin represent the average interest rate for loans
originated to borrowers with FICO scores in that bin relative to the estimated constant
(the omitted category is loans outside this range--we focus on relative magnitudes for this
exercise).
    Figure 1 presents interest-rate plots for three different financial institutions. The point
estimates ^ represent how that lender's pricing rules appear to vary with borrower FICO
score, and the accompanying 95% confidence intervals provide a sense of how reliant on FICO
scores each lender's pricing rule was. Panel A of Figure 1, estimated on one institution in
our data with approximately 12,000 borrowers, illustrates breaks in average interest rates for
borrowers with FICO scores around cutoffs at 600, 660, and 700. The breaks in interest rates
at the FICO cutoffs are large, representing jumps of over two percentage points. Average
interest rates for borrowers in the 595-599 FICO bin are 2.5 percentage points higher than the
average interest rate for borrowers in the 600-604 FICO bin, and the difference in average
interest rates between the two bins is statistically significant at the 0.001 level. Panels
  23
     In the mortgage industry, Bubb and Kaufman (2014) write that "Though [Automated Underwriting
Systems] calculate default risk using smooth functions of FICO score, they also employ a layer of `overwrites'
which trigger a `refer' recommendation when borrowers fall into certain categories--for instance, borrowers
with FICO scores below 620." See Hutto & Lederman (2003) for a history of the incorporation of discrete
credit score cutoffs into automated underwriting systems for mortgage lending, such as those created by
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.


                                                     20
B and C of Figure 1 illustrate similar rule-of-thumb FICO breaks for unique institutions
with approximately 6,000 and 25,000 loans, respectively. Note that the breaks occur at
different FICO scores across different institutions, consistent with our understanding that
the discontinuities are reflective of institution-level idiosyncratic pricing policies.
   In order to standardize our analysis to include every institution that employs discontin-
uous pricing rules, we empirically identify the existence of discontinuities at each institution
(if they exist at all) in our sample through the following criteria. We first estimate the
interest-rate FICO bin regressions following equation (10) for each institution in our sample
separately. To establish the existence of an economically and statistically significant interest-
rate discontinuity, we require interest rate differences across consecutive bins to be larger
than 50 basis points and to be estimated with p-values that are less than 0.001. We further
refine the set of discontinuities by requiring that differences between leading and following
FICO bin coefficients ck have a p-value of at least 0.1.24 We further examine each potential
threshold visually to ensure that the identified discontinuities are well behaved around the
candidate thresholds. Following Angrist and Lavy (1999), Table 2 reports summary statis-
tics for the 514,834 loans in the discontinuity sample (the set of loans within 19 points of
one of our detected thresholds) used in estimation.

6.2       First-Stage Results
To validate our RD design, we present a series of diagnostics designed to test whether our
data meet the two main identifying assumptions required of valid RD estimation. First,
the RD design assumes that the probability of borrower treatment (i.e., offered interest
rates) with respect to loan terms is discontinuous at detected FICO thresholds. Second,
valid RD requires that any borrower attribute (observed or unobserved) that could influence
loan outcomes changes only continuously at interest-rate discontinuities. This smoothness
condition requires that borrowers on either side of a FICO threshold are otherwise similar,
such that borrowing outcomes on either side of a threshold would be continuous absent the
difference in treatment induced by policy differences at the threshold.
    In our remaining specifications, we normalize FICO scores to create a running variable
F^ICO that measures distance from an interest-rate discontinuity. For example, for loans
near the 600 FICO score threshold, F   ^ICOi = F ICOi 600. Panel A of Figure 4 plots
average interest rates against normalized borrower FICO scores for a sample restricted to
loans with borrower FICO scores between 581 and 619. The plots demonstrate smoothness
in the conditional expectation function except for the points corresponding to a FICO score
of 599 and 600, where interest rates jump discontinuously. We repeat the plot using similar

  24
       See Appendix C of Agarwal et al. (2017) for a discussion of overlapping cutoffs.


                                                      21
38-point FICO ranges for the 640 and 700 FICO thresholds in panels B and C of Figure 4.
These plots confirm the existence of large interest-rate discontinuities at these thresholds.
The narrow confidence intervals in Figures 1 and 4 also indicate that interest rates in this
market seem to be strongly determined by FICO. If there were substantial residual variation
after controlling for FICO scores nonparametrically, the confidence intervals would be much
larger.
   To estimate the average magnitude of the interest-rate discontinuity across all detected
thresholds, we estimate RD regressions. To intuitively introduce our RD design, we first
explain the RD estimation equation in the context of a single threshold and with linear
controls for the running variable. The resulting specification would take the form
             ^
   yiglt = 1 F            ^
               ICOi + · 1(F ICOi                ^
                                         0) + 2 F          ^
                                                  ICOi · 1(F ICOi        0) + gt +    l   + "iglt   (11)
where yiglt is the outcome for loan i originating in Commuting Zone g from lending institution
                  ^
l in quarter t, 1(F ICOi 0) is in indicator variable equal to one if the normalized FICO score
F^ ICOi is above the threshold, and gt and l are Commuting Zone  quarter and lender
fixed effects, respectively. In this specification, is the key RD coefficient and estimates
how loan terms y change discontinuously at a policy threshold while allowing the running
variable F^ ICO gradient to also change at the threshold.
    In practice, there are two differences between (11) and our actual estimating equation.
                                                       ^
First, we allow for the effect of the running variable F ICO above and below the cutoff at
F^ICO = 0 to be a quadratic. Second, to deal with loans that may be in the discontinuity
samples corresponding to multiple discontinuities, we sum across discontinuities d from the
set of discontinuities D to estimate
              X                                                     
      yiglt =                      ^                 ^
                 1(il 2 Dd ) · 1(F ICOid 0) + f (F ICOid ;  ) + 'dl + gt + "iglt       (12)
             d 2D

where 1(il 2 Dd ) is an indicator for whether loan i is within a bandwidth of 19 FICO points
of a discontinuity at lender l, 'dl are discontinuity  lender fixed effects to allow for each
lender to have a different selection of borrowers around each threshold, and the function
f (·; ·) is defined as
                         f (x;  ) = 1 x + 2 x2 + 1(x 0) 3 x + 4 x2                       (13)

to allow for a smooth nonlinear effect of the running variable that potentially changes shape
discontinuously at the threshold. Standard errors are double clustered by lender and FICO
score, and the sample used to estimate (12) is the discontinuity sample described in Table
(2).25

  25
     While our reported results use a uniform kernel with a bandwidth of 19, our results are robust to
alternative kernels and a wide range of bandwidths.


                                                 22
   Table 3 presents results of this exercise. Interest rates for borrowers with FICO scores
immediately above a detected threshold are an average of 1.27 percentage points lower than
borrowers just below. Column 2 reports that loan maturities for borrowers just above a
FICO threshold are 0.8 months longer than otherwise similar borrowers below the threshold.
Given an average interest rate in our estimation sample of 6.0% (Panel B of Table 2), the
magnitude of these effects is economically meaningful, amounting to a $13 higher monthly
payment and $440 higher present value for otherwise identical loans taken out by borrowers
on the expensive side of a FICO discontinuity. In the context of our theoretical model,
drawing a rate quote from the expensive side of an interest-rate discontinuity constitutes a
significantly higher initial interest rate r0 , and, depending on whether search is costly, could
have material consequences on the ultimate cost of credit for such borrowers.

6.3    Testing Quasi-Random Assignment
To test whether other observables beside loan terms also change discontinuously at our
detected FICO thresholds, we plot the average value of other borrower and loan application
characteristics by FICO score normalized to each threshold. In Figure 5, we plot these
values and associated 95% confidence intervals along with a fourth-order polynomial robust
RD function estimated following Calonico et al. (2014).26 Importantly, these graphs are
constructed with loan application data in order to ensure that borrowers are similar along
observable characteristics around FICO thresholds at the time of application. Panels A­E
plot borrower DTI ratios, loan amounts, borrower age in years, borrower gender (an indicator
for male), and borrower ethnicity (an indicator for white), respectively. These plots indicate
smoothness in ex-ante borrower characteristics around FICO thresholds. Borrowers on either
side of FICO thresholds do not appear meaningfully different in terms of their debt capacity,
their willingness to borrow, or demographics. Panel F plots the number of applicants within
each normalized FICO bin, along with the McCrary (2008) test for bunching in the running
variable. While such manipulation of the running variable--a discontinuity in the propensity
to apply for a loan at a FICO threshold--would raise selection concerns, Panel F shows that
borrowers do not appear to select into applying for a loan based on where their FICO
score falls relative to a lender's cutoff. In any event, such targeting seems a priori unlikely
given the uncertainty applicants face about their own credit scores (owing to the volatility
of FICO scores, uncertainty about which credit bureau(s) a lender will query, and general
unawareness) and the low likelihood that prospective borrowers are aware of the precise
thresholds used by a given lender.

  26
     To facilitate this graphing exercise, we make the mapping between a loan and its normalized FICO
score unique by keeping only loans within 10 points of a discontinuity.


                                                 23
   Table 4 uses the specification in (12) allowing for overlapping discontinuity samples to
report the magnitude and significance of the discontinuity coefficients on the loan charac-
teristics variables using the loan-application data. The estimates in column 1 indicate no
statistical difference in requested loan amounts for borrowers on either side of the threshold.
Column 2 shows that ex-ante debt-to-income ratios of borrowers on either side of the thresh-
olds are statistically indistinguishable. Column 3 is equivalent to a McCrary test, counting
the number of applications received from borrowers of each normalized FICO score and ex-
amining these counts at the normalized-FICO-score level using our RD estimator. The point
estimate suggests that the number of borrowers applying for loans is also not statistically
different on either side of a discontinuity.
   While loan interest rates change by an average of nearly 130 basis points at institution-
specific FICO discontinuities, borrowers on either side of these thresholds are demographi-
cally similar and apply for similarly sized loans at similar frequencies, supporting the validity
of our RD design.

6.4       Measuring Potential Gains to Search Across Lenders
By quasi-randomizing initial interest-rate quotes r0 to each borrower, these discontinuities
represent exogenous variation in markups within lender. However, in the model, if search
across lenders were costless (or demand inelastic), a high r0 quote would have no effect
on transaction outcomes because borrowers would find the lowest-price lender. We next
document empirically that borrowers who find themselves on the expensive side of a pricing
threshold at one lender could reasonably expect to find a lower interest rate (all else equal)
were they to search across lenders.27
    Figure 6 provides visual evidence of differentially higher returns to search across lenders
for left-of-threshold borrowers by plotting the density of the spread to the lowest available
rate for left- and right-of-threshold borrowers using the matching strategy of section 5. Dot-
ted and solid lines in each plot are for borrowers just below and above a given threshold,
respectively. For each threshold, those offered exogenously higher rates, realize substantially
higher average spreads from the lowest available rate (and larger variance in those spreads).
For borrowers with FICO scores between 595 and 599, for example, there was on average a
loan with a 3.8 pp lower interest rate originated to someone with the same FICO and DTI
in the same CZ at the same time and used to secure a similarly priced car (see Appendix
Table A2 for details). Taken together, these plots confirm that price dispersion is largest for
borrowers exogenously offered higher interest rates and that such borrowers are more likely
to draw a much lower interest rate from an additional search.

  27
       Note that this would not be the case if every institution shared the same FICO cutoffs.


                                                      24
7        Evidence on Loan Search and Search Costs
The persistence of high and dispersed markups in equilibrium--particularly given their de-
tection using quasi-exogenous pricing discontinuities--is prima facie evidence that borrowers
find soliciting the full menu of prices costly. Otherwise, as in our model, we would expect
borrowers to search until finding the lowest available price and that the resulting compe-
tition would drive dispersion to zero. However, while the results of section 6 suggest that
the initial assignment of markups to borrowers on either side of a FICO discontinuity is
as good as random, attributing variation in subsequent outcomes conditional on origination
to search frictions raises selection concerns. In other words, the possibility that borrow-
ers who accept high markups are different on other dimensions from borrowers accepting
lower markups prevents simple comparisons of outcomes conditional on markup size, even
when these markups have been randomly assigned. In this section, we introduce a simple
geographic-based measure of search costs and use our RD apparatus to demonstrate that
search behavior and several key predictions of our model line up with this search-cost proxy.
Appendix A contains several robustness checks addressing concerns that the response of
borrowers across FICO discontinuities to our search-cost measure could be correlated with
other characteristics of borrowers in high-search-cost areas.

7.1      Measures of Loan Search and Search Costs
Can costly search explain why many borrowers randomly assigned expensive rates do not
avail themselves of better credit terms available elsewhere? In this section, we evaluate
whether a proxy for search costs can explain borrowers' apparent reluctance to shop, neces-
sitating measures of both search behavior and search costs.
    Potential borrowers face a variety of non-monetary costs when shopping for a car loan.
While many car buyers--perhaps precisely because of financing search costs--choose to fi-
nance their purchase through a lender vertically integrated with a dealer, used car buyers
frequently finance their purchase from a separate source.28 Such borrowers may seek loan
preapproval before negotiating with the seller over purchase price to refine their own budget
or avoid double marginalization (Busse and Silva-Risso, 2010; Grunewald et al., 2019). Al-
ternatively, buyers may finalize a purchase price and then shop around for car loans before
completing the purchase.
    As car-loan pricing is specific to the credit risk of each individual, obtaining price quotes
in this market most often entails filling out a loan application, undergoing a credit check,

    28
     Recall that our sample consists of so-called direct auto loans originated through a lending institution,
as opposed to indirect auto loans where dealers broker an electronic search across multiple lenders at the
time of the auto purchase and mark up the resulting loan offer (Grunewald et al., 2019).

                                                     25
and potentially verifying assets and income. Here, we focus on the dimension of search costs
that scales with time and distance, such as the time and hassle required to travel to a branch
and physically sign financial paperwork or the cost of ascertaining the choice set of potential
lenders.29 However, we note that there are many other dimensions that we do not measure
over which search is costly, for example the disutility of filling out financial paperwork,
the effort required to become informed about price dispersion, and potential concerns that
additional credit-registry queries negatively impact credit scores (Liberman, Paravisini, and
Pathania, 2016).30
   To proxy for distance-based search costs, we use FDIC and NCUA data to identify the
physical location of every bank branch and credit union branch in the United States for each
year in our application data. We then create a measure of proximity to financial institutions
(PFI) by calculating the driving-time lender density for each borrower. To do so, we geocode
and count the number of physical branch locations within a 20-minute drive of the borrower,
although our results are robust to the precise time cutoff used (see section 7.1.1).31 This
driving-time density measure PFI is designed to capture the effort, proxied by time and
distance, for each borrower to shop for an additional interest-rate quote from a lending
institution that is within a reasonable distance from their home.32 Supporting this search-
cost proxy, Degryse and Ongena (2005) find evidence of the important role of transportation
costs in local credit markets.
    The median borrower in our application data lives within a 20-minute drive of 72 lending
institutions. Borrowers in the 25th percentile of driving distance live less than a 20-minute
drive from 23 institutions, as compared to 168 institutions for borrowers in the 75th per-
centile. Just under 4% of applicants in our sample live in an area with one or fewer lending
institutions within a 20-minute drive. In contrast, 45% of applicants live within a 20-minute
drive of at least 100 different lending institutions. Our baseline results categorize borrowers
with fewer than 10 lending institutions within a 20-minute drive as facing high search costs
(lowest 15% in the density distribution) to capture nonlinearity in the effect of additional

  29
      We discuss the option borrowers have to search for loans online in Appendix Section A.3.
  30
      Note that we do not consider several other plausible correlates of search costs in our data because of
their likely nonmonotonic mapping to search costliness. For example, borrowers with high FICO scores or
older borrowers may have both better financial literacy and a higher opportunity cost of time.
   31
      Our driving-time calculations rely on posted speed limits along current driving routes and do not
incorporate traffic conditions or changes to the road network between the time of loan origination and 2016
(the date of our driving-time data). For each borrower, we use only those institutions that existed at the
time of that borrower's loan origination.
   32
      While distance can also proxy for soft-information producing relationships (see Nguyen, 2019; Granja,
Leuz, and Rajan, 2018), we do not believe auto-loan lending to be a particularly relationship-intensive credit
product. Consistent with this, we find a lack of adverse selection around discontinuities and a high R2 in
our interest-rate regressions based on lender pricing rules.


                                                     26
nearby lenders on search costs.33 In section 7.1.1 below, we verify robustness of our results to
the definition of high-search-cost area. In Appendix B, we demonstrate that the structural
search model of Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) also estimates low-PFI areas to have higher
search costs.
   Our first measure of search propensity is whether an applicant accepts a given loan offer.
Loan take-up proxies for search insofar as prospective borrowers who applied for but then
decline an offered loan do so in favor of accepting a different loan. While applicants could
decline offered loans for other reasons, including deciding not to originate any loan, we view
differences in the decision to accept an offered loan around lending thresholds as a reasonable
measure of differences in borrowers' shopping behavior.
   Using application FICO scores, we estimate differences in take-up rates around FICO
thresholds. If PFI is correlated with search costs and thus influences the propensity to
search, differences in loan take-up-rates around FICO thresholds should be larger in areas
with higher PFI (i.e., more lenders live close by, thus lowering search costs). We predict
that applicants in low-PFI areas, facing higher search costs, will be less likely to reject
unfavorable loan terms and search for better terms elsewhere. Importantly, in a difference-
in-differences spirit, our empirical specification measures differences in loan take-up rates
around FICO thresholds. This allows us to exploit the random assignment of borrowers
in the neighborhood of a FICO discontinuity to high and low markups to control for any
unobserved differences in borrowers across space.34 We then compare differences in loan
take-up rates for borrowers in high versus low-PFI areas.
    Using our standard RD framework described by equation (12), we specify the dependent
variable as an indicator equal to one for accepted loans and estimate differences in the take-
up rate around FICO thresholds. In Table 5, we estimate effects for the full sample and
separately for borrowers with more and less than 10 lending institutions within a 20-minute
drive (low and high search costs, respectively). For the full sample, column 1 documents
differences in take-up rates of 12.1 pp around the threshold; that is, borrowers randomly
drawing high markups from the distribution of interest rates are 12.1 percentage points
less likely to accept the offered loan. We estimate the same regression in high- and low-

  33
      In unreported results, we split the sample in other ways based on quantiles of the driving-density
distribution. Top quartile versus bottom quartile driving densities produce estimates qualitatively similar
to our reported results. Above- and below-median splits produce similarly signed (but smaller) differences
in the difference of take-up rates across thresholds.
   34
      While our RD empirical strategy does not require that applicants in high and low search cost areas
are otherwise identical, we note that they do look similar on observables. For example, two measures of
creditworthiness tell mixed but muted stories about applicant differences across our search cost measure. On
average, applicants in high-search-cost areas have lower FICO scores (6 points) but also lower DTI ratios
(1.5 points). See Appendix A for further results addressing endogeneity concerns.


                                                    27
search-cost areas and report results in columns 2 and 3, respectively. In high-search-cost
areas, take-up rates differ by only two percentage points between borrowers on either side
of the discontinuity. In contrast, the difference in take-up rates around FICO thresholds is
13.7 pp in low-search-cost areas (column 3). In other words, borrowers in low-search-cost
areas are much less likely to accept a loan if they are assigned a high interest-rate markup,
whereas high-search-cost borrowers are likely to accept loan terms regardless of where they
fall in the distribution of prices.35 Finally, column 4 shows that the difference between the
discontinuity coefficients in the high- and low-search-cost samples is statistically significant.
Given the mean take-up rate of 0.51 (Table 2), being in a high-search-cost has over a 20%
effect on the likelihood a borrower will accept an expensive loan.
7.1.1    Robustness to Definition of High-Search-Cost Area
To probe whether our take-up results are sensitive to the choice of cutoff for our high-search-
cost area definition, we augment our RD specification (12) with two additional controls: a
High Search Cost indicator and an interaction between this dummy and the discontinuity
indicator 1(F^ICOid      0). We then vary the cutoff used for the definition of the High
Search Cost dummy and plot the results in Figure 7. Each point plots the coefficient on the
interaction between High Search Costi  1(F  ^ICOid 0) from a separate regression. Along
the x-axis, we indicate the number of proximate lenders within a 20-minute drive used to
define High Search Cost for the corresponding point estimate and confidence interval, varying
the maximum number of nearby institutions to qualify as high search cost to be 5, 10, 15,
etc. When the max number of PFIs on the x-axis is 10, the point estimate corresponds to
column 4 of Table 5.
   Several interesting patterns emerge from the plotted coefficients. First, when the contrast
between high- and low-search-cost areas is meaningful (i.e., when the maximum number of
nearby lenders on the x-axis is below 25), the point estimates are negative and largest when
the number of nearby lenders is small. Recall that the main effect of a FICO discontinuity on
take-up rates is positive; applicants just above a FICO discontinuity are much more likely to
accept an offered loan because they are being offered much more favorable interest rates (an
average of 127 bp lower) than just-below applicants. Being in a high-search-cost area nearly
undoes all of the main effect of an interest rate markup on take-up. We interpret this as high-
search-cost borrowers being insensitive to their first interest rate r0 because they would find

   35
     One threat to our interpretation of Table 5 is that the magnitude of the interest-rate discontinuity
may be different in high- and low-search-cost areas, naturally leading to differences in responses to the
discontinuities. Note, however, that for this to explain our results, low-search-cost areas would have to have
larger discontinuities in rates. Appendix Table A3 finds a small and insignificant difference in the size of the
average interest-rate change at a FICO threshold across our measure of search costs. See Appendix Section
A.1 for further discussion.


                                                      28
shopping for a better rate particularly costly relative to low-search-cost borrowers. Second,
while borrowers with five or fewer PFIs are rare and so the resulting take-up discontinuity
is estimated imprecisely, the other estimates for borrowers who have less than 25 PFIs are
significantly less than zero. Third, estimates for high-search-cost definitions near our baseline
cutoff of 10 PFIs are similar, suggesting that our conclusions are robust to the exact definition
of a high-search-cost area. Finally, the point estimates become insignificant as the number
of PFIs used in the definition of high search cost grows. This is consistent with the intuition
that from a search-cost perspective, the value of an additional PFI diminishes (i.e., each
lender matters a lot when there are only a handful of nearby lenders compared to when
there are, for example, over 40 lenders nearby). From an identification standpoint, too, it is
reassuring that there is no difference in take-up rates across a FICO discontinuity when the
number of lenders cutoff is too large to reasonably be capturing something related to search.
7.1.2   Explaining Variation in Price Dispersion with Search Costs
Our first comparative static in section 3.1 is that markets with lower search costs should result
have less price dispersion and smaller markups, as both of these objects should respond to
consumers facing lower search costs being more likely to be informed about the complete
distribution of available prices. We test this prediction using our PFI measure of search
costs. In Figure 8, we plot kernel density functions of the spread to lowest available rate
for each borrower in our data separately for borrowers in high- and low-search-cost areas.
The solid line is the estimated probability density function for borrowers facing higher search
costs and the dotted line is for lower-search-cost borrowers. The plots indicate that a smaller
fraction of high-search-cost borrowers accept loans with lower spreads to the lowest available
rate and a higher fraction of lower-search-cost borrowers accept larger spreads. Appendix
Table A4 shows that the mean spread for higher-search-cost borrowers is 27 bp higher than
the mean spread for lower-search-cost borrowers. The standard deviation of spreads is also
22 bp higher in high-search-cost areas. Although these magnitudes are likely attenuated by
the limited coverage of our data relative to the entire local auto-loan market, Kolmogorov-
Smirnov tests confirm that the distributions are statistically different at the 1% confidence
level.

7.2     Inferring Loan Shopping from Multiple Applications
To construct a more direct measure of loan shopping, we exploit the ability of our data
to identify the same borrower filing a loan application at multiple financial institutions.
We then evaluate whether we are more likely to observe borrowers in low-search-cost areas
submitting more loan applications than borrowers in high-search-cost areas. As before, we
define high-search-cost areas to be places where borrowers live within a 20-minute drive of

                                               29
at most 10 lending institutions.
   Every prospective borrower in our application data, by construction, applies for at least
one loan. Table 6 documents that we observe applicants in high-search-cost areas (column 1)
applying for an average of 0.34 additional loans loans. In contrast, we observe applicants in
low-search-cost areas (column 2) applying for an average of 0.41 loans per vehicle purchase.
Column 3 shows that this difference is statistically significant at a 1% significance level.
Although the difference (0.067 loans) is small in magnitude, these estimates suggest that one
in every 15 borrowers applies for an extra loan only if in a low-search-cost area. Importantly,
these average differences are a lower bound as we do not observe applications to any lender
not in our data. Note, too, that equilibrium applications need not change to be affected by
search--in a sequential search equilibrium (including our model above), consumers always
buy from the first seller in equilibrium. Regressions of loan applications per applicant on the
count of lending institutions within a 20-minute drive also confirm a positive and significant
relationship. These results inferring loan shopping behavior from submitting multiple loan
applications are consistent with the evidence presented in section 7.1 that borrowers facing
high search costs search less and accept worse rates than borrowers facing relatively lower
search costs.

7.3    Identification
Our empirical setting generates exogenous variation in the benefits to search across lenders
by quasi-randomizing within-lender interest-rate markups to borrowers around pricing dis-
continuities. Borrowers appear balanced across FICO discontinuities at the application stage,
which is intuitive given the likely low level of precise awareness borrowers have about their
own FICO score or the discontinuous mapping from FICO scores to loan pricing. However,
there could be several time-varying or time-invariant factors correlated with our search cost
measure that could affect equilibrium price dispersion and take-up behavior. We emphasize
that our RD results are unaffected by any differences between high- and low-search-cost
areas that affect borrowers on both sides of a discontinuity. Instead, such factors bias our
estimates only to the extent low-search-cost-area borrowers respond to pricing discontinuities
differently from high-search-cost-area borrowers for reasons other than differences in search
costs.
    To address this possibility, in Appendix A, we present several robustness exercises and
a discussion of identification issues related to our measure of search costs. First, a Bartik
strategy based on the 1990 network of lender branches in the United States allows us to
address potential time-varying endogeneity in the number of proximate lenders (e.g., that
banks close branches in response to hyperlocal economic conditions that also determine


                                              30
interest-rate elasticities). Because shift-share instruments essentially rely on the exogeneity
of preexisting conditions, we also present a difference-in-differences strategy and a hyperlocal
fixed effects strategy that allow us to rule out time-invariant explanations for our results
(for example, the concern that low financial sophistication or brand loyalty covaries across
space with interest-rate sensitivity and the density of financial providers). The results are
consistent with those presented above and support our use of nearby lender density combined
with our RD strategy to measure the consequences of search frictions in consumer credit
markets.

8    Effects on Loan and Consumption Quantities
To test the second and third predictions of our model--that search frictions in credit markets
can have real effects on consumption--we next establish that being treated with a higher in-
terest rate affects loan and purchase decisions. Whether a given credit-market imperfection
constrains consumption is difficult to ascertain empirically because it requires estimating
counterfactual consumption in the absence of the alleged friction. However, our RD setup
allows us to test for quantity effects by using the borrowing and purchasing decisions of
borrowers on one side of a FICO threshold as a counterfactual for borrowers on the other.
Given the empirical result that borrowers are ex-ante similar around FICO thresholds, our
operating assumption is that borrowers around FICO thresholds would have similar demand
for loans and cars if quoted the same set of financing terms. Exploiting our ability to observe
the exact amount that each borrower borrowers and spends on a car, we test whether bor-
rowers spend differently around the observed FICO thresholds and whether the composition
of borrowers accepting loans changes across thresholds.
    Figure 9 plots car purchase amounts around the normalized FICO threshold. Purchase
amounts are smooth leading up to the FICO threshold and then jump down discontinuously
at the threshold. Using the same RD design used in our first-stage analysis above, we formally
test for statistical differences in purchase amounts. As before, we estimate equation (12)
by controlling for commuting-zone  quarter-of-origination fixed effects and discontinuity
 lender fixed effects and allow for a quadratic function of the running variable using a
bandwidth of 19 around the normalized FICO threshold with a uniform kernel.
    Table 7 presents these reduced-form results. Borrowers quasi-randomly offered more
expensive loans spend an average of $377 less on the cars they purchase (a 2.4% effect).
Column 2 presents results with loan amounts as the dependent variable. Originated loan sizes
are an average of $566 lower (4%) on the expensive side of a detected FICO discontinuity.
The fact that loan sizes increase by larger amounts around the threshold than purchase
amounts indicates that, ex-post, borrowers on the right side of the cutoff are approved for


                                              31
and take up higher loan-to-value (LTV) ratios. Column 3 of Table 7 indicates that ex-post
LTV ratios are an average of 1.3 percentage points higher for borrowers to the right of FICO
thresholds. Given that ex-ante DTI ratios in the loan application data are continuous around
the thresholds (Table 4), we interpret these results as further evidence of the easing of credit
terms for above-threshold borrowers. That is, ex-post, borrowers with FICO scores just
above a pricing discontinuity are offered lower rates, longer terms, and apparently allowed
higher ex-post LTV and DTI ratios.
   Microdata on loan amounts and loan terms allow us to calculate the implied monthly pay-
ment of borrowers on either side of the thresholds. In column 4 of Table 7, we test whether
ex-post monthly payments are different around the thresholds. On average, monthly pay-
ments increase by a statistically and economically insignificant $0.17 for above-threshold bor-
rowers. Shorter terms and higher interest rates lead below-threshold borrowers to purchase
less expensive cars and use less financing in their purchase than above-threshold borrowers,
essentially purchasing less car and using less credit to keep the same monthly payment.36
    This evidence of otherwise similar borrowers spending different amounts on the cars
they purchase as a result of the financing terms they are offered is consistent with a quantity
effect of search frictions, an essential component of the welfare effects predicted by our model.
Absent search frictions, we would expect all borrowers to find the lowest-price provider, and
given the balance of borrowers across discontinuities, we would also expect to observe similar
purchasing decisions. One concern with this interpretation is that purchase-price effects may
not represent quantity effects if borrowers only pay different amounts but actually purchase
the same cars they would have otherwise, deriving the same flow utility from their purchase.
For example, if dealers can use financing terms to price discriminate, they may exploit above-
threshold borrowers' increased marginal willingness to pay by charging more for the exact
same car than otherwise similar borrowers with more expensive financing.37
    We test for this possibility by controlling for year-make-model (e.g., 2013 Honda Accord)
fixed effects in our RD regressions. Column 1 of Table 8 reports results when controlling
for make-model fixed effects. Even within a make and model category, borrowers quasi-
randomly assigned expensive credit continue to spend $345 less on cars, suggesting that the
bulk of the purchasing behavior we observe in Table 7 is not driven by people choosing to
purchase different model cars as a result of their assigned credit. Contrasting the coefficients
in columns 1 and 2 provides indirect evidence on the nature of the substitution patterns in
this market. When we include year -make-model fixed effects in column 2, we find a much
smaller change in purchase price at the discontinuity of $80.38 Because fixing the model
  36
     See Argyle et al. (2018) for related evidence on borrowers' monthly payment targeting.
  37
     See Argyle et al. (2019) for evidence that individual-level used-car prices capitalize financing terms.
  38
     We hesitate to overinterpret column 2 as strong evidence of a null effect on purchase prices conditional


                                                    32
year of a car has such large explanatory power on the effect of an interest-rate markup, we
conclude that much of the effect in column 1 is explained by substitution within a model
and across model years.
    Reconciling the strong effect on purchase prices within make-models and the relatively
weaker effect on purchase prices within make-model-years, column 3 provides direct evidence
with vehicle age at purchase in months as the dependent variable (controlling for make-model
fixed effects since vehicle age would be collinear with year-make-model and time fixed effects).
Borrowers with access to easier credit purchase cars that are on average 1.8 months newer,
suggesting that roughly one in seven borrowers respond to a high (low) interest-rate markup
by buying a car that is one model year older (newer), keeping their monthly payments
roughly constant. These car-age effects are likely to represent some borrowers preferring to
purchase older cars over searching for better financing. Appendix Figure A1 uses data from
the National Highway Transportation Survey (U.S. Department of Transportation, 2017) to
show the average relationship between car age and mileage. On average, every additional
year of car age in the NHTS data is associated with 8,000 more miles. Evidence in Busse
et al. (2013) suggests that controlling for make, model, model year, and trim, the used-car
market values every additional 8,000 miles of mileage at -$960, implying a valuation of a
1.8-month age effect of $144.
    These results on car age are consistent with search frictions changing the quantity of
car services purchased by borrowers with high search costs, affirming real (as opposed to
purely financial) effects of search frictions. Under the assumption that borrowers on either
side of pricing discontinuities are otherwise identical, we would expect them to find similar
financing opportunities and purchase similar cars absent search frictions. Our model also
predicts that any quantity distortions should be stronger in markets with higher search
costs. To reinforce our interpretation that these effects are driven by costly search per se,
we again divide the sample into high- and low-search-cost areas and test whether our effects
are stronger for borrowers in higher-search-cost areas. Table 9 shows that borrowers in both
relatively high- and low-search-cost areas are affected by the interest-rate markup offered by
a given firm; FICO pricing discontinuities affect loan sizes and purchase prices in both types
of markets. However, comparing discontinuity effects for high-search-cost areas (columns 1
and 3) to discontinuity effects in low-search-cost areas (columns 2 and 4), a borrower's draw
of a given markup r0 is much more consequential when search costs are high, as predicted by

on the car chosen given the loss of power from including so many fixed effects. Borrowers with more affordable
credit could be paying slightly more for the same make-model-year either because their marginal willingness
to pay increased and was extracted by the dealer or by choosing a nicer car within a make-model-year
(extra add-on features, lower mileage, etc.). Still, we can reject the column 1 effect size using the column 2
estimates.


                                                     33
the model. While markups would also distort quantities in an oligopolistic market, too, we
show in Appendix A.4 that the contrast between high- and low-search-cost borrowers holds
in both concentrated and less concentrated markets.
   How do borrowers respond to being arbitrarily offered high financing markups? The
evidence presented in Tables 7 and 8 indicates that borrowers offered expensive credit adjust
their loan- and car-purchasing behavior to keep their monthly payments the same despite
the higher interest rates. Such borrowers spend less on their car purchases by selecting
an older car than they would have otherwise, potentially bargaining harder on purchase
price and originating smaller loans at higher loan-to-value ratios. Moreover, these effects
are economically and statistically significantly larger in areas we measure as having high
search costs. We view this as evidence that borrowers' inability to costlessly identify the
best available loan terms distorts consumption away from the efficient quantities that would
prevail absent search frictions.

8.1    Assessing Selection into Origination
Limiting our sample to direct loans eliminates the possibility of borrower selection driven
by car-seller steering of borrowers to lenders. Moreover, borrowers are unlikely to be aware
of their precise FICO score as calculated by the credit bureau queried by the lender pricing
their loan application, and even less aware of that lender's or alternative lenders' FICO
discontinuities. However, as mentioned previously, another possibility is that borrowers
who accept loans on either side of FICO thresholds might differ systematically (even if
borrowers are balanced at the application stage), violating the smoothness condition required
for valid RD inference. For example, perhaps borrowers who accept high loan markups are
particularly inelastic, and the larger car expenditures for below-threshold borrowers are the
result of conditional-on-origination effects drawing disproportionately from higher-demand,
inelastic borrowers. In this section, we address the possibility that borrowers who take
up below-threshold, high-markup loan offers are different on unobservable dimensions from
above-threshold, low-markup car buyers.
    The above evidence demonstrates that interest-rate markups seem quasi-randomly as-
signed (borrowers are similar on observable dimensions at the ex-ante application stage).
An alternative explanation for our results is that rate-insensitive borrowers may accept high
loan markups and face other constraints that lead them to demand lower loan sizes and
spend less on their car purchases. Similarly, perhaps (unobservably) high credit-quality bor-
rowers who are arbitrarily offered expensive interest rates withdraw their loan applications
and look elsewhere for credit. Under this private-information scenario, borrowers who follow
through with the origination of expensive loans are those who know they are of poor credit


                                             34
quality and unlikely to do better given their unfavorable soft attributes. If lenders recognize
that borrowers who choose to accept unfavorable terms are riskier, ex-ante arbitrary FICO
discontinuities could reinforce an equilibrium that separates high- and low-credit-quality
borrowers with the appropriate pricing differences offered to each borrower type.
   We test for the possibility that such selection drives the observed equilibrium outcomes
in our data by comparing the balance around the FICO discontinuities of borrower char-
acteristics and ex-post borrower performance conditional on origination. If some correlated
selection process guides differences in who accepts expensive loan offers, this should be re-
vealed by an imbalance of offer-accepting borrower characteristics or ex-post credit outcomes.
Appendix Figure A2 repeats the exercise of Figure 5 by checking for the smoothness of bor-
rower and loan characteristics around FICO discontinuities. We merge our application data
to our origination data to demonstrate that the same smoothness in borrower attributes that
we saw at the application stage persists conditional on origination. For the four borrower
attributes that should not respond to the thresholds if there is not selection into origination
based on borrower demand, we find smoothness. Although the estimates are noisier in this
merged sample due to smaller sample sizes, age, DTI, gender, and ethnicity have economi-
cally small and statistically insignificant differences across FICO discontinuities, indicating
that borrowers who accept high markups seem similar to those above FICO discontinuities
that accept low markups. Panels B and F show that loan sizes and the fraction of borrow-
ers accepting loans do respond to interest-rate markups, consistent with the extensive- and
intensive-margin effects of the discontinuities we estimate in Tables 5 and 7, respectively.
The results of the Appendix Figure A2 exercise suggest that the observed borrower responses
to FICO discontinuities are causal effects of the search-cost-induced interest-rate markups
and not explainable by selection into which borrowers accept higher markups.
    To test for selection on (unobserved) creditworthiness, we specify as a dependent variable
in our RD setting various ex-post credit outcomes as any selection on credit quality should
eventually manifest itself in the average ex-post credit performance of selected borrowers.
The coefficient in column 1 of Table 10 estimates that above-threshold borrowers are an av-
erage of 4.2 more days delinquent than below-threshold borrowers, indicating that borrowers
on either side of the threshold do not exhibit economically meaningful or statistically signif-
icant differences in delinquency.39 Similarly, above-threshold borrowers are 0.4 percentage
points more likely to have their loan charged off (written off as a loss by the lender, column
2) and 0.2 percentage points more likely to be in default (over 90 days past due, column 3),
both of which we view as relatively precise zeroes.

  39
     The sample size differs across columns in Table 10 because of inconsistent data coverage of all monitoring
variables across lenders.


                                                      35
    A novel feature of our dataset allows for a second test of private information on creditwor-
thiness as an explanation for our observed results. As a means of monitoring borrowers, many
lending institutions in our dataset pull credit scores on borrowers after loan origination.40
Ex-post credit scores allow us to calculate changes in credit scores over time, capturing broad
changes in borrower distress and financial responsibility that extend beyond the given auto
loan in question. Any unobserved heterogeneity driving selection into loan take-up should
impact credit scores over time if low credit-quality borrowers (for whom the below-threshold
expensive interest rate actually reflects their riskiness) are the only ones to originate such
loans. This test incorporating credit performance for other products, too, is particularly
valuable given that the effect of markups on equilibrium monthly payments is close to zero,
possibly resulting in negligible effects on the performance of the auto loan itself. Using the
subsample of institutions that collect updated FICO scores after origination, we use the per-
centage change between credit scores at origination and the most recently observable credit
score as the dependent variable in our RD framework. Results presented in column 4 of
Table 10 show no meaningful differences (0.1 percentage points) in credit score changes for
borrowers around the threshold.41
   While adverse selection undoubtedly motivates many features of retail car-loan markets
(Adams, Einav, and Levin, 2009), information asymmetries do not appear to be a primary
determinant of the acute differences in lending and purchasing behavior around the observed
FICO pricing discontinuities. Of course, selection into take-up correlated with ex-ante bor-
rower characteristics or ex-post credit worthiness is not the only alternative explanation
for our observed results around thresholds. For example, FICO thresholds could promote
the steering of financially unsophisticated borrowers into higher-rate loans. However, any
explanation such as borrower naïveté would have to not be manifest in differences across
thresholds at loan application or origination, significantly higher prices paid for the same
make-model-year, differential ex-post default rates, or differences in ex-post credit scores.
Given this set of outcomes showing high- and low-markup borrowers to be otherwise quite
similar, we find it unlikely our results are driven by a missing factor that drives the differen-
tial response of above- and below-discontinuity borrowers in high- and low-search-cost areas.
We address the robustness of our results to alternative sources of variation in local branch
networks in Appendix A.

   40
       Ex-post credit score queries occur as frequently as every six months, and, in a few cases, as infrequently
as once post-origination. The most common convention for the subset of institutions that pull credit ex-post
is to pull credit scores once a year.
    41
       While our effects on monthly payments suggest that there is unlikely to be a causal effect of higher
interest rates themselves on default outcomes, note that this would work against our finding of null effects
on credit outcomes for high-markup borrowers.

                                                       36
9     Conclusion
Mounting evidence indicates that credit-market imperfections influence household debt and
consumption outcomes. A parallel empirical search literature establishes the consequences
of the costliness of learning prices in a wide variety of markets. Motivated by our model
of search for credit when credit demand is both elastic and values complementary durable
consumption, we present empirical evidence connecting these two literatures.
    First, we present evidence that substantial price dispersion exists in retail auto lending
markets. About 54% of borrowers in our sample for whom a comparable borrower exists
did not originate a loan with the lowest available interest rate. The average borrower in our
data pays 130 bp more ($440 in present-value terms for the average loan) than the best rate
available to observationally similar borrowers. In this setting where the gains to search are
high, we show that borrowers' acceptance of dominated loan terms is related to measures
of search costs. In particular, because arbitrary pricing schedules vary across lenders within
the same commuting zone, borrowers on the expensive side of FICO discontinuities in loan
pricing at one institution would be more likely to find favorable pricing at a different institu-
tion. Absent search frictions, borrowers should be unlikely to accept dominated loan terms.
Proxying for the costliness of loan shopping with the density of nearby lenders, we show that
borrowers in higher-search-cost areas face more dispersed prices, are more likely to accept
quasi-randomly offered dominated loan terms, and apply for fewer loans.
    Second, as illustrated by our model, we demonstrate that search costs have material
effects on loan quantities and durable consumption. On average, borrowers that accept
quasi-randomly offered higher interest rates borrow $566 less, spend $377 less on their car
purchases, and buy 1.8 months older cars than otherwise similar borrowers that accept quasi-
randomly offered lower rates. These results highlight the importance of well-functioning
consumer credit markets in determining durable goods consumption patterns. Moreover,
relative to popular search models with inelastic demand where dispersed prices have no
associated deadweight loss and just represent a transfer from buyers to sellers, there appear
to be aggregate welfare consequences of costly search in the real world. When search costs
are non-negligible, consumers facing firm-specific markups for a given good may adjust the
quantity or characteristics of both that good and its complements away from first-best levels.
    Even with a well-developed financial sector including secondary markets for many forms of
consumer debt, household consumption still appears distorted by credit market imperfections
such as costly search. At least one answer to Zinman's (2014) query as to why efficient risk-
based pricing is still not ubiquitous in the era of big-data-based credit modeling appears
to be demand-side obstacles to finding lowest available prices. Even with the possibility of


                                               37
shopping for interest rates online, searching for consumer credit products remains an opaque,
local, and costly process for many borrowers. This relationship between costly search and
consumption outcomes broadens the consequences of search frictions, especially in credit
markets, and could motivate the extra regulatory attention paid to so-called banking deserts
where the density of lenders is particularly low.




                                             38
References
Adams, Paul D, Stefan Hunt, Christopher Palmer, and Redis Zaliauskas (2019). "Testing
   the Effectiveness of Consumer Financial Disclosure: Experimental Evidence from Savings
   Accounts." NBER Working Paper No. 25718.
Adams, William, Liran Einav, and Jonathan Levin (2009). "Liquidity constraints and im-
  perfect information in subprime lending." The American Economic Review 99.1, pp. 49­
   84.
Agarwal, Sumit, Souphala Chomsisengphet, Neale Mahoney, and Johannes Stroebel (2017).
   "Do banks pass through credit expansions to consumers who want to borrow?" The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 133.1, pp. 129­190.
Agarwal, Sumit, John Grigsby, Ali Hortaçu, Gregor Matvos, Amit Seru, and Vincent Yao
   (2019). "Searching for Approval." Working Paper.
Alexandrov, Alexei and Sergei Koulayev (2017). "No Shopping in the U.S. Mortgage Market:
   Direct and Strategic Effects of Providing More Information." Working Paper.
Allen, Jason, Robert Clark, and Jean-François Houde (2014a). "Price Dispersion in Mortgage
   Markets." The Journal of Industrial Economics 62.3, pp. 377­416.
-- (2014b). "The Effect of Mergers in Search Markets: Evidence from the Canadian Mortgage
   Industry." American Economic Review 104.10, pp. 3365­96.
-- (2019). "Search Frictions and Market Power in Negotiated-Price Markets." Journal of
   Political Economy 127.4, pp. 1550­1598.
Al-Najjar, Nabil I and Mallesh M Pai (2014). "Coarse decision making and overfitting."
   Journal of Economic Theory 150, pp. 467­486.
Aneja, Abhay P. and Carlos F. Avenancio-León (2019). "No Credit For Time Served? Incar-
   ceration and Credit-Driven Crime Cycles." Working Paper.
Angrist, Joshua D and Victor Lavy (1999). "Using Maimonides' rule to estimate the effect of
   class size on scholastic achievement." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114.2, pp. 533­
   575.
Argyle, Bronson, Taylor Nadauld, and Christopher Palmer (2018). "Monthly Payment Tar-
   geting and the Demand for Maturity." Review of Financial Studies Forthcoming.
Argyle, Bronson, Taylor Nadauld, Christopher Palmer, and Ryan Pratt (2019). "The Cap-
   italization of Consumer Financing into Durable Goods Prices." The Journal of Finance
   Forthcoming.
Attanasio, Orazio P, Pinelopi Koujianou Goldberg, and Ekaterini Kyriazidou (2008). "Credit
   constraints in the market for consumer durables: Evidence from micro data on car loans."
   International Economic Review 49.2, pp. 401­436.


                                            39
Bartlett, Jeff (2013). "Consumers rely on car financing more than ever." Consumer Reports.
Baye, Michael R, John Morgan, and Patrick Scholten (2006). "Information, search, and price
   dispersion." Handbook on Economics and Information Systems. Ed. by T. Hendershott.
   Vol. 1, pp. 323­77.
Benmelech, Efraim, Ralf R. Meisenzahl, and Rodney Ramcharan (2017). "The Real Effects
   of Liquidity During the Financial Crisis: Evidence from Automobiles." The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 132.1, pp. 317­365.
Bertrand, Marianne and Adair Morse (2011). "Information disclosure, cognitive biases, and
   payday borrowing." The Journal of Finance 66.6, pp. 1865­1893.
Bhutta, Neil, Andreas Fuster, and Aurel Hizmo (2019). "Paying Too Much? Price Dispersion
  in the US Mortgage Market." SSRN Working Paper No. 3422904.
Bubb, Ryan and Alex Kaufman (2014). "Securitization and moral hazard: Evidence from
   credit score cutoff rules." Journal of Monetary Economics 63, pp. 1­18.
Bulow, Jeremy I and Paul Pfleiderer (1983). "A note on the effect of cost changes on prices."
   Journal of Political Economy 91.1, pp. 182­185.
Busse, Meghan R., Nicola Lacetera, Devin G. Pope, Jorge Silva-Risso, and Justin R. Syd-
   nor (2013). "Estimating the Effect of Salience in Wholesale and Retail Car Markets."
   American Economic Review 103.3, pp. 575­79.
Busse, Meghan R and Jorge M Silva-Risso (2010). "`One Discriminatory Rent' or `Double
   Jeopardy': Multicomponent Negotiation for New Car Purchases." The American Eco-
   nomic Review 100.2, pp. 470­474.
Calonico, Sebastian, Matias D Cattaneo, and Rocio Titiunik (2014). "Robust Nonparametric
   Confidence Intervals for Regression-Discontinuity Designs." Econometrica 82.6, pp. 2295­
   2326.
Campbell, John Y (2006). "Household finance." The Journal of Finance 61.4, pp. 1553­1604.
De Los Santos, Babur, Ali Hortaçsu, and Matthijs R. Wildenbeest (2012). "Testing Models
   of Consumer Search Using Data on Web Browsing and Purchasing Behavior." American
   Economic Review 102.6, pp. 2955­80.
DeGroot, Morris (1970). Optimal Statistical Decisions. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Degryse, Hans and Steven Ongena (2005). "Distance, lending relationships, and competition."
   The Journal of Finance 60.1, pp. 231­266.
Diamond, Peter A (1971). "A model of price adjustment." Journal of Economic Theory 3.2,
   pp. 156­168.
Drechsler, Itamar, Alexi Savov, and Philipp Schnabl (2017). "The deposits channel of mon-
   etary policy." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132.4, pp. 1819­1876.



                                             40
Einav, Liran, Mark Jenkins, and Jonathan Levin (2012). "Contract pricing in consumer
   credit markets." Econometrica 80.4, pp. 1387­1432.
-- (2013). "The impact of credit scoring on consumer lending." The RAND Journal of Eco-
   nomics 44.2, pp. 249­274.
Ellison, Glenn and Sara Fisher Ellison (2009). "Search, obfuscation, and price elasticities on
    the internet." Econometrica 77.2, pp. 427­452.
Granja, João, Christian Leuz, and Raghuram Rajan (2018). "Going the Extra Mile: Distant
   Lending and Credit Cycles." NBER Working Paper No. 25196.
Gross, David B and Nicholas S Souleles (2002). "Do Liquidity Constraints and Interest Rates
   Matter for Consumer Behavior? Evidence from Credit Card Data." Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 117.1, pp. 149­185.
Grunewald, Andreas, Jonathan Lanning, David Low, and Tobias Salz (2019). "Auto Dealer
  Loan Intermediation: Consumer Behavior and Competitive Effects." Working Paper.
Hong, Han and Matthew Shum (2006). "Using price distributions to estimate search costs."
   The RAND Journal of Economics 37.2, pp. 257­275.
Hortaçsu, Ali and Chad Syverson (2004). "Product differentiation, search costs, and compe-
   tition in the mutual fund industry: A case study of S&P 500 index funds." The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics 119.2, pp. 403­456.
Hutto, Gary W and Jess Lederman (2003). Handbook of Mortgage Lending. Mortgage Bankers
   Association of America.
Keys, Benjamin J., Tanmoy Mukherjee, Amit Seru, and Vikrant Vig (2009). "Financial regu-
   lation and securitization: Evidence from subprime loans." Journal of Monetary Economics
   56.5, pp. 700­720.
-- (2010). "Did Securitization Lead to Lax Screening? Evidence from Subprime Loans." The
   Quarterly Journal of Economics 125.1, pp. 307­362.
Laufer, Steven and Andrew Paciorek (2016). "The Effects of Mortgage Credit Availability:
   Evidence from Minimum Credit Score Lending Rules." FEDS Working Paper No. 2016-
   098.
Liberman, Andres, Daniel Paravisini, and Vikram Singh Pathania (2016). "High-Cost Debt
   and Borrower Reputation: Evidence from the UK." Working Paper.
Liberti, José María and Mitchell A Petersen (2018). "Information: Hard and soft." Review
   of Corporate Finance Studies 8.1, pp. 1­41.
Liebersohn, Jack (2019). "Does Local Bank Competition Still Matter? Quasi-Experimental
   Evidence from Bank Mergers." Unpublished Working Paper.
Lippman, Steven A and John J McCall (1976). "Job search in a dynamic economy." Journal
   of Economic Theory 12.3, pp. 365­390.


                                             41
Livshits, Igor, James C Mac Gee, and Michele Tertilt (2016). "The democratization of credit
   and the rise in consumer bankruptcies." The Review of Economic Studies 83.4, pp. 1673­
   1710.
McCrary, Justin (2008). "Manipulation of the running variable in the regression discontinuity
  design: A density test." Journal of Econometrics 142.2, pp. 698­714.
New York, Federal Reserve Bank of (2019). "Quarterly Report on Household Debt and
  Credit."
Nguyen, Hoai-Luu Q (2019). "Are credit markets still local? Evidence from bank branch
   closings." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 11.1, pp. 1­32.
Reinganum, Jennifer F (1979). "A simple model of equilibrium price dispersion." Journal of
   Political Economy 87.4, pp. 851­858.
Salz, Tobias (2017). "Intermediation and competition in search markets: An empirical case
   study." SSRN Working Paper No. 2961795.
Scharfstein, David S and Adi Sunderam (2016). "Market Power in Mortgage Lending and
   the Transmission of Monetary Policy." Working Paper.
Sorensen, Alan T. (2000). "Price Dispersion in Retail Markets for Prescription Drugs." Jour-
   nal of Political Economy 108.4, pp. 833­850.
Stahl, Dale O (1989). "Oligopolistic pricing with sequential consumer search." The American
   Economic Review, pp. 700­712.
Stango, Victor and Jonathan Zinman (2009). "Exponential growth bias and household fi-
    nance." The Journal of Finance 64.6, pp. 2807­2849.
-- (2015). "Borrowing high versus borrowing higher: price dispersion and shopping behavior
    in the US credit card market." Review of Financial Studies.
Stigler, George J. (1961). "The Economics of Information." Journal of Political Economy
    69.3, pp. 213­225.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration (2017). National House-
    hold Transportation Survey. http://nhts.ornl.gov.
Woodward, Susan E and Robert E Hall (2012). "Diagnosing consumer confusion and sub-
    optimal shopping effort: Theory and mortgage-market evidence." The American Eco-
    nomic Review 102.7, pp. 3249­3276.
Zhu, Haoxiang (2012). "Finding a good price in opaque over-the-counter markets." The
    Review of Financial Studies 25.4, pp. 1255­1285.
Zinman, Jonathan (2014). "Consumer Credit: Too Much or Too Little (or Just Right)?" The
    Journal of Legal Studies 43.S2, S209­S237.




                                             42
       Figure 1: Examples of FICO-Based Discontinuities in Interest-Rate Policies
                                                          A. Sample Lender #1




                           .1
                           .08
                    .02 .04 .06
               FICO Bin Coefficient
                0         -.04 -.02




                                        500 520 540 560 580 600 620 640 660 680 700 720 740 760 780 800
                                                                  FICO Score Bin

                                                          B. Sample Lender #2
                           .02
                           0
               FICO Bin Coefficient
                  -.04    -.02
                          -.06
                          -.08




                                        500 520 540 560 580 600 620 640 660 680 700 720 740 760 780 800
                                                                  FICO Score Bin

                                                          C. Sample Lender #3
                           .16
                           .14
               .04 .06 .08 .1 .12
                 FICO Bin Coefficient
                           .02
                           0




                                        500 520 540 560 580 600 620 640 660 680 700 720 740 760 780 800
                                                                  FICO Score Bin


Notes: Each panel plots estimated interest-rate rules (with 95% confidence intervals) for a
different lender in our sample. Loan rates are regressed on five-point FICO bin indicators as
in equation (10).
                                              43
          Figure 2: Illustration of Surplus and Welfare Loss from Search Frictions


         log r


                     BS
               
          log rj



                          LS
                                        DW LA

          log cj
                     DW LC                      DW LB
           log c
                                                                             Inverse
                                                                            Demand log r(q )


                 0                     
                               log q (rj , p)                log q (c, p)
                                                                              log q
Notes: Figure plots equilibrium outcomes under perfect competition and costly search in log
interest rate (y-axis) and log quantity (x-axis) space. Log inverse demand is the diagonal
line denoted log r(q ). The perfect-competition equilibrium quantity and price are denoted
q (c, p) and c, respectively, where c is the minimum support of the marginal cost distribution.
The costly search equilibrium quantity and price are q (rj
                                                         
                                                           , p) and rj
                                                                     
                                                                       , respectively, where rj
                                                                                              
                                                                                                is
the monopolist price charged by a lender with marginal cost cj . BS and LS denote borrower
surplus and lender surplus, respectively. The three deadweight loss components are denoted
DW L.




                                                        44
                         Figure 3: Density of Spread to Lowest Available Rate

          60    40
  Kernel Density
          20
          0




                     0    .01        .02           .03        .04          .05   .06        .07
                                           Spread to Lowest Available Rate
Notes: Figure reports the kernel density of the spread (in percentage points) to the lowest
available rate for borrowers not receiving the best available rate in their cell. A cell is defined
as all borrowers in the same commuting zone taking out a loan in the same $1,000 collateral-
value bin, five-point FICO bin, 10-point DTI bin, six-month time period, and loan maturity.
Estimated density uses an Epanechnikov kernel with a bandwidth of 0.0012.




                                                      45
               Figure 4: Interest-rate FICO Regression Discontinuity Plots
                       A. Interest Rates Around FICO = 600 Discontinuities




                                  .12    .11
                       Average Loan Rate
                               .1 .09
                                  .08




                                               -20   -15      -10        -5       0          5       10        15      20
                                                                        FICO Score Relative 600

                                                     Sample average within bin             Polynomial fit of order 4


                       B. Interest Rates Around FICO = 640 Discontinuities
                                  .085   .08
                       Average Loan Rate
                         .07     .075
                                  .065
                                  .06




                                               -20   -15      -10        -5       0          5       10        15      20
                                                                        FICO Score Relative 640

                                                     Sample average within bin             Polynomial fit of order 4


                       C. Interest Rates Around FICO = 700 Discontinuities
                                  .055   .05
                       Average Loan Rate
                             .045 .04
                                  .035




                                               -20   -15      -10        -5       0          5       10        15      20
                                                                        FICO Score Relative 700

                                                     Sample average within bin             Polynomial fit of order 4



Notes: Figures plot average interest rates against borrower FICO scores normalized to pricing
discontinuities. 95% confidence intervals are double clustered by lender and FICO score.
Plotted RD functions are estimated using the Calonico et al. (2014) robust RD estimator
with fourth-degree polynomials for institutions with pricing discontinuities detected at FICO
scores of 600, 640, and 700, respectively.
                                              46
                                       Figure 5: Balance of Borrower Characteristics Across FICO Discontinuities
                              A. Application Debt-to-Income Ratio                                                                                   B. Application Loan Amount




                                                                                                                          24000
              .34




                                                                                                                            23500
                                                                                                           Average Loan Amount
              .33
Average DTI




                                                                                                                  23000
              .32




                                                                                                        22500             22000
              .31




                        -10               -5                 0                    5                10                                       -10             -5                 0                    5                10
                                               FICO Score Relative to Threshold                                                                                  FICO Score Relative to Threshold

                                Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4                                                  Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4



                                     C. Applicant Age (years)                                                                                              D. Applicant Gender
              42




                                                                                                                          .64
              41




                                                                                                                     .62
                                                                                                        Average Pr(male)
Average Age
    40




                                                                                                         .6
              39




                                                                                                                          .58
              38




                        -10               -5                 0                    5                10                                       -10             -5                 0                    5                10
                                               FICO Score Relative to Threshold                                                                                  FICO Score Relative to Threshold

                                Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4                                                  Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4



                                       E. Applicant Ethnicity                                                                                     F. Number of Loan Applications
                                                                                                                          .022
              .6




                                                                                                        Frequency of Applicant FICO score
                  .58




                                                                                                                                    .02
Average Pr(white)
      .56




                                                                                                                      .018
              .54




                                                                                                         .016
              .52




                        -10               -5                 0                    5                10
                                                                                                                          .014




                                               FICO Score Relative to Threshold
                                                                                                                                            -10             -5                 0                    5                10
                                Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4                                                                 FICO Score Relative to Threshold


                        Notes: Figures plot average values of ex-ante borrower characteristics around FICO thresholds for
                        institutions with detected discontinuities. 95% confidence intervals are double clustered by lender
                        and FICO score. Plotted RD functions are estimated using the Calonico et al. (2014) robust RD
                        estimator with fourth-degree polynomials. Applicant gender in panel D is an indicator for male, and
                        ethnicity in panel E is an indicator for whether the applicant is estimated as white by the lender.
                        Panel F plots the application count within each normalized FICO bin along with the estimated
                        McCrary (2008) density test.                    47
        Figure 6: Variation in the Returns to Search Around FICO Discontinuities
                                          A. Borrowers Around a FICO = 600 Threshold




                               40
                               30
                      Kernel Density
                           20  10
                               0




                                           0   .01         .02     .03      .04    .05    .06    .07    .08          .09         .1         .11
                                                                         Spread to Lowest Available Rate

                                                                        595FICO599                   600FICO604


                                          B. Borrowers Around a FICO = 640 Threshold
                               40
                               30
                      Kernel Density
                           20  10
                               0




                                           0   .01     .02       .03     .04 .05 .06 .07 .08 .09                .1         .11        .12
                                                                          Spread to Lowest Available Rate

                                                                        635FICO639                   640FICO644


                                          C. Borrowers Around a FICO = 700 Threshold
                               80    60
                      Kernel Density
                         40    20
                               0




                                           0         .01          .02         .03      .04       .05          .06            .07             .08
                                                                          Spread to Lowest Available Rate

                                                                        695FICO699                   700FICO704



Notes: Figure plots the kernel densities of the spread from the originated interest rate for
borrowers at lenders with FICO discontinuities at 600, 640, and 700, respectively, to the
lowest rate available to similar borrowers in the same market. Dashed blue lines and solid
red lines, respectively, plot the densities for borrowers with FICO scores just below and
above each FICO threshold.                    48
    Figure 7: Robustness of Take-up Rate Differentials to High Search Cost Definition


             .1  0
       Coefficient
             -.1
             -.2




                     0   5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95 100
                         Max Number of Nearby Lenders Used in Definition of High Search Cost Area
                               Coefficient on Discontinuity x High Search Cost Area Interaction


Notes: Figure reports estimates of the coefficient on an interaction term between the Dis-
                      ^
continuity indicator (F ICO 0) and a High Search Cost indicator in an RD regression of
loan take-up on the specification in (12) along with a High Search Cost main effect. High
Search Cost is defined as an individual loan applicant having at most the number of lenders
indicated on the x-axis within a 20-minute drive of her home at the time of loan application.
95% confidence intervals are double clustered by lender and FICO score.




                                                         49
                 Figure 8: CDFs of the Spread to Lowest Available Rate by Search Costs


                40    30
       Kernel Density
           20   10
                0




                           0   .01        .02         .03       .04         .05       .06       .07
                                             Spread to Lowest Available Rate

                                     Low Search Cost Area               High Search Cost Area


Notes: Figure plots kernel density of the spread to the lowest available rate for each loan
(the difference between a loan's interest rate and the best rate among similar borrowers in
its cell) for borrowers in high- and low-search-cost areas. The estimated distributions for
high- and low-search-cost areas are plotted in solid red and dashed blue lines, respectively.
High-search-cost areas are defined as locations where borrowers have less than 10 lenders
within a 20-minute drive of their home. See notes to Figure 3.




                                                       50
                              Figure 9: Effect of FICO Discontinuity on Value of Car Purchased


                 18000
                     17500
      Average Car Value ($)
      17000      16500




                              -10               -5                 0                    5                10
                                                     FICO Score Relative to Threshold

                                      Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4


Notes: Figures plot average car transaction prices by FICO scores normalized to detected
pricing discontinuities. 95% confidence intervals are double clustered by lender and FICO
score. Plotted RD functions are estimated using the Calonico et al. (2014) robust RD
estimator with fourth-degree polynomials for institutions with pricing discontinuities.




                                                                  51
                               Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                                           Percentile
                             Count       Mean      Std. Dev.     25th        50th         75th
                                                  A. Loan Applications
 Loan Term (months)        1,119,153     67.25       24.43        60          72           72
 Loan Amount ($)           1,320,109   21,927.3     11,660.7   13,296.0     20,000      28,932.1
 Loan Rate                 1,131,240     0.05         0.05       0.02        0.04         0.06
 FICO                       898,339      647.9       118.2        605         661         720
 Debt-to-Income             833,854      0.26         0.3        0.13        0.27         0.39
 Take Up                    588,231      0.65         0.48         0           1            1

                                                 B. Originated Loans
 Loan Rate                 2,434,049      0.05       0.03       0.03         0.04         0.06
 Loan Term (months)        2,434,049     62.73      22.08        48           60           72
 Loan Amount ($)           2,434,049   18,136.52 10,808.97     10,094       16,034       23,892
 FICO                      2,165,173  710.55         74.89        661        714           770
 Debt-to-Income (%)        1,276,585    0.25          0.32        0.05       0.26          0.37
 Collateral Value ($)      2,434,049 19,895.13      10,929.1   12,046.81    17,850      25,562.28
 Monthly Payment ($)       2,434,049     324.4      159.21      210.93      297.02       405.56

                                        C. Ex-Post Loan Performance Measures
 Days Delinquent           1,589,843     23.41      221.99      0        0                 0
 Charged-off Indicator     2,434,049     0.02        0.13       0        0                 0
 Default Indicator         2,434,049      0.02        0.14         0           0            0
 Current FICO              1,719,848     705.5       83.28        654         714         772
 %DFICO                    1,697,700     -0.01        0.09       -0.04         0          0.03


Note: Panels A­C, respectively, report summary statistics for loan applications, originated
loans, and ex-post loan performance. Loan Rate is the annual interest rate of the loan. Loan
Term is the term (in months) of the loan. Debt-to-Income is the ratio of all debt service
payments to income. Collateral Value is the value of the car at origination. Days Delinquent
is the number of days since a borrower has missed one or more monthly payments. Charged-
off Indicator is a dummy for whether a loan has been written off the books of the lending
institution. Default is an indicator for whether a borrower has been delinquent for at least
90 days. Current FICO is an updated FICO score for each borrower as of the date of our
data extract. FICO is the change in FICO score since origination as a fraction of the FICO
score at origination.



                                            52
Table 2: Summary Statistics for Estimation Sample with Identified FICO Discontinuities
                                                                         Percentile
                             Count      Mean      Std. Dev.     25th        50th      75th
                                           A. Approved Loan Applications
 Loan Term (months)          30,743     63.75      13.02      60         66            72
 Loan Amount ($)             30,743    21,310.6    11,106.2   13,188.5     19,626     27,606
 Loan Rate                   26,938     0.056       0.082      0.037        0.05       0.07
 FICO                        30,743     678.2        31.4        657        682        703
 Debt-to-Income              27,197     0.292       0.133       0.197      0.296      0.388
 Take-up                     30,743     0.511        0.5          0          1          1

                                               B. Originated    Loans
 Loan Rate                  514,834     0.061      0.031        0.037      0.055      0.078
 Loan Term (months)         514,834    59.616     19.813         48          60         71
 Loan Amount ($)            514,834   14,297.87 6,539.55        9,209      13,704     18,805
 FICO                       514,834    662.386      40.242      636          664       691
 Debt-to-Income (%)         296,748     0.243        0.161       0.1        0.271      0.38
 Collateral Value ($)       514,834    15,768     6,808.878    10,825      14,906     19,750
 Monthly Payment ($)        514,834    279.952      108.67     199.888    269.717 348.356

                                       C. Ex-Post Loan Performance Measures
 Days Delinquent            331,590    30.905     245.453      0       0                0
 Charged-off Indicator      514,834     0.025      0.157       0       0                0
 Default Indicator          514,834      0.024       0.154        0          0          0
 Current FICO               405,236    659.352      69.749      621         667        706
 %DFICO                     405,236     -0.005       0.09      -0.045      0.003      0.047


Note: Table reports summary statistics for the discontinuity sample (restricted to a 19-point
bandwidth around detected FICO discontinuities in lender pricing rules). Panels A, B, and
C describe loan applications, loan originations, and ex-post loan performance, respectively.
See notes to Table 1 for further details.




                                             53
          Table 3: Effects of FICO Discontinuities on Loan Rate and Loan Term
                                                      (1)          (2)
                                                  Loan Rate    Loan Term
               Discontinuity Coefficient          -0.0127***    0.822***
                                                    (0.004)      (0.187)

               Discontinuity  Lender FEs              X            X
               Commuting Zone  Quarter FEs            X            X
               Number of Observations               514,834      514,834
               R   2
                                                     0.169        0.083


Notes: Table reports regression discontinuity estimates of equation (12), normalizing FICO
scores around each threshold using a uniform kernel and a bandwidth of 19 FICO points.
Both specifications include commuting-zone-by-quarter fixed effects and discontinuity-by-
lender fixed effects. Robust standard errors in parentheses are double clustered by lender
and FICO score.




                                           54
                Table 4: Loan Application Covariate Balance Regressions
                                          (1)              (2)             (3)
                                                                     Number of Loan
                                    Loan Amount Debt-to-Income         Applications
  Discontinuity Coefficient             128.43           -0.084          -270.18
                                       (187.75)         (0.447)         (760.48)

  Discontinuity  Lender FEs                X                X                 X
  Commuting Zone  Quarter FEs              X                X                 X
  Number of Observations                117,985           91,923              39
  R2                                     0.0584           0.009             0.466

Notes: Table reports reduced-form RD regressions for the subset of institutions for which
we have detailed loan application data. See notes to Table 3 for details. Each observation
in the data used for column 3 represents a normalized FICO score. Robust standard errors
in parentheses for columns 1 and 2 are double clustered by lender and FICO score.




                                           55
Table 5: Effect of FICO Discontinuities on Loan Offer Take-up Decisions by Search Costs
      Search Costs Sample                     Full       High       Low      Difference
                                              (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
      Discontinuity Coefficient            0.121***    0.020***   0.137***    -0.116***
                                            (0.015)    (0.005)     (0.016)     (0.006)

      Discontinuity  Lender FEs                X          X           X
      Commuting Zone  Quarter FEs              X          X           X
      Number of Observations                30,743      4,436      26,307
      R   2
                                             0.27       0.45        0.25


Notes: Table reports results for reduced-form RD regressions of loan take-up (conditional on
being approved for a loan offer) separately for the full sample (column 1) and for borrowers in
areas with high and low search costs in columns 2 and 3, respectively, using the specification
in equation (12). High search costs are defined as borrowers living at locations with less
than 10 lenders within a 20-minute drive. Robust standard errors in parentheses are double
clustered by lender and FICO score. See notes to Table 3 for estimation details.




                                              56
Table 6: Number of Additional Observed Loan Applications per Borrower by Search Costs
                  Search Costs                 High      Low     Difference
                                                (1)      (2)      (1) - (2)
                  Mean                        0.342     0.409    -0.067***
                  Standard Deviation          (0.009) (0.004)     (0.011)
                  Number of Observations       6,042  44,655


Notes: Table reports average number of additional applications observed for each loan ap-
plication in our data for applications with non-missing birthdates and nine-digit zip codes
for high- and low-search-cost areas in columns 1 and 2, respectively. Standard deviations
are reported in parentheses. Column 3 calculates the difference in means along with the
robust standard error for the statistical significance of the difference between columns 1 and
2. High search costs are defined as borrowers living at locations with less than 10 lenders
within a 20-minute drive.




                                             57
            Table 7: Effects of FICO Discontinuities on Origination Outcomes
                                    (1)              (2)           (3)            (4)
                                 Purchase       Loan          Loan-to-Value    Monthly
                                 Price ($)    Amount ($)         Ratio        Payment ($)
 Discontinuity Coefficient       376.58**         566.21***     0.0130**         0.17
                                 (175.72)         (167.93)       (0.005)        (1.02)

 Discontinuity  Lender FEs          X                X             X              X
 Commuting Zone FEs                 X                X             X              X
 Quarter FEs                        X                X             X              X
 Number of Observations          514,834           514,834       514,834        514,834
 R2                               0.052             0.058         0.029          0.056


Notes: Table reports reduced-form RD estimates of equation (12). Robust standard errors
in parentheses are double clustered by lender and FICO score. See notes to Table 3 for more
details.




                                             58
               Table 8: Effects of FICO Discontinuities on Vehicle Purchase
                                        (1)             (2)                   (3)
                                  Purchase Price   Purchase Price   Car Age (months)
    Discontinuity Coefficient       344.69***          79.71            -1.76***
                                     (123.78)         (49.25)            (0.043)

    Discontinuity  Lender FEs           X                X                    X
    Commuting Zone FEs                  X                X                    X
    Quarter FEs                         X                X                    X
    Make-Model FEs                      X                                     X
    Make-Model-Year FEs                                  X
    Number of Observations           468,800          468,800            468,800
    R2                                0.353            0.767              0.352


Notes: Table reports reduced-form RD estimates of equation (12) on car purchase prices
(columns 1­2) and car age in months (column 3). Columns 1 and 3 include make  model
fixed effects and column 2 includes make  model  model-year fixed effects. Robust
standard errors in parentheses are double clustered by lender and FICO score. See notes to
Table 3 for more details.




                                              59
    Table 9: Effects of FICO Discontinuity on Origination Outcomes by Search Costs
                                           (1)          (2)         (3)        (4)
        Dependent Variable                Loan Amount ($)        Purchase Price ($)
        Search Cost Sample                High      Low           High       Low
        Discontinuity Coefficient       754.41***   535.41***    634.48**   335.96*
                                         (226.18)    (171.10)    (260.62)   (171.75)

        Discontinuity  Lender FEs           X           X           X          X
        Commuting Zone FEs                  X           X           X          X
        Quarter FEs                         X           X           X          X
        Number of Observations            75,206      439,628     75,206    439,628
        R2                                0.064        0.059      0.054      0.054


Notes: Table reports reduced-form RD estimates of equation (12) for borrowers with high
and low search costs. High search costs are defined as borrowers living at locations with less
than 10 lenders within a 20-minute drive. Robust standard errors in parentheses are double
clustered by lender and FICO score. See notes to Table 3 for more details.




                                             60
       Table 10: Balance of Ex-Post Credit Outcomes Across FICO Discontinuities
                                           (1)              (2)         (3)        (4)
                                    Days Delinquent Charge-off       Default    % FICO
     Discontinuity Coefficient            4.185            0.004      0.002       0.001
                                         (3.101)          (0.003)     (0.004)    (0.003)

     Discontinuity  Lender FEs              X               X           X          X
     Commuting Zone FEs                     X               X           X          X
     Quarter FEs                            X               X           X          X
     Number of Observations              331,590          514,834    514,834     405,236
     R2                                   0.162            0.073      0.089       0.015


Notes: Table reports reduced-form RD estimates of equation (12) on ex-post loan and bor-
rower outcomes. Days delinquent is the number of days a borrower is delinquent as of our
data extract. Charge-off is an indicator for whether a loan has been written off the books of
the lending institution. Default is an indicator for whether a borrower has been delinquent
for at least 90 days. FICO is the change in FICO score since origination as a fraction of
the FICO score at origination for the subsample of institutions that report credit scores after
loan origination. Robust standard errors in parentheses are double clustered by lender and
FICO score. See notes to Table 3 for estimation details.




                                              61
A     Identification Appendix
    In this appendix, we discuss additional robustness checks that support our interpretation
of the results in the main body of the paper.
A.1     First-stage Heterogeneity
    Our take-up estimates represent unbiased estimates of borrowing elasticities at the exten-
sive margin to the extent that the discontinuities satisfy the identifying assumptions required
of valid RD estimation. However, when comparing these second-stage RD estimates across
subsamples, an important caveat is that variation in the proximity of financial institutions
(PFI) could influence first-stage estimates of the magnitude of FICO pricing discontinu-
ities. If so, it would not be surprising to find that below-threshold borrowers search more
in high-PFI geographies if differences in offered rates across thresholds are correlated with
PFI. Appendix Table A3 reports estimates of differences in offered interest rates around
thresholds for high- and low-search-cost geographies. High-search-cost areas (low PFI) have
estimated average differences of 1.4 percentage points across thresholds, compared to dif-
ferences of 1.2 percentage points in low-search-cost areas (high PFI). The difference in the
first-stage estimates between high and low-PFI areas is not statistically significant (as re-
ported in column 3), suggesting that our measure of search costs does create bias through
differences in first-stage effects.
A.2     Potential Omitted Variables Correlated with High Search Costs
    Another challenge to our inference is the interpretation of differences in borrowing elas-
ticities across high- and low-search-cost geographies. While our RD estimation allows us to
estimate internally valid responses to interest-rate markups, differences in RD coefficients
across areas could be related to other factors besides search costs. Our search-cost proxy
(the number of PFIs) is plausibly correlated with several unobserved variables, including the
financial sophistication of borrowers, the advertising of credit (which plausibly influences
search costs), local (within-CZ) preferences, and economic or demographic conditions. Can-
didate omitted variables could be time varying (e.g., hyper-local economic conditions) or
relatively time invariant (e.g., financial sophistication, brand loyalty preferences).
A.2.1 Addressing Time-varying Omitted Variables
    If a given location has few nearby lenders because, for example, lenders anticipate forth-
coming local economic shocks, then our proxy for high search costs may be correlated with
a growing inelasticity of local demand that could generate our results even if the number of
PFIs had remained high. We address possible bias from such time-varying omitted variables
in the following way. We create a Bartik measure of PFI, calculated as the number of PFIs
for each borrower in our sample using the density of nearby financial institutions as of 1990
using NETS data on the location of every financial institution in the U.S. We then grow the
1990 PFI measure using the national growth rate in financial institutions from 1990 through
the year of each observation in our sample period, calculating the national growth rate for
each location excluding the contribution of that location to the aggregate changes. Variation
in the Bartik PFI measure is thus driven by local branching concentration as of 1990 and
aggregate variation in national branching trends, neither of which is likely to be correlated

                                              62
with time-series variation in, e.g., local economic conditions during our sample period of
2005­2015. We sort our sample based on high and low Bartik PFIs and estimate take-up
elasticities as in equation (12). Results are reported in Appendix Table A5. These results
indicate that borrowing elasticities in high-Bartik-PFI geographies (low search costs) are
higher than in low-Bartik-PFI geographies (high search costs), with high-search-cost areas
being relatively insensitive to interest rates and low-search-cost areas exhibiting strong and
statistically significant reactions. These results suggest that time-varying economic shocks
that occur during our sample period do not appear to be a sufficient explanation for differ-
ences in loan take-up rates across high- and low-PFI geographies.
A.2.2    Addressing Time-invariant Omitted Variables
    A second challenge to our inference is correlated time-invariant omitted variables, such
as financial sophistication or brand loyalty. Ultimately, the strength of the Bartik instru-
mentation strategy relies on the exogeneity of the 1990 branch network, which may itself be
correlated with local characteristics. For example, borrowers with low financial sophistica-
tion could exhibit lower borrowing elasticities if they do not appreciate the costs associated
with differences in loan interest rates (see, e.g., Stango and Zinman, 2009, and Bertrand
and Morse, 2011). Related, borrowers may have a preference for borrowing from their
current depository (although this, too, could be driven by unawareness of price dispersion
arising from high search costs). While our regression-discontinuity design uses random as-
signment to one side of a FICO threshold and thus conceptually holds such unobservables
fixed, when we compare the effect of discontinuities in high and low-PFI areas, we need
to address possible time-invariant correlates of the number of nearby lenders that could af-
fect spatial variation in RD coefficients. In general, our specifications above attempted to
address bias caused by time-invariant omitted variables with commuting-zone fixed effects.
However, while commuting-zone fixed effects address time-invariant omitted variables at
the metropolitan-area level, they do not address likely variation in sophistication correlated
with high or low PFI within a commuting zone. We address this concern in two ways: using
eight-digit zip code fixed effects in our RD specification and with a difference-in-differences
design.
    First, we augment our RD specification (12) to include fixed effects zip8(i) for the eight-
digit zip code of borrower i. We then estimate take-up RD regressions separately for high- and
low-search-cost areas, as before. Results in Appendix Table A6 are identified off of regression-
discontinuity variation within a hyperlocal geography, allowing us to compare borrowers on
the opposite sides of a FICO threshold who live in an area smaller than a census tract. While
our High Search Cost indicator may be correlated with other unobservables that affect take-
up decisions (e.g., stronger brand preferences or a weaker understanding of personal finance),
to the extent that there is spatial correlation in such unobservables, this specification allows
us to hone our RD apparatus on more comparable borrowers. Again, column 1 of Appendix
Table A6 shows that even within an eight-digit zip code, there is essentially zero contrast
between the take-up decisions of borrowers on either side of a discontinuity, whereas within
an eight-digit zip code in low-search-cost areas, there is a large and significant difference in
take-up rates across a FICO threshold (column 2). The difference between high- and low-
search-cost area take-up rates shown in column 3 is even larger than the effects estimated
using CZ fixed effects in column 3 of Appendix Table 5. Supporting our interpretation

                                              63
of the effects of the discontinuities being driven by search costs, firm-specific pricing has
significant effects on prospective borrowers only when our search-cost proxy is high even
when comparing borrowers that live in the same hyperlocal neighborhood.
    An alternate approach is to explicitly use temporal variation in the branch network in a
difference-in-differences setting that looks at changes in take-up rates as a function of changes
in the nearby lender density within a very narrow location. While the identifying assumption
here is the exogeneity of time-series changes to the branch network, using this variation is
supported by the results of section A.2.1 that potentially endogenous changes to the branch
network cannot explain our results. For this exercise, we set aside the discontinuity sample
and instead focus on ascertaining the reaction of shopping behavior of locations g that become
high-search-cost areas after not being high-search-cost areas previously. We first restrict our
attention to only those nine-digit zip codes g in our data that eventually transition from
having 10 or more PFIs to fewer than 10. This results in a small sample of 608 observations
from locations that we observe before and after becoming high-search-cost areas (note that
nine-digit zip codes can often be a single address). We estimate the effect of becoming a
high-search-cost areas in a panel setting as follows

               Take-upigt = g +     t   + High Search Costgt + F ICOigt + "igt ,            (14)

where HighSearchCost is a dummy for whether location g was a high-search-cost location in
quarter t. The virtue of this specification is that it absorbs fixed differences across extremely
local areas (e.g., financial sophistication or credit-union loyalty) and thereby identifies the
effect of search costs solely off of the timing of changes in search costs, which we argued
in Appendix Section A.2.1 seem unrelated to unobservables driving variation in demand
elasticities across space. We control for the FICO score of the given borrower to control
for changes in the composition of borrowers at a nine-digit address over time. Column 1 of
Appendix Table A7 reports estimates of equation (14), showing that when borrowers face a
reduction in nearby potential lenders, they are 11.0 percentage points more likely to accept
a given loan offer.
     To include locations which did not change search-cost status in the control group to
identify the coefficients on the control variables, we also estimate a version of equation (14)
in first-differences. For each location g in our sample that we observe more than once, we
calculate the change in take-up rates Take-upgt , which we then regress on commuting-zone
and quarter-pair fixed effects (a fixed effect for the pair of quarters in which location g was
observed to calculate Take-upgt ); the change in the location's average FICO score; and
an indicator High Search Costgt equal to one if location g was a high-search-cost area in
quarter t but not in the last period location g was observed before period t.

            Take-upgt = cz(g) +    t, t   +   High Search Costgt +     F ICOgt + "gt .      (15)

Again, the identifying assumption behind this specification is that the timing of decreases in
the number of PFIs is unrelated to counterfactual trends in take-up rates, supported by the
Bartik results above. Including commuting-zone fixed effects in the differences specification
allows for each metropolitan area to change its propensity to shop for a loan differentially.
The prediction of our search-cost explanation for high take-up rates in high-search-cost areas


                                                 64
for this setting is that cross-sectional changes in take-up rates, having differenced out time-
invariant factors, will be positively related to changes in our search-cost measure. Column 2
of Appendix Table A7 shows that the estimated ^ is positive and significant such that take-
up rates increase as borrowers shop around less when nearby lenders exit. The results of
the levels difference-in-differences specification and the first-differences specification further
confirm that borrowers seem to be more affected by firm-specific markups when search costs
are high.
A.3     Online Search
    Many consumers now search for loans on the internet (including using such information
aggregators as Bankrate.com), potentially limiting the relevance of lender density and driving
distances as a proxy for 21st-century search costs. One large lender in our sample suggests
that formal digital search (actually filing out an application to receive an interest-rate offer
online) is less common than might be expected: only 8% of their total applications are
digital. While credit-union clientele skew slightly older than the general population, another
potential explanation for the ability of physical search measures to explain variation in search
propensity is that, although borrowers can be easily preapproved on the internet, the actual
closing of loans (signing documents, transfer of title, etc.) still most frequently occurs at
physical branch or dealer locations, even for direct loans. We also note that the literature
on online search has not found e-commerce to be a panacea driving search costs and price
dispersion to zero (see, e.g., Ellison and Ellison, 2009).
    The option to search online could affect the interpretation of our empirical results in
a few ways. First, our price dispersion results are lower bounds given the possibility of
digital lending given that each calculated spread from a given borrower's rate to the best
available rate could only be weakly higher if taking into account other lenders' rates. On
representativeness, there still may be a large category of borrowers not in our data that are
unaffected by nearby lender density (although they may well be affected by other types of
search costs). However, our results provide positive evidence of the persistent important of
physical search costs for millions of borrowers. Ultimately, given trends in digital banking
and the possibility of online search for credit, we view our results with respect to nearby
lender density and loan search even more noteworthy.
A.4     Distinguishing Search Costs from Market Concentration
    Proxying search costs with driving-time density may not uniquely measure borrower
search costs. Driving-time density, as constructed, might also be a correlate of other local
factors such as market concentration that determine the degree of price competition among
lenders. Moreover, some of the predictions of the model would also be consistent with more
imperfect competition arising from market concentration. In particular, markups being sus-
tainable in equilibrium and these markups affecting own-good quantities and complementary
consumption would also be a feature of a concentrated market.
    We first reiterate that in a standard oligopolistic-competition setup, there would not be
price dispersion or differential effects on take-up or search behavior across markets. Appendix
Figure A3 supports this argument by plotting the relationship in our data between markups
and market shares in high- and low-PFI markets. Markups are estimated as lender fixed


                                               65
effects in a regression of loan-level interest rates on controls for a FICO cubic, LTV, loan
size, loan term, and quarter fixed effects. Market shares are calculated at the lender 
Commuting Zone  quarter level. In high-PFI (low-search-cost) markets, where the density
of nearby lenders is high, charging a higher markup corresponds to a lower market share. In
low-PFI (high-search-cost) areas, market shares are statistically unrelated to markups.
    Appendix Table A8 confirms that in a multivariate regression of log market shares on
average markups with commuting zone fixed effects and lender fixed effects, we cannot reject
a zero effect of higher markups on market shares for high-search-cost markets. For low-search-
cost markets, the semi-elasticity of market share with respect to interest-rate markups in
column 3 is -7, meaning that for every 100 bp higher markup a lender charges, it can expect
to lose 7% market share. These results confirm the last prediction of our theoretical model
in section 3.1 that market shares should be unrelated to markups when search costs are high.
    To further differentiate between search costs and a market concentration story, we con-
struct empirical measures of lending competition within CZs. We calculate the share of
originated mortgage loans by each HMDA lender within a given CZ and use the origination
shares to construct a CZ-level Herfindahl index to capture the idea that two locations with
identical branching networks could face differing degrees of competition based on the dis-
tribution of market shares across branches.42 Dividing loans into high and low (above and
below median) competition areas based on our constructed Herfindahl index, we reestimate
the take-up RD specification of Table 5 for all four combinations of high and low search cost
and market concentration combinations.
    The results of this exercise in Appendix Table A9 highlight that even within a competition
category, there are statistically significant differences by search costs in the difference of take-
up rates across FICO thresholds. Even for markets with a highly competitive banking sector,
borrowers in high-search-cost areas are much more likely to accept dominated loan terms.
Within low-competition CZs in low-search-cost areas, the difference in take-up rates around
lending thresholds is 14 percentage points; borrowers quasi-randomly assigned high RD rate
markups are 14 pp more likely to walk away from a loan offer. In comparison, borrowers in
high-search-cost areas in the same low competition bin do not appear to respond to markups
at the extensive margin--the point estimate is only marginally significant but suggests that
such borrowers are more likely to accept a likely dominated loan. Within high-competition
markets, we find similar results: borrowers with lower search costs are 10 pp less likely to
accept a firm specific markup than borrowers in high-search-cost areas. These results suggest
that regardless of the overall level of market concentration, borrowers in areas we expect to
have high search costs are much less sensitive to interest rates in their extensive-margin loan
take-up decisions and thus more affected by firm-specific pricing.

B      Estimates from Structural Search Model
   In this appendix, we demonstrate that search-cost estimates from the structural search
model of Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) (HS) are consistent with our characterization of
high- and low-search-cost areas. Although HS models inelastic demand for a single final
good (mutual funds), it provides a useful framework to relate data on market shares and
  42
     See Scharfstein and Sunderam (2016), Dreschler, Savov, and Schnabl (2017), and Liebersohn (2019) for
recent alternative measures of retail banking market concentration.


                                                   66
prices to the distribution of search costs in a sequential search equilibrium. We first introduce
the version of the HS model that we apply to our setting and then discuss our estimation
procedure. We then reestimate the model separately using only market-share and markup
data from borrowers in high- or low-PFI areas (our proxy for low and high search costs,
respectively) and discuss our results.
    In the version of the HS model we consider, buyers are homogenous except for hetero-
geneous search costs ki distributed according to H (·), which we take to be a log-normal
distribution with parameters E (log k ) = µ and V ar(log k ) = 2 . When searching, buyers
draw a price quote from seller j with probability
                                                                   
                                                                  Zj
                                                   j = PN                  
                                                                               ,                        (16)
                                                                  k=1     Zk

where Zj is a vector of characteristics about seller j that determine its sampling probability.
For a shifter Zj of sampling probability, we use NUCA data to calculate the number of years
since a credit union first opened in a market.43
    Analogous to (3), borrowers in the HS model continue searching insofar as the expected
gain from search given their current quote r0 exceeds their search cost ki
                                           Z       r0
                                     ki                 [V (r )        V (r0 )] dF (r)                  (17)
                                               r

where F (·) is the distribution of interest rates and V (·) is the indirect utility function. This
yields a set of search-cost critical values kj
                                             
                                               , where borrowers that have drawn a quote from
firm j and who have individual search costs ki kj      
                                                        will accept the offer from firm j , with

                                               N
                                               X
                                       
                                      kj   =              l [ V ( r l )        V (rj )]                 (18)
                                                   l=j


where N is the number of (discrete) lenders and lenders are indexed in descending order
according to the interest rate rl that they charge such that V (rl ) V (rj ) whenever l > j .
Given (17), borrower search will again feature an optimal stopping rule, where borrowers
will search until they find a lender whose search cost cutoff kj  
                                                                   < ki .
     The cutoff values established by (18) connect a lender's market share given price rj to
the search cost distribution. Borrowers with search cost ki 2 (kj  
                                                                    , kj
                                                                          1 ) will make up some of
the market share of every lender l j , as some of these borrowers will have arrived at lender
l first and will stop because their search cost is above the critical value for lender l (because
likelihood of finding a sufficiently lower-cost lender than l is too small). The contribution of
borrowers satisfying ki 2 (kj     
                               , kj 1 ) to the market share of lender l     j will be
                                           l                                                         
                                                                               
                                                                          H ( kj 1)
                                                                                               
                                                                                          H ( kj )      (19)
                            1    1     2           ...       j     1



  43
    We find that that estimates of  are positive, suggesting that borrowers are indeed more likely to sample
from lenders with longer tenure in a market.


                                                              67
and the total market share sl for lender l will then be the sum of these values for all segments
in the search cost distribution
               "
                                              
                      1 H (k1 )       2 H (k2  )
        s l = l 1 +             +                                                           (20)
                      1 1         (1 1 )(1 1 2 )
                  l 1
                                                                                        #
                 X                   j H (kj
                                             )                          H (kl )
               +                                                                          .
                 j =3
                      (1 1 . . . l 1 )(1 1 . . . l ) (1 1 . . . l 1 )

Intuitively, borrowers from firm l are borrowers that drew from l first with search costs
sufficiently high as to fail to justify additional search, or else happened to sample from only
firms with sufficiently higher prices than l before sampling from, and being satisfied with,
firm l.
     Lenders choose rates rj to maximize current profits, given by

                                      j = S · sj (rj )(rj           cj )                                         (21)

where S is the total size of the market, sj (rj ) is firm market share given prices, and cj
is firm's marginal cost of lending. Note that HS abstracts away from continuously elastic
demand or complements, which is sufficient for our objective here of illustrating whether a
search model estimates different search costs for high- and low-PFI areas. The FOC is then

                                                            @ sj (rj )
                                  sj (rj ) + (rj     cj )              = 0.                                      (22)
                                                              @ rj

The relevant derivative of market shares with respect to prices in (22) is knowable from (20):

                                       
  @ sj     1 2j h(k1 )        2 2 j h(k2 )
       =
  @ rj      1 1          (1   1 )(1 1          2 )
                 "                                                                              P                  #
            j 1
            X                           l 2    
                                          j h(kl )                                           j ( N             
                                                                                                  l=j +1 l )h(kj )

             l=3
                   (1    1    2    ... l 1 )(1 1                2          ...      l )     1 1 2 ... j 1

where the dependence of k  on r comes from (18) and h(·) = dH (·) is the PDF of the
search-cost distribution.
    Assuming constant marginal cost c as in HS, we can then estimate the parameters
(µ, , , c) by non-linear least squares, taking (22) as our estimating equation and an ob-
jective function
                                              N 
                                              X                                                  2
                                                                                    @ sj (rj )
                    (^
                     µ, ^ , ^, c
                               ^) = arg min          sj (rj ) + (rj              c)                  .           (23)
                                              j =1
                                                                                      @ rj

    Because this model assumes homogenous products and borrowers, we restrict the data
to loans with the modal maturity (60 months) and residualize interest rates of credit risk
and other product characteristics using lender fixed effects as described in section A.4. Ap-


                                                     68
pendix Figure A4 plots the CDF of search costs for high- and low-PFI areas implied by our
log-normal distributional assumption and the estimated parameters µ and . The model
estimates that given the joint distribution of market shares and prices, low-PFI borrowers
have higher search costs, with the CDF of search costs for borrowers in low-PFI areas always
less than the search-cost CDF for borrowers in high-PFI areas. When the y-axis is 0.5, the
horizontal difference between the two CDFs corresponds to the difference in median search
costs, which we show below is 70 basis points.
    Appendix Table A10 reports key moments of the search-cost distribution in each area.
The units are the same as interest-rate units such that 0.01 corresponds to one percentage
point. We reject the equality of the two distributions. Low-PFI areas have much higher
average search costs, as well as more dispersed search costs. Because the search-cost dis-
tribution is significantly skewed, HS emphasize differences in median search costs, which in
our case is 70 basis points. Discounting at 5%, for a typical, $20,000 loan with a 60-month
maturity, a 70 basis point change in interest rates from 5% to 5.70% corresponds to a present
value difference of total loan payments of $342. These estimates therefore imply that the
median borrower in a high-PFI area has a search cost $342 less than the median borrower
in a low-PFI area.
    The Hortaçsu and Syverson (2004) search model differs from our model in several key
ways. However, its framework for estimating search-cost distributions given market shares
and prices provides an independent characterization of the relative costliness of searching
for credit in areas with high and low nearby lender densities. The results in Figure A4 and
Appendix Table A10 confirm our use of driving-time lender density above and below a cutoff
as a proxy for search costs that is indeed predictive of model-implied estimates of relative
search costs.




                                             69
                                        Figure A1: Average Vehicle Mileage by Car Age


                  120,000
                       80,000
          Odometer (miles)
      40,000      0




                                1   2    3    4   5    6    7    8     9     10   11   12   13   14   15
                                                           Car Age (years)

Notes: Figures plots average used-car odometer readings as a function of car age using
microdata from the National Household Transportation Survey (U.S. Department of Trans-
portation, 2017).




                                                             70
                             Figure A2: Balance of Borrower and Loan Characteristics Conditional on Origination
                                   A. Debt-to-Income Ratio                                                                                                     B. Loan Amount




                                                                                                                        18000
          .25




                                                                                                                          17500
          .245




                                                                                                         Average Loan Amount
Average DTI




                                                                                                                17000
    .24




                                                                                                      16500
          .235




                                                                                                                        16000
          .23




                       -10              -5                 0                    5                10                                       -10             -5                 0                    5                10
                                             FICO Score Relative to Threshold                                                                                  FICO Score Relative to Threshold

                              Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4                                                  Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4



                                             C. Age (years)                                                                                                       D. Gender
          42




                                                                                                                        .6
          41




                                                                                                                     .59
                                                                                                       Average Pr(male)
Average Age
39       40




                                                                                                      .58
          38




                                                                                                                        .57
          37




                       -10              -5                 0                    5                10                                       -10             -5                 0                    5                10
                                             FICO Score Relative to Threshold                                                                                  FICO Score Relative to Threshold

                              Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4                                                  Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4



                                               E. Ethnicity                                                                                     F. Number of Loans Originated
                                                                                                                        .015
          .81




                                                                                                      Frequency of Origiated FICO score
                  .8
Average Pr(white)




                                                                                                                              .01
      .79




                                                                                                           .005
          .78
          .77




                       -10              -5                 0                    5                10
                                                                                                                        0




                                             FICO Score Relative to Threshold
                                                                                                                                          -10             -5                 0                    5                10
                              Sample average within bin              Polynomial fit of order 4                                                                 FICO Score Relative to Threshold


                       Notes: Figures plot average values of borrower and originated loan characteristics around
                       FICO thresholds conditional on observing the application of an originated loan in our data.
                       See notes to Figure 5 for further details.



                                                                                                      71
 Figure A3: Relationship between Market Shares and Average Mark-ups by Search Costs

               -4
               -5      -6
     log(Market Share)
         -8    -7
               -9
               -10
               -11




                            -.12   -.1   -.08 -.06 -.04 -.02    0   .02   .04   .06   .08   .1   .12
                                                        Average Mark-Up

                                                       High PFI    Low PFI


Notes: Figure shows a bin-scatter plot of average log market shares against average interest-
rate markups for high-PFI (low-search-cost) and low-PFI (high-search-cost) markets (de-
noted with N and  symbols, respectively) along with bivariate regression lines and 95%
confidence intervals. High (low) PFI are defined as borrowers living at locations with more
than (at most) 10 lenders within a 20-minute drive. Market shares are calculated at the lender
 Commuting Zone level using the origination data of lenders in our sample. Markups are
calculated as lender fixed effects in a loan-level regression of interest rates on controls for a
cubic in FICO, loan size, loan term, LTV, and quarter fixed effects.




                                                            72
                                                     Figure A4: Model-Estimated Search Cost Distributions

                                           0.9

                                           0.8

                                           0.7           High PFI
        Cumulative Distribution Function




                                                                               Low PFI
                                           0.6

                                           0.5

                                           0.4

                                           0.3

                                           0.2

                                           0.1

                                            0
                                                 0        0.02      0.04           0.06         0.08   0.1   0.12
                                                                           Search Costs (percent)

Notes: Figure plots search cost CDFs estimated using the sequential search model of Hortaçsu
and Syverson (2004). The blue line on the left is the estimated distribution of search costs
for borrowers in high-PFI areas that proxy for low search costs, and the orange line on the
right is estimated using data from borrowers in low-PFI areas that proxy for for high search
costs. The x axis is measured in the same units as loan interest rates.




                                                                                  73
          Table A1: Summary Statistics for Excluded Sample of Indirect Loans
                                                                          Percentile
                               Count       Mean      Std. Dev.    25th      50th       75th
                                                 A. Originated Loans
   Loan Rate                 1,166,822      0.05       0.03      0.03       0.04        0.06
   Loan Term (months)        1,166,822     69.97       17.97       60        72     75
   Loan Amount ($)           1,166,822   22,051.64   11,318.28   13,790    20,146 28,324
   FICO                      1,013,915     718.77      68.06       672       719        770
   Debt-to-Income (%)         462,116       0.25        0.52        0       0.22        0.35
   Collateral Value ($)      1,166,822    21,997.7   11,176.38   13,983    19,965      27,800
   Monthly Payment ($)       1,166,822     360.87      161.71     246.8    334.25      445.04

                                       B. Ex-Post Loan Performance Measures
   Days Delinquent            799,144      39.16     645.64     0       0                0
   Charged-off Indicator     1,166,822     0.03       0.16      0       0                0
   Default Indicator         1,166,822     0.03       0.17      0       0                0
   Current FICO               705,754      704.76      81.71       656       712        769
   %DFICO                     695,114       -0.02       0.08      -0.05     -0.01       0.02


Note: Table reports summary statistics for the indirect loan portion of the original dataset.
This portion is excluded for the balance of the analysis of the paper. See notes to Table 1
for further details.




                                             74
              Table A2: Spread to Lowest Available Rate Summary Statistics
                                         Mean #
                                        Borrowers                             Percentile
     FICO Range            # of Cells    in Cell  Mean Std. Dev.         25th    50th 75th
 595  F ICO  599               74          2.19      0.038     0.029      0.01   0.03      0.06
 635  F ICO  639              250          2.23      0.023     0.021     0.01    0.02      0.03
 695  F ICO  699              161          2.15      0.011      0.01     0.003   0.01      0.02


Notes: Table reports summary statistics for the spread between a left-of-threshold borrower's
interest rate and the best available interest rate for borrowers in the same cell for measured
discontinuities at around three FICO scores (600, 640, and 700). Cells are defined as bor-
rowers within the same commuting zone, 5-point FICO bin, $1,000 purchase-price bin, 10
percentage point DTI bin, maturity, and who take out loans in the same six-month window.
Within each of the matched bins, we calculate the average difference between the lowest
interest rate in the cell and each individual loan in the cell. Summary statistics are reported
for only those cells that contain at least two borrowers.




                                              75
 Table A3: Effects of FICO Discontinuities on Origination Interest Rates by Search Costs
           Search Costs                            High       Low       Difference
                                                    (1)        (2)         (3)
           Discontinuity Coefficient            -0.014***   -0.012***     -0.002
                                                  (0.004)    (0.005)     (0.002)

           Discontinuity  Lender FEs                X           X
           Commuting Zone  Quarter FEs              X           X
           Number of Observations                 75,206     433,825


Notes: Table repeats RD estimates of first-stage equation (12) reported in Table 3, splitting
the sample into high- and low-search-cost areas. High search costs are defined as borrowers
living at locations with less than 10 lenders within a 20-minute drive. Robust standard errors
in parentheses are double clustered by lender and FICO score. See notes to Table 3 for more
details.




                                             76
     Table A4: Spread to Lowest Available Rate Summary Statistics by Search Costs
                                  N      Mean     Std. Dev.   25th    50th     75th
        High Search Costs      29,589    0.0258    0.0288     0.005   0.014    0.035
        Low Search Costs       236,031   0.0231    0.0266     0.005   0.0125   0.031


Notes: Table reports summary statistics for the spread between the rate a borrower accepted
and the best available interest rate for borrowers in the same cell. Cells are defined as
borrowers within the same commuting zone, 5-point FICO bin, $1,000 purchase-price bin,
10 percentage point DTI bin, maturity, and who take out loans in the same six-month
window. Within each of the matched bins, we calculate the average difference between the
lowest interest rate in the cell and each individual loan in the cell. High search costs are
defined as borrowers living at locations with less than 10 lenders within a 20-minute drive.
Summary statistics are reported for only those cells that contain at least two borrowers.




                                            77
Table A5: Effect of FICO Discontinuities on Loan Offer Take-up Decisions by Bartik Search
Costs
             Bartik Search Costs                   High       Low      Difference
                                                    (1)       (2)         (3)
             Discontinuity Coefficient            0.050     0.135***   -0.085***
                                                  (0.045)   (0.037)     (0.006)

             Discontinuity  Lender FEs              X          X
             Commuting Zone  Quarter FEs            X          X
             Number of Observations               5,591      25,152
             R2                                   0.40        0.25


Notes: Table reports results for reduced-form RD regressions of loan take-up (conditional
on being offered a loan) separately for borrowers in areas with low and high search costs in
columns 2 and 3, respectively. High search costs are defined as borrowers living at locations
predicted to have less than 10 lenders within a 20-minute drive using the Bartik instrument
discussed in section A.2.1. Robust standard errors in parentheses are double clustered by
lender and FICO score. See notes to Table 3 for estimation details.




                                             78
 Table A6: Robustness of FICO Discontinuities Effects on Take-up to Zip-8 Fixed Effects
                 Search Costs Sample          High       Low      Difference
                                               (1)       (2)         (3)
                 Discontinuity Coefficient   0.066     0.190***   -0.125***
                                             (0.057)   (0.035)     (0.009)

                 8-digit Zip Code FEs          X          X
                 Quarter FEs                   X          X
                 Number of Observations      4,436      26,307
                 R   2
                                             0.91        0.87


Notes: Table reports results for reduced-form RD regressions of loan take-up (conditional
on being offered a loan) separately for borrowers in areas with low and high search costs in
columns 1 and 2, respectively, including eight-digit zip code fixed effects. Robust standard
errors in parentheses are double clustered by lender and FICO score. See notes to Table 3
for estimation details.




                                             79
         Table A7: Effects of Search Costs and Competition on Take-up Decisions
                    Dependent Variable            Take-up       Take-up
                                                    (1)          (2)
                    High Search Cost Area         0.11***
                                                   (0.04)
                       High Search Cost Area                    0.03*
                                                               (0.017)
                    FICO                           -0.0004
                                                  (0.0003)
                      FICO                                    -0.0002***
                                                               (0.00003)

                    Geographic FEs                 Zip-8         CZ
                    Time FEs                      Quarter    Quarter Pair
                    Number of Observations          608        29,321
                    R-squared                      0.60         0.05

Notes: Table reports difference-in-differences regression results relating local take-up rates
to a given location's high-search-cost status. Column 1 estimates this relationship in levels
at the individual  quarter level, restricting the sample to only those locations (9-digit zip
codes) that transition from low to high search cost. Column 2 estimates this relationship in
changes, specifying the dependent variable as the change in the take-up rate at the location
 quarter level, and includes all locations for which we observe originated loans in multiple
quarters. Quarter Pair fixed effects are time fixed effects for each pair of quarters over
which the differences in column 2 are calculated. FICO is the change in the average FICO
score of a given location between observations for that location. Robust standard errors in
parentheses are double clustered by FICO and quarter (column 1) or quarter pair (column
2).




                                             80
            Table A8: Effects of Search Costs and Mark-ups on Market Shares
                                                      (1)         (2)         (3)
           Average Mark-up                         -9.452***   -8.058***   -7.067***
                                                    (2.032)     (1.917)     (1.896)
           High Search Cost                        2.788***    2.856***    2.474***
                                                    (0.180)     (0.199)     (0.222)
           Avg. Mark-up  High Search Cost           8.485*      6.141*      7.929*
                                                    (4.396)     (2.837)     (3.941)

           Commuting Zone FEs                                     X           X
           Lender FEs                                                          X
           R-squared                                 0.26        0.42        0.42
           Number of Observations                    3,133       3,133       3,133


Notes: Table reports estimation results of regressions of log(market share) on average mark-
ups at the lender  Commuting-Zone level. Market shares are calculated at the lender 
Commuting Zone level using the origination data of lenders in our sample. Markups are
calculated as lender fixed effects in a loan-level regression of interest rates on controls for
a cubic in FICO, loan size, loan term, LTV, and quarter fixed effects. High search cost is
an indicator for borrowers living at locations with less than 10 lenders within a 20-minute
drive. Robust standard errors in parentheses are clustered by Commuting Zone.




                                              81
    Table A9: Effects of Search Costs and Market Concentration on Take-up Decisions
                                                      Market
                                                   Concentration
                                                    LOW       HIGH




                             Search Costs
                                                   0.14***   0.10***
                                            LOW
                                                    (0.01)    (0.01)
                                                    -0.07*     -0.01
                                            HIGH
                                                    (0.04)    (0.01)


Notes: Table reports results for reduced-form RD regressions of loan take-up for borrowers in
each combination of markets with low and high search costs and high and competition. High
search costs are defined as borrowers living at locations with less than 10 lenders within
a 20-minute drive. Market concentration uses CZ-level lender mortgage market shares in
HMDA data to construct an Herfindahl index (HHI) of competition. High and low market
concentration are defined as above and below median HHI. All regressions include disconti-
nuity by lender fixed effects and commuting zone by quarter fixed effects. Robust standard
errors in parentheses are double clustered by lender and FICO score. See notes to Table 3
for estimation details.




                                                    82
                 Table A10: Search Cost Distribution Estimation Results
                 PFI Sample     Mean     Std. Dev. Median Observations
                                 (1)        (2)        (3)          (5)
                    High        0.068      1.512      0.017        2,525
                               (0.040)    (0.010)    (0.013)
                     Low        0.102      1.585      0.023         614
                               (0.066)    (0.025)    (0.020)


Notes: Table reports key moments of the search cost distribution (measured in percents)
corresponding to estimates of (22) by Nonlinear Least Squares as in (23) separately for loans
in high-PFI and low-PFI areas. Low-PFI areas proxy for high-search-cost markets and are
defined as areas where borrowers live within a 20-minute drive of less than 10 lenders. Means,
standard deviations, and medians of the search cost distribution for each type of area are
calculated from estimated log-normal parameters µ and with standard errors computed
by the delta method.




                                             83
