                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   CAN RE-ENROLLMENT CAMPAIGNS HELP DROPOUTS RETURN TO COLLEGE?
             EVIDENCE FROM FLORIDA COMMUNITY COLLEGES

                                       Justin C. Ortagus
                                        Melvin J. Tanner
                                       Isaac McFarlin Jr.

                                      Working Paper 26649
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26649


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




This study is supported by a research grant from the Helios Education Foundation. We thank
Peter Bergman, Angela Boatman, Joshua Hyman, and Dennis Kramer for their detailed feedback.
We also thank conference participants at the Association for the Study of Higher Education for
their helpful comments and Maryanne Long and Jiayao Wu for outstanding research assistance.
The study was approved by the University of Florida Institutional Review Board
(IRB201602705). The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Justin C. Ortagus, Melvin J. Tanner, and Isaac McFarlin Jr.. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Can Re-Enrollment Campaigns Help Dropouts Return to College? Evidence from Florida
Community Colleges
Justin C. Ortagus, Melvin J. Tanner, and Isaac McFarlin Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 26649
January 2020
JEL No. I2

                                           ABSTRACT

Most students who begin at a community college leave without earning a degree. Given the
growing emphasis on student success, many colleges have implemented re-enrollment campaigns
designed to foster re-engagement and degree completion among former students. However, there
is a lack of causal evidence on their effectiveness. We implement a text message-based re-
enrollment campaign in partnership with several Florida community colleges. Former students
who were previously successful academically are randomly assigned to one of two treatment
groups that either receives information to simplify the re-enrollment process or receives both
information and a one-course tuition waiver. When comparing outcomes of former students who
received information on re-enrollment to members in the control group, we find that providing
information that simplifies the re-enrollment process has a small, statistically insignificant effect
on re-enrolling. In contrast, offering both information and a one-course tuition waiver to recent
dropouts significantly increases the likelihood of re-enrollment by 1.5 percentage points (21
percent) and full-time re-enrollment by 0.6 percentage points (22 percent). The effects are
concentrated among former students who have accumulated the most credits and those with lower
grade point averages. This study highlights the importance of targeted interventions that address
informational and financial barriers facing former students.

Justin C. Ortagus                                 Isaac McFarlin Jr.
College of Education                              College of Education
University of Florida                             University of Florida
2-230C Norman Hall PO Box 117049                  2-230D Norman Hall
Gainesville, FL 32611                             P.O. Box 117049
jortagus@coe.ufl.edu                              Gainesville, FL 32611
                                                  and NBER
Melvin J. Tanner                                  imcfar@ufl.edu
College of Education
University of Florida
2-230C Norman Hall PO Box 117049
Gainesville, FL 32611
melvinjtanner@ufl.edu
    I.       Introduction

         As open-access institutions with diverse student bodies, community colleges provide access to higher

education for a disproportionate number of underserved students (Bailey et al, 2015). For community college

students who complete their degree, college can be economically rewarding (Belfield & Bailey, 2011; Jepsen

et al, 2014) and can also confer non-economic benefits, including improved health, longer life expectancy,

and lower rates of incarceration (Trostel & Chase, 2015). However, the majority of students who begin at a

community college do not earn a degree (Baum et al, 2016; Snyder et al, 2018). Disparities in college dropout

rates across demographic groups are especially worrisome, with Black and Hispanic students completing

college at significantly lower rates than their white peers (Juszkiewicz, 2016; Shapiro et al., 2017).1

         Despite the well-established benefits of obtaining a college degree, 36 million Americans have

obtained some postsecondary education without completing a degree. Roughly 10 percent of these non-

completers have already made substantial academic progress toward earning a degree and are most likely,

among former students, to re-enroll and graduate from college (Shapiro et al, 2019). In light of stagnant

enrollments, declining state appropriations, and a renewed emphasis on student success, many colleges have

launched re-enrollment campaigns targeted at former students who have made considerable progress toward

obtaining a degree (Schwartz, 2019). To encourage re-enrollment, colleges reach out to former students by

sending a combination of letters, emails, and text messages. In addition to using a variety of modalities of

communication, colleges sometimes offer targeted scholarships to incentivize re-enrollment among former

students. Although the number of re-enrollment campaigns in higher education has grown considerably in

recent years, there is a lack of causal evidence on their effectiveness.

         In this paper, we conduct a randomized controlled trial to evaluate the effect of text message-based

interventions on re-enrollment behavior among previously successful former students at five high-enrollment

community colleges. In partnership with participating community colleges, we sent multiple text messages



1
 We use the term "dropout" throughout this paper for the purpose of clarity, but students who withdraw from college on a temporary
basis are often described as "stop-outs" rather than dropouts.
1
to former students who had already made considerable progress toward their degree but were not currently

enrolled at any postsecondary institution. More than 27,000 former students comprise our sample and are

randomly assigned to receive one of two interventions through text messaging.

        The first intervention consists of multiple text messages that provide information on how to re-enroll

at the student's prior institution and a direct link to do so. In essence, the texts simplify and streamline the re-

enrollment process by providing embedded links to a website that informs the student how to re-enroll and

apply for financial aid. Furthermore, the texts inform students of critical enrollment deadlines. The second

intervention is similar to the first intervention but also offers a tuition waiver that covers the actual cost of

enrolling in their first course. Former students who are randomly assigned to a control group do not receive

any texts and, thus, are not offered a one-course tuition waiver or information that might facilitate re-

enrollment.

        The rationale for developing these interventions rests on the theory of human capital and models of

behavioral economics. On one hand, human capital theory implies that former students are rational actors

when making decisions about continuing their education based on the costs and benefits associated with re-

enrollment (Mincer, 1958). Therefore, offering students one-course tuition waivers lowers near-term costs of

financing a college education and may incentivize re-enrollment. On the other hand, the central motivation

behind behavioral economics rests on the assumption that individuals have limited information and their

decision-making can vary on the margins when decisions are complex, risky, or uncertain (Meyer & Rosinger,

2019; Karlan, McConnell, Mullainathan, & Zinman, 2016; Thaler & Benartzi, 2004). Due to the perceived

challenges associated with making complex decisions, former students may be inattentive to critical deadlines

or deterred in carefully evaluating the costs and benefits of re-enrolling. Accordingly, they may avoid taking

any action altogether. Because our interventions provide timely reminders and information that simplifies the

re-enrollment process, treated individuals may be more likely to re-enroll.

        Overall, we find no relationship between providing former students informational nudges, alone, and

their likelihood of re-enrollment. However, we do find positive effects on the likelihood of former students

2
re-enrolling when informational nudges are combined with a one-course tuition waiver. More specifically,

former students who received both the information and one-course waiver are 1.5 percentage points (or 21

percent) more likely to return to college. The effects of the informational nudges combined with a course

waiver are especially strong among former students who have lower GPAs, earned a substantial number of

credit hours when previously enrolled, and students who are older than traditional undergraduates.

          Our study makes two important contributions. Most obviously, this research sheds light on the

efficacy of types of outreach campaigns aimed at fostering re-enrollment among former students. Despite the

growing popularity of these targeted outreach programs (Schwartz, 2019), little is known regarding whether

these targeted outreach programs are actually effective. As such, our study provides the first causal evidence

that outreach campaigns can help former students return to college. Second, there is a nascent body of

evidence that shows informational nudges alone do not significantly improve college enrollment or students'

academic outcomes (Bettinger, Long, Oreopoulos, & Sanbonmatsu, 2012; Bird, Castleman, Denning,

Goodman, Lamberton, & Rosinger, 2019; Oreopoulos & Petronijevic, 2019). Our experimental findings align

with this prior work by showing that informational nudges alone do not improve the likelihood of former

students re-enrolling in college. However, our study provides compelling and robust evidence that combining

informational nudges with a financial incentive improves the likelihood that former students return to college.

          The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews prior literature on student

attrition at community colleges and the effects of nudges and financial incentives on access and success in

higher education. Section III outlines the data, sample, design of the intervention, mechanics of the

randomization, and analytic strategy. Section IV presents our results, including both main and heterogeneous

effects. Section V offers a discussion of the implications of our findings for practice, policy, and future

scholarship.

    II.      Literature Review

          Community colleges play a democratizing role for millions of underserved students (Belfield &

Bailey, 2011; Rouse, 1995), but many community college students leave college without completing a degree

3
(Snyder, de Brey, & Dillow, 2018). Approximately 47% of students who begin at a community college are

no longer enrolled at any college or university, and only 38% of community college students complete their

associate or bachelor's degree within six years of initial enrollment (Juszkiewicz, 2016; Shapiro et al., 2017).

Prior literature has shown that many college students are unable to complete a degree due to informational

and financial barriers that are unrelated to their academic ability or prior performance in coursework (Long,

2007).2

    A. Institutional Responses to Student Attrition

          Given widespread concerns that not enough qualified students reap the benefits associated with

completing college, the federal government invests over $120 billion each year to various initiatives designed

to encourage college enrollment and graduation (Scott-Clayton, 2017). Many public colleges and universities,

especially those whose funding is tied to institutional performance measures, invest considerable resources

toward improving their retention and completion rates. In recent years, targeted initiatives have expanded

beyond improving the outcomes of current students by seeking to help former students in good academic

standing return to college and finish their degree.

          Former students who left college before earning their degree have reported that they did not

understand what was required to be able to re-enroll and lacked a clear list of next steps and specific deadlines

related to the re-enrollment process (Inside Track, 2019). Behavioral nudges can be used as a mechanism to

remove informational barriers for individuals who may not be attentive to or aware of critical information or

deadlines related to how to return to college (Bird et al., 2019). In an effort to encourage recent non-

completers to return to college, numerous colleges have enacted re-enrollment campaigns to increase

enrollment and completion numbers (Schwartz, 2019). For example, the University of Memphis created a re-

enrollment initiative targeted at students who stopped enrolling in courses at least a semester ago, have a 2.0




2
  Most research examining why students leave college is correlational. For example, Crosta (2013) highlights student attributes
associated with the decision to drop out and finds community college dropouts are more likely to be older and less likely to receive
financial aid. Additional work shows that students often leave college due to many financial issues unrelated to their ability to
succeed in the classroom (e.g., Rath et al., 2013; Stinebrickner & Stinebrickner, 2008).
4
GPA, and earned 90 or more credit hours through their previous coursework (University of Memphis Finish

Line Program, 2019). In addition, Waubonsee Community College (WCC) recently implemented a re-

enrollment campaign in which students received a postcard or phone call offering information about re-

enrolling, but the former students who were contacted via postcards or phone calls did not re-enroll at a higher

rate than those students who were not contacted through the campaign (Lashure, Randall, & Hinkle, 2019).

    B. Prior Evidence on Interventions to Increase Enrollment

       Numerous studies have employed informational interventions to determine the effect of nudges on the

behaviors of both prospective and current college students. Castleman and Page (2015) found that their text

messaging campaign had a positive impact on whether recent high school graduates enrolled in college.

Additional work has shown positive effects associated with the implementation of text messaging programs

on financial aid renewal among college freshmen (Castleman & Page, 2016).

       Some prior research has revealed positive effects of informational nudges on prospective students'

likelihood of enrolling in college (Barr & Turner, 2018; Castleman & Page, 2015; Castleman, Page, &

Schooley, 2014; Page & Gehlbach, 2017). Castleman, Owen, and Page (2015) found that contacting high

school graduates via phone, email, and text messaging increased the likelihood of college enrollment among

Hispanic males. Hyman (2019) mailed letters encouraging high-achieving high school seniors to consider

college and engage with a custom website containing additional information. The author reported that low-

income students were more likely to attend college after receiving the informational letters, but the results

appeared to be driven by low-income student enrollment at four-year institutions.

       Several researchers have sent emails or mailed letters to describe the benefits of college to prospective

college students and found no effect on the likelihood of enrollment (Bergman, Denning, & Manoli, 2019;

Gurantz, Howell, Hurwitz, Larson, Pender, & White, 2019; Kerr, Pekkarinen, Sarvimäki, & Uusitalo, 2014).

Bettinger et al. (2012) found no change in college enrollment in response to a treatment offering financial aid

information, but an additional treatment offering both financial aid information and professional assistance



5
completing the FAFSA led to an increase in enrollment among dependent students and independent students

with no prior college experience.

          In a recent study examining the efficacy of nudge interventions at scale, Bird, Castleman, Denning,

Goodman, Lamberton, and Rosinger (2019) employed a state-level and nationwide campaign that reached

over 800,000 students, finding no impact of their information-based nudging campaign on the likelihood of

college enrollment for any student subgroups. Oreopoulos and Petronijevic (2019) designed online and text-

message interventions in order to improve student achievement in college and found no effect on college

students' academic outcomes--even among those students who were identified as more likely to drop out of

college. According to a systematic review of experimental and quasi-experimental literature on the efficacy

of outreach by colleges, outreach programs can increase access to higher education among disadvantaged

students when the program offers supplemental counseling or simplifies the college application process, but

outreach programs are not effective when they merely provide general information (Herbaut & Geven, in

press).

          Previous literature has also examined the effect of financial aid on the likelihood of college

enrollment. Castleman and Long (2016) employed a regression discontinuity design and found that receiving

the Florida Student Access Grant had a positive impact on students' likelihood of enrollment, which aligns

with prior work showing the positive relationship between financial aid receipt and college enrollment (e.g.,

Fack & Grenet, 2015; Goldrick-Rab et al., 2016. Bettinger (2015) also found that students who received need-

based financial aid through the Ohio College Opportunity Grant initiative were less likely to drop out of

college.

          In a quasi-experimental study examining the impact of community college tuition discounts on student

enrollment among recent high school graduates, Denning (2017) reported that community college enrollment

increased by 5.1 percentage points for each $1,000 reduction in tuition. Although prior work has shown that

the Pell Grant receipt was not associated with an increase in college enrollment (Denning, Marx, & Turner,

2017; Kane, 1995; Rubin, 2011), grants that supplement the Pell grant are more likely to positively influence

6
college enrollment (e.g., Bettinger, 2015; Castleman & Long, 2016). Richburg-Hayes et al. (2015) conducted

a randomized controlled trial to examine the impact of a one-time, performance-based scholarship on

students' likelihood of enrolling in college, finding that providing a $1,000 performance-based scholarship

increased students' likelihood of enrolling in college by 5 percentage points.

III. Research Design

       This experimental study was conducted in collaboration with five high-enrollment community

colleges located in the state of Florida. Each community college was selected due to its large enrollment size

(roughly 64,000 students per community college) and diverse student body. We collaborated with each

institution during the 2018-19 academic year to conduct the text message-based re-enrollment campaign.

    A. Data and Sample

The text message-based re-enrollment campaign focused solely on former students who were identified as

previously successful academically and eligible to re-enroll at their prior community college. To be included

in our sample and eligible for treatment, former students were required to meet our agreed-upon criteria of

30 accrued credit hours, a 2.0 GPA or better, and no behavioral or financial holds that would prevent the

former student from being allowed to re-enroll in college. We worked directly with the participating

community colleges to further restrict our sample to former students who were enrolled previously in degree-

seeking programs but stopped enrolling in courses within the past three years. Each participating community

college provided administrative data files including all former students' demographic characteristics,

academic information, and cell phone number.

       We also partnered with a third-party vendor to ensure that all former students in our sample had an

active cell phone number by removing any students who only had an inactive cell phone number on file. To

ensure that we identified and removed any former students who had already re-enrolled or graduated from a

different college or university, we matched student-level data obtained from each community college with

data from the National Student Clearinghouse at the beginning of the project period and immediately before



7
sending text messages. 3 The residual sample of the study includes 27,028 former community college students.

Before partnering with a text messaging platform to employ the interventions (described in detail directly

below), we randomly assigned eligible students to a control group or one of two treatment groups.

Control Group: Students within the control group received no information through this experiment.

Information Only Treatment: Students within the "information only" treatment group received ten text

messages directing them to re-enroll in college and visit our custom website to be able to streamline the re-

enrollment process, apply for financial aid, or contact an assigned advisor for assistance.

Information + One-Course Waiver Treatment: Students within the "information + one-course waiver"

treatment group received the same information described in the above treatment and a one-course tuition

waiver. This one-course tuition waiver could be a conditional waiver (additional aid received only if the

student did not already have all coursework covered by financial aid) or unconditional waiver (refundable

credit received even if all coursework is already fully covered by financial aid). Although we recommended

that all participating community colleges offer an unconditional waiver, only two community colleges elected

to offer the unconditional waiver and the remaining three offered the conditional waiver.

    B. Measures

To examine the impact of each treatment on former students' likelihood of re-enrollment, we measure re-

enrollment as the primary outcome of interest and consider a host of demographic and academic

characteristics to better understand our main and heterogeneous effects. First, we measure re-enrollment as a

binary indicator capturing whether former students in our sample enrolled in at least one for-credit course at

their prior institution during Summer 2018, Fall 2018, or Spring 2019. To further explore this outcome, we

consider not only our main effects including the whole sample but also heterogeneous effects for the following

subgroups of interest: individuals with lower GPAs (below 3.0), near completers (more than the median of




3
 The National Student Clearinghouse is a nongovernmental organization that serves as the nation's leading provider of
enrollment and degree verification for colleges and universities.
8
42 credit hours), low-income students, underrepresented minority students, and adult students (25 years of

age or older).

       To improve the precision of our empirical models, we include numerous covariates related to students'

background characteristics, as outlined in Table 1. Finally, we include college fixed effects and specify

additional models to consider whether each institution used a conditional or unconditional one-course tuition

waiver. As noted previously, a conditional one-course tuition waiver allows students to waive tuition and fees

for one course if at least one of their courses was not already covered by financial aid, whereas an

unconditional one-course tuition waiver allows students to waive tuition and fees for one course regardless

of the amount of financial aid they receive.

    C. Intervention Design

       Former students were randomly assigned to the control group, the information-only treatment, or the

information and one-course waiver treatment. In May of 2018, we began our text message-based re-

enrollment campaign, which included targeted messaging to treated individuals immediately before

matriculation deadlines for the Summer 2018, Fall 2018, and Spring 2019 semesters. The final text message

was sent in December of 2018. The extent to which these former students had received any type of outreach

prior to the intervention varied across colleges. Former students assigned to the control group did not receive

any text messages, but they would be granted the same opportunities for advising and financial aid assistance

as any other student if they initiated the original point of contact with the institution. After the introductory

text message for treated individuals, text messages were sent every two to three weeks, with a total of ten text

messages being sent to former students in either treatment group. Appendix A provides the content of each

text message, which varied according to whether former students were assigned to the information-only or

information and one-course waiver treatment group.

       We reviewed the "business as usual" approach associated with re-enrolling at each community college

and discovered that the standard process of re-enrolling was complex, challenging to navigate, and

inconsistent across all five participating community colleges. To address these potential information barriers,

9
we coordinated across all participating community colleges and created custom websites for each intervention

at each community college to simplify the re-enrollment process (10 unique websites in total). For the

information-only intervention, the custom website provided a single button to re-enroll immediately, a single

button to apply for financial aid immediately, and the contact information of an assigned advisor--including

the advisor's name, email, and phone number--for each former student. For the information and one-course

waiver intervention, former students received the same information designed to simplify the re-enrollment

process, but both the text messages and custom website clearly noted that they would receive a one-course

tuition waiver upon re-enrolling. The one-course tuition waiver covered the equivalent of three credit hours

of in-state tuition at the participating community college. Each text message, regardless of the intervention,

prompted former students to visit their assigned custom website. If former students replied to any of our text

messages, they received an automated reply directing them to their custom website. Appendix B shows

example website for the information-only intervention and the information and one-course waiver

intervention, respectively.

     D. Randomization and Baseline Equivalence

        Our study is based on a randomized block design, where we randomly assigned treatment status to

former students within each of the five participating community colleges. Among the 27,028 former students

in our sample, 9,010 were randomly assigned to the control group, 9,009 were randomly assigned to the

information-only treatment group, and 9,009 were randomly assigned to the information and course waiver

treatment group. In Table 1, we report basic descriptive statistics on students' demographics and prior

academic circumstances. More specifically, we report means for the control group and differences between

each treatment group (alongside standard errors). Unsurprisingly, we find little evidence of significant

differences in observed means between the control group and treatment groups following the randomization,

providing reassurance that we achieved baseline equivalence and the randomization was successful.

        Among former community college students, only 41 percent of the control group is male, with equal

proportions of men across the treatment groups. On average, individuals in our sample are older than

10
traditional undergraduate students. The average age for individuals in the control group slightly exceeds 31

years. Our sample also demonstrates the racial diversity of American community colleges. Almost 24 percent

of individuals in the control group are Black while Hispanics comprise 17 percent of the control group. Also,

in the control group, more than 29 percent of individuals identify as multi-racial. About 13 percent of former

students in the control group have limited English skills. Across every demographic attribute, we do no find

significant differences in observed means between participants in the control group and those in either the

information-only group or information and one-course tuition waiver group.

        We also collected data on individual's academic performance and circumstances based on the last

academic year they attended community college. For the control group, the average grade point average

earned is nearly 2.8. The average number of credits accumulated is 45. In general, we do not find any

statistically significant differences between these measures of academic performance in the control group and

the treatment groups, although there is one exception. Participants in the information-only group have

marginally higher grade-point averages than those individuals in the control group. Nonetheless, this

difference is very small and does not appear to be meaningful. As for the circumstances surrounding their

most recent academic enrollment, for the control group, we find that only 12 percent of individuals enrolled

full-time and that 20 percent of these individuals transferred to a community college from a different

postsecondary institution. Lastly, it is notable that many individuals in our sample received some form of

financial assistance when last attending college. In the control group, 49 percent of individuals received need-

based aid. Broadly, we report no statistically significant differences between any academic circumstances in

the control group and treatment groups.

     E. Empirical Strategy

        Since we are utilizing random assignment, we can measure the impact of the interventions by making

simple comparisons of the outcomes of individuals assigned to either the information-only treatment or the

combined information and tuition-waiver treatment to those individuals in our sample who were not treated.

We can estimate the intent-to-treat (ITT) effects by using a linear probability model:

11
           (1) !"# = %& + %( )*+,"# + %- )*+,_/0)123"# + %4 5"# + 6# + 7"# ,

where !"# is an indicator equaling one or zero for whether individual i who was formerly enrolled in college

j decides to re-enroll in community college. The variable )*+,"# is a treatment indicator that equals one if an

individual is offered information on how to re-enroll at college j and takes the value zero otherwise. The

variable )*+,_/0)123"# is also a treatment indicator that takes a value of one if an individual is offered

both information on how to re-enroll and a financial incentive in the form of a one-course tuition waiver by

college j. 5"# represents a vector of demographic variables and information on the academic performance and

circumstances of individual i who formerly attended community college j. We also include dummy variables

for the last academic term in which each student enrolled. All covariates included in the model are represented

in Table 1. Also, 6# is a fixed effect for college j and signifies the randomization was conducted within each

community college. The error term is represented by 7"# . Lastly, we use robust standard errors to account for

heteroskedasticity induced from using linear probability models.

     IV.      Results

     A. Estimated Effects of the Re-Enrollment Campaign

           Table 2 reports our main results for the estimated effects of the information-only treatment and the

estimated effects of the bundled information nudge with financial incentives on community college re-

enrollment. We report the findings in separate columns based on the full sample of community colleges and

whether a community college offered an unconditional or conditional tuition waiver. In the first column, we

report results based on pooling individuals attending each of the community colleges. In the second column,

we report results for the two community colleges that offered unconditional one-course tuition waivers. In

the third column, we report results for the three community colleges that offered conditional one-course

tuition waivers.

           The first column reports findings for the full sample of all community colleges. As shown, the re-

enrollment rate for individuals in the control group is slightly more than 7 percent. For this sample, we find

that the information-only treatment does not have an effect on re-enrollment but that the information nudge
12
combined with the course tuition waiver has a significant impact on re-enrollment. Compared to the control

group, individuals offered both information and one course waiver are 1.5 percentage points (or 21 percent)

more likely to re-enroll. This estimated effect is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The effect of

the information-only treatment on re-enrollment is 0.5 percentage points and is not statistically significant.

An F-test of the joint hypothesis for whether the estimated re-enrollment effect from receiving the information

and one-course tuition waiver treatments is equal to the effect of receiving the information-only treatment

can be rejected at the 5 percent level of significance.

       In contrast to other colleges in our sample, two community colleges offered former students

unconditional one-course tuition waivers if they re-enrolled. It is important to examine how students respond

to this form of unrestricted financial incentives as compared to one-course tuition waivers that are conditional

on the amount financial aid that students already receive. Similar to the above results, we find that information

alone has essentially no effect on whether individuals re-enroll at institutions offering the unconditional one-

course tuition waiver. However, we uncover a relatively large effect from the combined treatment at these

institutions. Specifically, offering information and an unconditional one-course tuition waiver increases re-

enrollment by 2.5 percentage points or 21 percent of the re-enrollment rate for the control group. The estimate

is statistically significant at the 5 percent level. We can reject the hypothesis of equal treatment effects at the

1 percent level of significance. Along with the prior evidence on the full sample, this evidence suggests that

information alone may not be sufficient to encourage former community college students to re-enroll.

       Our main results also examine the treatment effects for individuals who were formerly enrolled at

community colleges that provided conditional one-course tuition waivers. Students from these community

colleges make up 77 percent of the sample. Unlike the previous evidence, our findings from this subsample

suggest that the information-only treatment has a small statistically significant effect on re-enrollment,

increasing re-enrollment by 0.7 percentage points, which is significant at the 10 percent level. For individuals

from this group of colleges, we find that the combined information and one-course waiver treatment increases



13
the likelihood of re-enrollment by 1.1 percentage points. For this subsample, we cannot reject the null

hypothesis of equal treatment effects.

        Although we report the main effects separately for community colleges that offer conditional or

unconditional tuition waivers (see column 4 within Table 2), we also assess whether the treatment effects are

in fact different depending on the type of one-course tuition waiver offered by the participating community

colleges. To inform this hypothesis, we pool both samples of community colleges and include interaction

terms that capture whether the treatment effects vary based upon whether a community college offered

unconditional waivers. We find that each of these estimated interaction effects is not statistically significant.

These findings suggest that the format of the one-course tuition waiver does not appear to matter and that we

can focus on results from the pooled sample.

        Finally, we examine the effects of each treatment on former students' likelihood to re-enroll in

multiple courses or re-enroll as a full-time student (see Table 3). Although the information-only treatment

has no impact on former students' likelihood of re-enrolling in more than one course or as a full-time student,

the combined intervention including information and a one-course tuition waiver had a positive effect on both

outcomes of interest. Specifically, the information and one-course waiver treatment increases the likelihood

of re-enrolling in multiple courses by 0.9 percentage points. In addition, the combined intervention increases

former students' likelihood of re-enrolling as a full-time student by 0.5 percentage points.

     B. Heterogeneous Effects

        The effects of the information-only treatment and combined information and one-course tuition

waiver treatment may vary based upon certain observable characteristics of individuals and their academic

circumstances. For all subgroups that we examined, we found little evidence that the information-only

treatment has a statistically significant effect on re-enrollment. However, our findings do point to some

evidence of heterogeneity for the effectiveness of the information and one-course tuition waiver treatment

(see Table 4). For example, we find that the estimated effects of the information and course-waiver treatment

are concentrated among individuals with lower GPAs. More specifically, for students holding a GPA less

14
than 3.0, the intervention increases community college re-enrollment by 1.7 percentage points, while the

estimated effect on individuals with higher GPAs is qualitatively smaller and not statistically significant.

        Next, we aim to understand whether the effects vary based on the number of credits an individual

accumulated previously. The median number of accumulated credits for students in our sample is 42. We

examine the effects on students who achieved more than 42 credits and conduct a separate analysis for

individuals who achieved fewer credits. The effect of the information and one-course waiver treatment for

individuals who accumulated fewer credits is very small and not statistically significant. However, the

estimated effect on individuals who earned more than 42 credits is considerably larger. For these students,

the combined intervention increases community college re-enrollment by 2.1 percentage points.4

        The timing of when a student stops enrolling at a community college may play a critical role in

determining whether that individual chooses to return. In fact, among former students in our control group,

we observe that recent dropouts re-enroll at more than twice the rate of individuals who drop out earlier--11

percent versus 4 percent. We therefore examine whether the effects of the information and one-course tuition

waiver treatment vary based on when individuals left community college. Both groups of former students

who left community college during or since the Spring 2016 semester and former students who dropped out

during the Fall 2016 semester or earlier are significantly affected by the combined intervention of simplified

information and a one-course tuition waiver. However, the magnitude of the treatment effect on more recent

dropouts is stronger than the effect on earlier dropouts.

        The final subgroup analysis we conducted related to academic circumstances pertains to whether the

individual was a low-income student (as indicated by receiving need-based aid). Almost half of all individuals

in our sample received need-based aid when last enrolled. We examine whether the effect of the information

and one-course tuition waiver treatment vary based upon whether an individual received need-based aid. Our

findings are robust to whether or not someone was awarded need-based aid. For low-income individuals who


4
  In unreported results, we also estimated pooled models where we interacted an indicator for observable characteristics with the
information and one-course waiver treatment. Across all subgroups examined, we only find statistically significant evidence that
former students who have accumulated more credits are more affected than individuals who completed fewer credits.
15
receive need-based aid, we find that the combined intervention of an information nudge and one-course tuition

waiver significantly increases their likelihood of re-enrolling by 1.3 percentage points at the 5 percent level

of significance. For individuals who did not receive need-based aid and may be more likely to be

economically advantaged, we find that the information and one-course tuition waiver treatment significantly

increases the likelihood of re-enrolling by 1.7 percentage points at a significance level of 1 percent.

           Our study also examines whether treatment effects may differ based upon select demographic

attributes. For this study, we investigate whether the treatment effects are significant for both Blacks and

Hispanics and, separately, for non-Hispanic whites5. For both groups of individuals, the results are

remarkably similar and both are statistically significant. The information and one-course tuition waiver

treatment increases the likelihood of re-enrollment among Blacks or Hispanics by 1.7 percentage points. For

individuals who are non-Hispanic white, we find that the estimated effect is 2.1 percentage points. We also

examine whether our interventions may have differential effects based on whether someone is older or

younger. For individuals 24 years and younger, we find that the information and one-course course waiver

treatment has a small and statistically insignificant effect of 0.6 percentage points on re-enrollment. On the

other hand, for older students, we show that the combined intervention increases the likelihood of re-

enrollment by 1.7 percentage points at the 1 percent level of significance.

           V. Discussion

           The majority of students who begin at a community college leave school without earning a degree. In

response to high rates of student attrition, a growing number of community colleges have implemented re-

enrollment campaigns designed to encourage and potentially incentivize former students to return to college.

This experimental study represents the first attempt to examine the causal impact of a low-touch re-enrollment

campaign and provides evidence to show that the combined information and one-course tuition waiver

treatment had a positive impact on former students' probability of re-enrollment. Through this targeted re-

enrollment campaign, we identify an intervention that increases former students' likelihood of re-enrollment


5
    Subgroup analyses for Black and Hispanic students and white students do not comprise the full analytic sample.
16
in the aggregate and across multiple student subgroups, including low-income students, underrepresented

minority students, adult students, and students with low GPAs.

       Previous research has reported positive effects when examining the efficacy of localized text message-

based campaigns (Castleman & Page, 2015; Castleman et al., 2014; Castleman et al., 2015), but a growing

body of recent evidence has shown that informational nudges alone, when offered at a larger scale, do not

appear to significantly improve the likelihood of college enrollment (e.g., Bird et al., 2019). Additional work

has suggested that behavioral outreach programs can increase access to higher education among

disadvantaged students when the program simplifies the college application process (Herbaut & Geven, in

press). However, we find little evidence suggesting that streamlining the re-enrollment process, without

offering financial incentives, significantly impacts former students' likelihood of re-enrollment in the

aggregate or across student subgroups.

       This study offers clear and robust evidence of the positive impact of the information and one-course

tuition waiver treatment on the likelihood of former students re-enrolling in college. For community colleges

that may be finding limited success through letter-writing campaigns or third-party call centers, we show that

interventions including both pertinent re-enrollment information and a one-course tuition waiver have a

positive impact on the probability of former students returning to college. Given that a substantial number of

postsecondary students leave college due to informational and financial barriers as opposed to their academic

ability or classroom performance (e.g., Long, 2007), this study highlights the importance of interventions that

not only simplify complex processes but also reduce the financial barriers facing community college students.

       Because the provision of a one-course tuition waiver costs between $303 and $354 for participating

community colleges, one potential concern may be that a former student will only return for a single course

and not allow the institution to recoup course waiver costs and generate additional tuition revenue. We ran

additional specifications to examine whether providing the course waiver can make financial sense for the

institutions. For example, Table 3 shows that the informational nudge alone is unrelated to the likelihood of

former students re-enrolling in more than one course, but the combination of the informational nudge and

17
one-course tuition waiver led to a 16.4 percent increase in former students' likelihood of re-enrolling in more

than one course and a 21.7 percent increase in the likelihood of non-completers returning as full-time students.

       Although the combination of an informational nudge and one-course tuition waiver may represent a

relatively affordable policy lever to foster re-enrollment among former community college students, further

research is needed to better understand whether former students who re-enroll are also more likely to persist

and ultimately complete their degree upon returning to college. Additional research is also needed to explore

why community college dropouts decide to leave college in the first place and what can be done to prevent

their initial departure and thereby enhance their likelihood of degree completion.




18
                                                References

Bailey, T., Jaggars, S. S., & Jenkins, D. (2015). Redesigning America's community colleges.

       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Barr, A., Bird, K., & Castleman, B. L. (2019). The effect of reduced student loan borrowing on academic

       performance and default: Evidence from a loan counseling experiment. (EdWorkingPaper No. 19-

       89). Retrieved from Annenberg Institute at Brown University:

       http://www.edworkingpapers.com/ai19-89

Barr, A., & Turner, S. (2018). A letter and encouragement: Does information increase postsecondary

       enrollment of UI recipients? American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 10(3), 42-68.

Becker, G. S. (1962). Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Political

       Economy, 70(5), 9-49.

Belfield, C. R., & Bailey, T. (2011). The benefits of attending community college: A review of the

       evidence. Community College Review, 39(1), 46-68.

Bergman, P., Denning, J. T., & Manoli, D. (2019). Is information enough? The effect of information about

       education tax benefits on student outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 38(3),

       706-731.

Berkner, L., & Choy, S. (2008). Descriptive summary of 2003-04 beginning postsecondary

       students: Three years later. Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.

Bettinger, E. (2015). Need-based aid and college persistence: The effects of the Ohio College

       Opportunity Grant. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 37(1_suppl), 102S-119S.

Bettinger, E.P., Long, B.T., Oreopoulos, P., & Sanbonmatsu, L. (2012). The role of application assistance

       and information in college decisions: Results from the H&R Block FAFSA Experiment. The

       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3), 1205-1242.




19
Bird, K. A., Castleman, B. L., Denning, J. T., Goodman, J., Lamberton, C., & Rosinger, K. O. (2019).

       Nudging at scale: Experimental evidence from FAFSA completion campaigns (No. w26158).

       National Bureau of Economic Research.

Castleman, B. L., & Long, B. T. (2016). Looking beyond enrollment: The causal effect of need-based

       grants on college access, persistence, and graduation. Journal of Labor Economics, 34(4), 1023-

       1073.

Castleman, B. L., & Page, L. C. (2015). Summer nudging: Can personalized text messages and peer mentor

       outreach increase college going among low-income high school graduates? Journal of Economic

       Behavior & Organization, 115, 144-160.

Castleman, B. L., & Page, L. C. (2016a). Freshman year financial aid nudges: An experiment to increase

       FAFSA renewal and college persistence. Journal of Human Resources, 51(2), 389-415.

Castleman, B. L., Page, L. C., & Schooley, K. (2014). The forgotten summer: Mitigating summer attrition

       among college-intending, low-income high school graduates. Journal of Policy Analysis and

       Management, 33(2), 320-344.

Crosta, P. (2013). Characteristics of early community college dropouts. New York, NY: Columbia

       University Teachers College, Community College Research Center.

Denning, J. T. (2017). College on the cheap: Consequences of community college tuition

       reductions. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(2), 155-88.

Denning, J. T., Marx, B. M., & Turner, L. J. (2019). ProPelled: The effects of grants on graduation,

       earnings, and welfare. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11(3), 193-224.

DesJardins, S. L., & Toutkoushian, R. K. (2005). Are students really rational? The development of rational

       thought and its application to student choice. In J. C. Smart (Ed.), Higher education: Handbook of

       theory and research. (Vol. 20, pp. 191­240). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer.




20
Fack, G., & Grenet, J. (2015). Improving college access and success for low-income students: Evidence

       from a large need-based grant program. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(2), 1-

       34.

Goldrick-Rab, S., Kelchen, R., Harris, D. N., & Benson, J. (2016). Reducing income inequality in

       educational attainment: Experimental evidence on the impact of financial aid on college

       completion. American Journal of Sociology, 121(6), 1762-1817.

Herbaut, E., & Geven, K. M. (2019). What works to reduce inequalities in higher education? A systematic

       review of the (quasi-)experimental literature on outreach and financial aid. Research in Social

       Stratification and Mobility.

Jepsen, C., Troske, K., & Coomes, P. (2014). The labor-market returns to community college degrees,

       diplomas, and certificates. Journal of Labor Economics, 32(1), 95-121.

Inside Track (2019). Re-engage, re-enroll, and prepare former students to finish strong. Retrieved from

       http://info.insidetrack.com/re-engage_re-enroll_and_prepare_ps

Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.

       Econometrica, 47, 263­ 291.

Kane, T. J. (1995). Rising public college tuition and college entry: How well do public subsidies promote

       access to college? (No. w5164). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Karlan, D., McConnell, M., Mullainathan, S., & Zinman, J. (2016). Getting to the top of mind: How

       reminders increase saving. Management Science, 62, 3393­3672.

Lashure, F., Randall, S., & Hinkle, H. (2019). The retention project and the investigation of a non-returning

       new student re-enrollment strategy. Strategic Enrollment Management Quarterly.

Levin, H. M. (1989). Mapping the economics of education: An introductory essay. Educational

       researcher, 18(4), 13-17.

Long, B. T. (2007). The contributions of economics to the study of college access and success. Teachers

       College Record, 109(10), 2367-2443.

21
Meyer, K., & Rosinger, K. O. (2019). Applying behavioral insights to improve postsecondary education

       outcomes: A review of Obama administration efforts and next steps under the Trump

       administration. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 38(2), 481-499.

Mincer, J. (1958). Investment in human capital and personal income distribution. The Journal of Political

       Economy, 66, 281­302.

Oreopoulos, P., & Petronijevic, U. (2013). Making college worth it: A review of the returns to higher

       education. The Future of Children, 41-65.

Oreopoulos, P., & Petronijevic, U. (2019). The remarkable unresponsiveness of college students to nudging

       and what we can learn from it (No. w26059). National Bureau of Economic Research.

Page, L. C., & Gehlbach, H. (2017). How an artificially intelligent virtual assistant helps students

       navigate the road to college. AERA Open, 3(4), 1-12.

Rath, B., Rock, K., & Laferriere, A. (2013). Pathways through college: Strategies for improving community

       college student success. Hartford, CT: Our Piece of the Pie.

Richburg-Hayes, L., Patel, R., Brock, T., de la Campa, E., Rudd, T., & Valenzuela, I. (2015). Providing

       more cash for college: Interim findings from the performance-based scholarship demonstration in

       California. New York, NY: MDRC.

Ronco, S. L. (1994). Meandering ways: Studying student stopout with survival analysis. Association of

       Institutional Research.

Rouse, C. E. (1995). Democratization or diversion? The effect of community colleges on educational

       attainment. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 13(2), 217-224.

Rubin, R. B. (2011). The pell and the poor: A regression-discontinuity analysis of on-time college

       enrollment. Research in Higher Education, 52(7), 675-692.

Schwartz, N. (2019). How colleges are bringing back stopped-out students. Education Dive. Retrieved from

       https://www.educationdive.com/news/how-colleges-are-bringing-back-stopped-out-

       students/556706/.

22
Scott-Clayton, J. E. (2017). Undergraduate financial aid in the United States. American Academy of Arts

       & Sciences.

Shapiro, D., Dundar, A., Huie, F., Wakhungu, P.K., Yuan, X., Nathan, A. & Bhimdiwali, A. (2017).

       Completing College: A National View of Student Completion Rates. Herndon, VA: National

       Student Clearinghouse Research Center.

Stinebrickner, R., & Stinebrickner, T. (2008). The effect of credit constraints on the college drop-out

       decision: A direct approach using a new panel study. American Economic Review, 98(5), 2163-84.

Thaler, R., & Benartzi, S. (2004). Save more tomorrow: Using behavioral economics to increase employee

       saving. Journal of Political Economy, 112, 164­187.

Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth, and happiness.

       New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Trostel, P., & Chase, M. (2015). It's not just the money: The benefits of college education to

       individuals and to society. Lumina Issue Papers.




23
                                              Table 1: Descriptive Statistics and Balance Tests

                                               Control           Information vs.        Info. & one-course                F-stat        Observations
                                                mean                 control             waiver vs. control           (all=control)
                                                 (1)                   (2)                      (3)                        (4)                (5)
 Student Background Characteristics
 Male                                           0.414                  0.004                    -0.001                    0.248                   27028
                                                                      (0.007)                  (0.007)                   (0.780)

 Age                                           31.515                  0.002                    0.104                     0.352                   27028
                                               (9.594)                (0.142)                  (0.142)                   (0.703)

 Black                                          0.237                  0.004                    0.004                     0.276                   27028
                                                                      (0.006)                  (0.006)                   (0.759)

 Hispanic                                       0.165                 -0.003                    -0.002                    0.188                   27028
                                                                      (0.005)                  (0.005)                   (0.829)

 Multi-racial                                   0.294                 -0.002                    -0.005                    0.310                   27028
                                                                      (0.006)                  (0.006)                   (0.733)

 Other                                          0.029                 -0.002                    -0.003                    0.752                   27028
                                                                      (0.002)                  (0.002)                   (0.471)

 Limited English                                0.127                 -0.003                    -0.005                    0.494                   27028
                                                                      (0.005)                  (0.005)                   (0.610)

 Grade Point Average                            2.774                  0.015*                   0.002                     1.793                   26551
                                               (0.623)                (0.009)                  (0.009)                   (0.166)

 Accumulated Credits                           44.700                  0.318                    0.310                     0.572                   27028
                                              (24.332)                (0.339)                  (0.339)                   (0.564)

 Full-Time                                      0.121                  0.007                    -0.004                    2.397                   27028
                                                                      (0.005)                  (0.005)                   (0.091)

 Transfer Student                               0.203                 -0.006                    -0.008                    1.296                   27028
                                                                      (0.005)                  (0.005)                   (0.274)

 Need-Based Aid Recipient                       0.485                  0.006                    -0.005                    1.205                   27028
                                                                      (0.007)                  (0.007)                   (0.300)

 Grade Point Average Missing                    0.018                 -0.001                    -0.001                    0.080                   27028
                                                                       0.002                   (0.002)                   (0.923)
 Notes: Standard deviations are reported in parentheses in column (1). Standard errors are shown in parentheses in columns (2) and (3). p-values for
 F -tests are reported in parentheses in column (4). The number of non-missing observations are reported in column (5). *** Significant at 1 percent
 level; ** 5 percent level; * 10 percent level.




24
                                        Table 2: Estimated Effects of Re-Enrollment Campaign
                                                                       Samples:
         Type of Waiver:                           All               Unconditional        Conditional                                      All
                                               Institutions            Waivers              Waivers                                    Institutions

 Information                                       0.005                         -0.002                        0.007*                     0.0065
                                                  (0.004)                       (0.010)                       (0.004)                    (0.0040)

 Information and one-course                        0.015***                      0.025**                      0.011***                      0.011***
 waiver                                           (0.004)                       (0.010)                       (0.004)                     (0.003)

 Information * Unconditional                                                                                                               -0.008
 waiver offered                                                                                                                           (0.011)

 Information and one-course                                                                                                                0.014
 waiver * Unconditional waiver                                                                                                            (0.011)



 Control mean                                      0.071                         0.119                         0.057                       0.071

 R2                                                0.052                         0.071                         0.029                       0.052



 p -value (F-test of equality of                   0.012
 treatment effects)

 p -value (F-test of joint                                                                                                                 0.116
 significance of interaction effects)

 N                                                27,028                         6,130                        20,898                      27,028



        Notes: Coefficients reported are from linear probability models of the estimated effects of information and financial nudges on
        re-enrollment of college dropouts, controlling for baseline covariates and college-level fixed effects. Baseline covariates are those
        variables included in Table 1. Observations with missing grade point average are coded with the median values and we include an
        indicator for covariate missingness. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at 1 percent level; ** 5
        percent level; * 10 percent level.




25
     Table 3: Estimated Effects of Re-Enrollment Campaign, More than 3 Credits & Full-Time Enrollment


       Type of Waiver:                           Re-Enroll > 3 Credits                                         Re-Enroll  12 Credits


Information                                              0.005                                                            0.002
                                                        (0.003)                                                          (0.002)

Information and one-course                              0.009***                                                         0.005**
tuition waiver                                          (0.003)                                                          (0.002)

Control mean                                             0.055                                                            0.023

R2                                                       0.045                                                            0.029




p -value (F-test of equality                             0.301                                                             0.181
of treatment effects)

N                                                       27,028                                                            27,028

Notes: Coefficients reported are from linear probability models of the estimated effects of information and financial nudges on re-
enrollment of college dropouts, controlling for baseline covariates and college-level fixed effects. Baseline covariates are those
variables included in Table 1. Observations with missing grade point average are coded with the median values and we include an
indicator for covariate missingness. *** Significant at 1 percent level; ** 5 percent level; * 10 percent level.




                                                                                                                                      26
                                   Table 4: Estimated Effects of Re-Enrollment Campaign by Academic Performance and Demographics

                                                Grade Point Average                                    Accumulated Credits                                     Semesters Since Dropped Out

                                         GPA < 3.0                GPA  3.0               Accum. Credits  42            Accum. Credits > 42           Dropout  Fall 2016           Dropout  Spring 2016

 Information                                0.006                    0.004                        0.002                        0.008                          0.001                            0.010
                                           (0.005)                  (0.007)                      (0.005)                      (0.005)                        (0.004)                          (0.020)

 Information & one-course                  0.017***                  0.010                        0.008                       0.021***                      0.011***                      0.020***
 waiver                                    (0.005)                  (0.007)                      (0.006)                      (0.005)                        (0.004)                       (0.008)

 Control mean                               0.067                    0.081                        0.077                        0.065                          0.042                            0.112

 N                                         16,899                    9,651                       13,671                       13,357                         16,050                           10,978
                                                           Age                                             Race / Ethnicity                                             Economic Status

                                          Age  24                  Age  25                 Black or Hispanic            non-Hispanic white               Low-Income                  Not Low-Income

 Information                                0.011                    0.002                        0.003                        0.011                          0.005                            0.004
                                           (0.009)                  (0.004)                      (0.006)                      (0.008)                        (0.005)                          (0.005)

 Information & one-course                   0.006                    0.017***                    0.017***                     0.021***                        0.012**                         0.017***
 waiver                                    (0.009)                  (0.004)                      (0.006)                      (0.008)                        (0.006)                          (0.005)

 Control mean                               0.113                    0.057                        0.072                        0.070                          0.070                            0.072

 N                                          6,752                   20,276                       10,883                        6,257                         13,121                           13,907
Notes: Coefficients reported are from linear probability models of the estimated effects of information and financial nudges on re-enrollment of college dropouts, controlling for baseline
covariates and college-level fixed effects. Baseline covariates are those variables included in Table 1. Observations with missing grade point average are coded with median values and we
include an indicator for missing GPA. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at 1 percent level; ** 5 percent level; * 10 percent level.



                                                                                                                                                                                               27
Appendix A. Text Messages Sent to Former Community College Students
 Message    Info                      Conditional Waiver        Unconditional Waiver
            Palm Beach State
            College (PBSC) wants      Palm Beach State          Hillsborough Community
            you back! We have         College (PBSC) wants      College (HCC) wants
            simplified the            you back! We will cover you back! We will cover
            enrollment process. Go the tuition for your next    the tuition for your next
            to [web link for info     course. See how at [link  course. See how at [link
            site.] for more info.     to waiver website] Reply to waiver website] Reply
 1          Reply stop to stop        stop to stop              stop to stop
            You are so close to       If financial aid does not Need help paying for
            finishing your degree!    already cover your next   your degree? HCC can
            Let Palm Beach State      course, PBSC will waive help you apply for
            College help you reach the tuition for that course. financial aid (FAFSA).
            your goals. Learn more Learn more at [link to       See how at [link to
            at [web link for info     waiver website] Reply     waiver website] Reply
 2          site.] Reply stop to stop stop to stop              stop to stop
            Need help paying for      Need help paying for      Do not miss this special
            your degree? Palm         your degree? Palm Beach offer to enroll in your
            Beach State College       State College can help    next course at HCC for
            can help you apply for    you apply for financial   free. Learn more at [link
            financial aid (FAFSA). aid (FAFSA). See how at to waiver website] Reply
            See how at [web link      [link to waiver           stop to stop
            for info site.] Reply     website] Reply stop to
 3          stop to stop              stop
                                      Any questions about       Any questions about
            Any questions about       registering using your    registering using your
            registering for classes? tuition waiver? PBSC can tuition waiver? HCC can
            PBSC can offer            offer advising or         offer advising or
            advising or enrollment    enrollment assistance.    enrollment assistance.
            assistance. More info     More info @ [link to      More info @ [link to
            @ [web link for info      waiver website] Reply     waiver website] Reply
 4          site.] Reply stop to stop stop to stop              stop to stop
                                      It is not too late to     It is not too late to
            It is not too late to     register for classes! The register for classes! The
            register for classes! The fall semester at PBSC     fall semester at HCC
            fall semester at PBSC     begins on August 23.      begins on August 20.
            begins on August 23.      Claim your tuition waiver Claim your tuition waiver
            Learn more @ [web         @ [link to waiver         @ [link to waiver
            link for info             website] Reply stop to    website] Reply stop to
 5          site.] Reply stop to stop stop                      stop



                                                                                            28
                                 You still have time to       You still have time to
     You still have time to      register! PBSC offers        register! HCC offers
     register! PBSC offers       flexible online and night    flexible online and night
     flexible online and         classes to fit your          classes to fit your
     night classes to fit your   schedule. Get started        schedule. Get started
     schedule. Get started @     @ [link to waiver            @ [link to waiver
     [web link for info          website] Reply stop to       website] Reply stop to
6    site.] Reply stop to stop   stop                         stop
     Palm Beach State            Spring registration is now   Spring registration at is
     College wants you           open! Palm Beach State       about to begin!
     back! Spring                College will cover the       Hillsborough CC will
     registration is now         tuition for your next        cover the tuition for your
     open. Go to [web link       course. See how at [link     next course. See how at
     for info site.] for more    to waiver website] Reply     [link to waiver website]
7    info. Reply stop to stop    stop to stop                 Reply stop to stop
     Need help paying for
     your degree? Palm           Need help paying for         Need help paying for
     Beach State College         your degree? PBSC will       your degree? HCC will
     can help you apply for      cover your next course       cover your next course
     financial aid (FAFSA).      and help you apply for       and help you apply for
     See how at [web link        financial aid. See how at    financial aid. See how
     for info site.] Reply       [the waiver site             at [the waiver site link.]
8    stop to stop                link.] Reply stop to stop    Reply stop to stop
     It is not too late to       It is not too late to        It is not too late to
     register for classes! The   register for classes! The    register for classes! The
     spring semester at          spring semester at PBSC      spring semester at HCC
     PBSC begins on              begins on January 4.         begins on January 7.
     January 4. Learn more       Claim your tuition waiver    Claim your tuition waiver
     @ [web link for info        @ [the waiver site           @ [the waiver site link.]
9    site.] Reply stop to stop   link.] Reply stop to stop    Reply stop to stop
     This is your final          This is your final           This is your final
     reminder to register for    reminder to claim your       reminder to claim your
     classes at PBSC for the     tuition waiver at PBSC       tuition waiver at HCC for
     Spring semester.            for the Spring semester.     the Spring semester.
     Contact your advisor at     Contact your advisor         Contact your advisor
     [web link for info          at [the waiver site          at [the waiver site link.]
10   site.] Reply stop to stop   link.] Reply stop to stop    Reply stop to stop




                                                                                           29
Appendix B. Custom Website Examples (Information Only and Unconditional Waiver Sites)




                                                                                        30
31
Appendix C: The Relationship between Re-Enrollment and Academic Performance and Demographics

                                                                   Re-Enrolled
                          Male                                      -0.0095*
                                                                    (0.0055)

                          Age (years)                               -0.0017***
                                                                     (0.0003)

                          Limited English Proficiency                -0.0132*
                                                                     (0.0078)

                          Black                                     0.0271***
                                                                     (0.0082)

                          Hispanic                                    0.0118
                                                                     (0.0088)

                          Multi-Racial                               0.0174**
                                                                     (0.0081)

                          Other Race                                 0.0368*
                                                                     (0.0195)

                          Grade Point Average                        0.0101**
                                                                     (0.0044)

                          Full-Time                                   0.0029
                                                                     (0.0089)

                          Transfer Credits                            -0.0114
                                                                     (0.0074)

                          Need-Based Aid Recipient                    0.0075
                                                                     (0.0059)

                          Accumulated Credits                         -0.0000
                                                                     (0.0001)

                          Grade Point Average Missing               -0.0275**
                                                                     (0.0137)

                          Constant                                  0.2848***
                                                                     (0.0382)

                          Observations                                9,008
                          R-squared                                   0.0493
            Notes: The table reports results for a model that regresses an indicator for re-
            enrollment on covariates for academic circumstances and demographic attributes of
            former students assigned to the control group. Robust standard errors are reported   32
            in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                              Appendix D: Estimated Effects of Re-Enrollment Campaign for Different Specifications

          Type of Waiver:                                                                                 All Institutions

Information                                          0.005                        0.005                        0.005                      0.005                     0.005

                                                    (0.004)                     (0.004)                       (0.004)                    (0.004)                   (0.004)


Information and one-course                           0.015***                    0.015***                       0.015***                  0.014***                  0.015***
waiver                                              (0.004)                     (0.004)                       (0.004)                    (0.004)                   (0.004)


Control mean                                         0.071

R2                                                   0.001                       0.009                        0.011                       0.041                  0.052


Demographic controls                                                                x                            x                          x                          x

Academic background controls                                                                                     x                          x                          x

Last term enrolled                                                                                                                          x                          x

                                                                                                                                                                       x
College-level fixed effects

N                                                   27,028                        27,028                      27,028                      27,028                    27,028


Notes: Coefficients reported are from linear probability models of the estimated effects of information and financial nudges on re-enrollment of college dropouts,
controlling for baseline covariates and college-level fixed effects. Baseline covariates are those variables included in Table 1. Observations with missing grade point
average are coded with the median values and we include an indicator for covariate missingness. Robust standard errors are reported in parentheses. *** Significant at 1
percent level; ** 5 percent level; * 10 percent level.

                                                                                                                                                                    33
