 IS HAPPINESS U-SHAPED EVERYWHERE? AGE
AND SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING IN 132 COUNTRIES

            David G. Blanchflower


           WORKING PAPER 26641
                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




   IS HAPPINESS U-SHAPED EVERYWHERE? AGE AND SUBJECTIVE WELL-BEING
                            IN 132 COUNTRIES

                                     David G. Blanchflower

                                       Working Paper 26641
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26641


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by David G. Blanchflower. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Is Happiness U-shaped Everywhere? Age and Subjective Well-being in 132 Countries
David G. Blanchflower
NBER Working Paper No. 26641
January 2020
JEL No. I31,J01

                                         ABSTRACT

I draw systematic comparisons across 109 data files and 132 countries of the relationship between
well-being, variously defined, and age. I produce 444 significant country estimates with controls,
so these are ceteris paribus effects, and find evidence of a well-being U-shape in age in one
hundred and thirty-two countries, including ninety-five developing countries, controlling for
education, marital and labor force status. I also frequently find it without any controls at all.
There is additional evidence from an array of attitudinal questions that were worded slightly
differently than standard happiness or life satisfaction questions such as satisfaction with an
individual's financial situation. Averaging across the 257 individual country estimates from
developing countries gives an age minimum of 48.2 for well-being and doing the same across the
187 country estimates for advanced countries gives a similar minimum of 47.2. The happiness
curve is everywhere.


David G. Blanchflower
Bruce V. Rauner Professor of Economics
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755-3514
and NBER
David.G.Blanchflower@Dartmouth.EDU
In this paper I identify U-shapes in age in well-being data, variously defined, in one hundred and
twenty-eight advanced and developing countries. I find the happiness curve (Rauch, 2019) for
ninety-five developing countries 1 and thirty-seven advanced including controls for gender,
education, marital and labor force status, and year when pooled year surveys are used . 2 I report
444 separate country level estimates across countries from a number of data files from around the
world, 187 from advanced countries and 257 from developing countries. The age minima appear
to center in midlife around age fifty for both.

1. Previous Evidence on the Happiness Curve
The background literature is large and, there is some disagreement over whether U-shapes exist at
all, see, for example, Baird et al. (2010), Blanchflower (2009a), Blanchflower and Oswald (2008a,
2009, 2011), Carstensen et al. (2011), Charles et al. (2001), Easterlin (2003, 2006), Frey and
Stutzer (2002), Frijters and Beaton (2012), Glenn (2009), Graham and Pozuelo (2017), Hellevik
(2017), Hudson et al. (2016), Lachman (2015), Leland (2018), Mroczek and Kolanz (1998),
Mroczek and Spiro (2005), Rauch (2018) Shields and Wheatley Price (2005), Stone et al. 2010,
Steptoe et al. (2015), Wunder et al. (2013), Schwandt (2016).

Easterlin (2006) is a particularly important paper. Controlling for year of birth, it finds evidence
of a hill-shape in well-being over the life cycle. His paper used pooled General Social Survey data
from the United States. A recent review by Ulloa et al. (2013) goes as far as to draw the conclusion
that "extant studies ... show either a U-shaped, inverted U-shaped or linear relation between
ageing and subjective well-being." Other studies, such as Lachman (2015), come close to arguing
that there may be a midlife dip but that it is too small to be significant. I disagree.

An early psychology literature suggested there was no age-happiness relationship (Cantril, 1965,
and Palmore and Luikart, 1972). Myers (2000, p. 58) argued that "Although many people believe
there are unhappy times of life­ times of adolescent stress, midlife crisis, or old age decline ­
repeated surveys across the industrialized world reveal that no time in life is notably happiest and
most satisfying". In contrast, Michael Argyle, concluded that studies of life satisfaction found that
it increased with age (Argyle, 1999, 2001). A survey by Diener et al (1999, p. 291) concluded that
"recent studies converge to show that life satisfaction often increases, or at least does not drop,
with age".


1
  Albania; Algeria; Argentina; Armenia; Azerbaijan; Bangladesh; Belarus; Benin; Bolivia; Bosnia; Botswana; Brazil;
Burkina Faso; Burundi; Cameroon; Cape Verde; Chile; China; Columbia; Costa Rica; Cote d'Ivoire; Dominican
Republic; Ecuador; Egypt; El Salvador; eSwatini; Gabon; Georgia; Ghana; Honduras; India; Indonesia; Iran; Iraq;
Israel; Jordan; Kenya; Kosovo; Kuwait; Kyrgyzstan; Laos; Lebanon; Lesotho; Liberia; Libya; Macedonia;
Madagascar; Malawi; Malaysia; Maldives; Mali; Mauritius; Mexico; Moldova; Mongolia; Montenegro; Morocco;
Mozambique; Myanmar; Namibia; Niger; Nigeria; Panama; Paraguay; Peru; Philippines; Puerto Rico; Russia; São
Tomé; Senegal; Serbia; Singapore; South Africa; South Korea; Sri Lanka; Surinam; Swaziland; Taiwan; Tajikistan;
Tanzania; Thailand; Togo; Trinidad; Tunisia; Turkey; Turkish Cyprus; Uganda; Ukraine; Uruguay; Uzbekistan;
Venezuela; Vietnam; Yemen; Zambia and Zimbabwe.

2
  Australia; Austria; Belgium; Bulgaria; Canada; Croatia; Cyprus; Czech Republic; Denmark; Estonia; Finland;
France; Germany; Greece; Hungary; Iceland; Ireland; Italy; Japan; Latvia; Lithuania; Luxembourg; Malta;
Netherlands; New Zealand; Norway; Poland; Portugal; Romania; Slovakia; Slovenia; Spain; Sweden; Switzerland;
United Kingdom and the United States.


                                                        1
More recently Whitbourne (2018) has gone so far as to argue that the U-shape curve is a 'myth'
despite based on no serious analysis. Whitbourne complains, without any evidence, about possible
sample selection bias in relation to who is able to answer the survey questions in the later adult
decades. Clearly, not the people who are either no longer alive, or are in a life situation where they
cannot answer questions. It's the survivors whom researchers can test. They may have been happy
and non-depressed for their entire lives. If the data analyses were based only on survivors, the
picture that emerges might be completely different. Instead of a dip, you would see a straight line
or even an increase." The U-shape I identify is taken from large random samples of the population.
Dead people don't answer the surveys that is true. I illustrate that the U-shape exists between ages
sixteen and seventy in the vast majority of countries that I have data for, developed or developing.

Whitbourne also suggests that you can redraw the U-shapes we identify with a smaller scale which
makes them look as if they are a straight line rather than a U-shape. She specifically criticizes the
results in Blanchflower and Oswald (2019). "The 'dip' involves a difference between 7.2 and 7.8.
No statistical analyses are provided in the paper, because, as the authors claim, the large sample
size would ensure this finding would achieve statistical significance. However, if you redraw the
graph, which I was able to do from the format in which I received it, the curve turns into a wobbly
line in which a dip is just barely discernible." It turns out the dip is neither small quantitatively
nor is it statistically insignificant.

I update and extend results in an earlier paper, (Blanchflower and Oswald, 2008a), where it was
shown that a U-shape in age existed in well-being data across a number of countries. Using data
on 500,000 randomly sampled Americans and West Europeans, the paper found that holding other
factors constant, a typical individual's happiness reaches its minimum on both sides of the Atlantic
for both males and females in middle age. 3 The minimum in age was broadly similar between
advanced, East European and developing nations. The function minimized on average in mid-life.
For example, in Europe for both men and women it minimized at around 47 with controls including
education, marital and labor force status. For developing countries from the WVS, sweeps 1-4,
minima were 43 for men and 44 for women. A maximum in age in unhappiness data for Europe
was found at around age 47. Some apparent exceptions, particularly in twenty developing nations
along with a few western countries, mostly where there are small numbers of observations, to the
U-shape were noted. 4

3
  Evidence for a U-shape was found in twenty-two advanced countries (Australia; Belgium; Canada; Denmark;
Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Iceland; Ireland; Italy; Japan; Luxembourg; Malta; Netherlands; Norway;
Portugal; Spain; Sweden; Switzerland; UK and USA). Second, evidence was provided for the existence of a similar
U-shape through the life-course in East European, Latin American and Asian nations. Evidence was found in fourteen
ex-Soviet Republics (Albania; Bosnia; Bulgaria; Croatia; Czech Republic; Estonia; Hungary; Latvia; Lithuania;
Macedonia; Poland; Romania; Serbia; Slovakia) and thirty-eight developing countries (Argentina; Azerbaijan;
Belarus; Brazil; Brunei; Brazil; Brunei; Cambodia; Chile; China; Colombia; Costa Rica; Dominican Republic;
Ecuador; El Salvador; Iraq; Israel; Honduras; Kyrgyzstan; Laos; Mexico; Myanmar; Nicaragua; Nigeria; Paraguay;
Peru; Puerto Rico; Philippines; Russia; Singapore; South Africa; South Korea Tanzania; Turkey; Ukraine; Uruguay;
Uzbekistan; and Zimbabwe. I find evidence of a U-shape in all of these countries also.
4
  That included Algeria, Armenia; Austria; Bangladesh; Chile; Colombia; Egypt; Greece; India; Indonesia; Iran;
Jordan; Luxembourg; Moldova; Morocco; New Zealand; Pakistan; Saudi Arabia; Singapore; Slovenia; Taiwan;
Uganda; Venezuela and Vietnam. In this paper I report U-shapes for all but three of them - Bangladesh; Pakistan and
Saudi Arabia.


                                                        2
Subsequently, Glenn (2009) argued that it was inappropriate to include controls and what mattered
was the raw data; Blanchflower and Oswald (2009) disagreed. Glenn claimed that: "the
appearance of this U-shaped curve of well-being is the result of the use of inappropriate and
questionable control variables" and especially marital status. It is worth rehearsing the arguments
we used there again. In many countries around the world, and especially in Europe, as I illustrate
in detail below, the U-shape can be found without any control variables, and a major problem with
Glenn's analysis was that he focused too heavily on the United States.

Second, we disagreed with Glenn's methodological position, which seems to be that social
scientists should not hold constant other factors when they study the relationship between well-
being and age. Ultimately in social science, the control variables that are included in multiple
regression equations we noted, have to be chosen with an eye on the intellectual or policy question
being answered. The summary of our argument went as follows. If the aim is to describe the data,
it is reasonable to leave out most or all control variables. `Smokers die at rate Z' is an acceptable
statement to make. But that is not the same as `smoking changes your risk by Z', which requires
other confounding variables to be controlled for such as diet, education, income and exercise. We
argued "it would likely be an error to use an equation without controls to tell the public what
impact ageing has on happiness without separating out the effects of other variables such as, say,
education, marriage or unemployment. If the aim is to understand relationships", we argued, "it
will rarely be desirable to stop at bivariate patterns." That seems right and I don't stop at bivariate
patterns in this paper, but I present results with and without controls which even then give U-
shapes.

Blanchflower and Oswald (2019) examined the issue of differences between the well-being and
age relationship with and without controls using seven pooled cross-country data sets, covering 51
countries and 1.3 million randomly sampled people, the paper examines the cross-sectional pattern
of psychological well-being from approximately age 20 to age 90. 5 The paper described the two
conceptual approaches. One studies raw numbers on well-being and age which we termed the
descriptive approach. The second studies the patterns in regression equations for well-being (that
is, adjusting for other influences). This we termed the ceteris-paribus analytical approach. The
paper applied each and compared the patterns of life-satisfaction and happiness. Using the first
method, evidence of a midlife low was found in five of the seven data sets; the two that didn't
were both for the United States. Using the second method, all seven data sets produced evidence
consistent with a midlife low.

As a validation of the happiness data Blanchflower and Oswald (2016) examined the use of
antidepressants in randomized samples from 27 European countries and show that the probability
of taking antidepressants follows an inverted U-shaped curve that peaks in people's late 40s.
Additionally, and remarkably, Weiss et al. (2012) find a similar U shape exists among chimpanzees
and orangutans. Raters familiar with the individual apes assessed cheerfulness among 508 great
apes. The U-shaped pattern or midlife crisis emerges with or without use of parametric methods.

5
 The data sets were a) LFS survey for the UK, 2011-2015; b) BRFSS for the USA, 2010 c) Eurobarometer, 2016; d)
European Social Survey 2002-2014; e) ISSP 2012; f) GSS for the USA, 1972-2014 g) Latinobarometer 2013 and
2015.


                                                      3
The results imply that human wellbeing's curved shape is not uniquely human and that, although
it may be partly explained by aspects of human life and society, its origins may lie partly in the
biology we share with great apes.

Graham and Pozuelo (2017) analyzed the happiness curve within 46 individual countries,
including controls for gender, education, marital and employment status and household income
and found U-shapes. They also looked at how the happiness curve varied depending on where in
the well-being distribution individuals. They also extended the analysis to stress with the same
controls and showed an inverted U. The U-shaped relationship between age and happiness was
measured using data from the Gallup World Poll from 2005-2014 with the dependent variable, the
so-called Cantril ladder, based on an individual's reports on the where they would put themselves
on an eleven-point ladder in which their lives compare to the best possible life they can imagine,
held in 44 of the 46 countries, and a reverse U held for stress in almost as many. 6 Fortin et al
(2015) using the same Gallup World Poll data also find evidence of an inverse U-shape in age for
stress and also find the same for worry and anger in the raw data, without controls.

All of the patterns identified there are statistically significant as will be confirmed below, given
the large sample sizes. As Blanchflower and Oswald (2019) note the claim that the size of the dip
is tiny does not appear to be correct. In the seven data sets, they studied the size of the drop, in
well-being to the low point in the late 40s is equivalent in magnitude to the influence of a major
life event like unemployment or marital separation.

Deaton (2018) uses data from the Gallup World Poll and plots Cantril's ladder without controls
and finds an the (unconditional) U-shape in the English speaking countries (U.K., U.S., Canada,
Ireland, New Zealand and Australia), to a lesser extent in East and in South Asia and perhaps in
Latin America and Caribbean--though only in the last age group, and in Europe--more for men
than women--but not elsewhere. The World as a whole shows the U­shape. In the two poorest
regions, Africa and South Asia, life evaluation is low throughout life and, in Africa, it falls with
age. In the ex-Communist countries of Asia and in the two poorest regions, Africa and South Asia,
life evaluation is low throughout life and, in Africa, it falls with age. In the ex-Communist
countries of Asia and Eastern Europe, life-evaluation is markedly lower among the elderly.
Steptoe et al. (2015), who use an earlier version of the Gallup data, do not find any consistent
pattern.

Deaton (2018) reported only unadjusted estimates in part he argued because of the difficult to
apply consistent controls to the Gallup data, not because the questions do not exist, but because
their meaning varies so much across the globe, with different patterns of education, work,

6
  Graham and Pozuelo (2017) found U-shapes for eighteen ex-Soviet countries (Albania; Bosnia Herzegovina;
Bulgaria; Czech Republic; Croatia; Estonia; Hungary; Kosovo; Latvia; Lithuania; Macedonia; Montenegro; Poland;
Portugal; Romania; Serbia, Slovakia; Slovenia), seventeen advanced countries (Australia; Austria; Belgium; Cyprus;
Canada; Denmark; Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Ireland; Italy; Netherlands; Spain; Sweden; UK and USA) and
nine developing countries (Argentina; Brazil; Chile; China; Colombia; India; Peru; Russia and Venezuela). The
authors did not find a U-shape in age for Mexico or South Africa. They also examined data from the World Values
Surveys (WVS) used in Blanchflower and Oswald (2008a) and here and found U-shapes for all but five of their sample
of forty-six countries - Brazil, Chile; Columbia; India and Montenegro were the exceptions but they did find them in
the WVS for Mexico and Argentina.


                                                         4
retirement, and health systems. Deaton also suggested that a weightier argument is that many
possible and potentially important controls are age dependent, including income and the presence
of children but especially health, disability and marital status.

Deaton notes that "different authors use different countries and different data sets with different
SWB questions, so it is possible that the age patterns in the Gallup data are different from those
that come from other questions and different survey protocols; it would be an important (if
daunting) task to make systematic comparisons." This is what I try to do here. 7

Helliwell, Norton et al (2019) found U-shapes in data for the US using the Gallup World
Healthways data for happiness yesterday as well as Cantril's ladder plus for Canada (Canadian
General Social Survey and Canadian Community Health Survey) and the UK (Annual
Population Survey), for happiness with and without controls. They found that the U- shape in
age is significantly flatter, and well-being in the middle of the age range higher, for those living as
couples, and for those who have lived for longer in their communities. A strong sense of
community belonging, the authors found, is associated with greater life satisfaction at all ages, but
especially so at ages 60 and above, in some samples deepening the U-shape in age by increasing
the size of the life satisfaction gains following the mid-life low.

Some have further argued that no U-shape exists in longitudinal data (Frijters and Beatton, 2012;
Kassenboehmer and Haisken-DeNew, 2012). In contrast Cheng et al (2017) drawing on four data
sets, and only within-person changes in well-being, build on the work of Van Landeghem (2012)
and document powerful support for a U shape in longitudinal data. Three of the data sets are
nationally representative household surveys, namely the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS,
1991­ 2008), the Household Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA, 2001­ 10) and
the German Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP, 1984­ 2008). The fourth data set comprises a
relatively more homogenous sample of medical doctors from the Medicine in Australia Balancing
Employment and Life (MABEL) longitudinal study. They measure the change in well-being of
randomly selected individuals each year and then plot that against individuals' ages. On average,
they find people's well-being gradually drops until individuals reach midlife. From then on, it
picks up smoothly as people go on, in each of three countries and four data sets, to approach the
age of 70.

Wunder et al. (2013) and Ranjbar and Sperlich (2019) both use semi-parametric methods on
German SOEP panel data to examine the relation between age and well-being. They both get the
same results; Ranjbar and Sperlich conclude "we find a clear, deep valley between the ages of 45
and 50, typically interpreted as a midlife crisis." Piper (2015) uses GMM dynamic panel
estimation with 16 waves of the British Household Panel Study on youngsters age 16-30 and found
that happiness declined over that age range, a result found by comparing the coefficients of the age
dummies: a result in line with the overall U-shape. Furthermore, tests of the individual age group
coefficients demonstrate that they are, in many cases, significantly different from each other.
Additionally, because the preferred model controls for the individual waves in the sample, this
decline of life satisfaction with age is a lifecycle effect. The life satisfaction of young people

7
  In private communications Angus Deaton suggested that he didn't have quite this in mind. He suggested, more just
a look at the questions they ask, their response rates, and whether they are even grossly consistent.


                                                        5
between 16 and 30 falls, and this seems to be something that everyone, on average, experiences.
Overall, his findings, Piper argues, "are in line with the common U-shape finding." Clark (2019)
also finds, using the same data source and panel data methods controlling for fixed effects that
the data "continues to produce a U-shaped relationship between well-being and age".

Morgan and O'Connor (2017) examined Eurobarometer data for 17 countries 8 for the years 1973-
2016 and argued that there is in fact an M-shape in age rather than a U-shape after controlling for
cohort and education effects. They argue there is a local maximum in life satisfaction around age
30, declining life satisfaction until around age 50 followed by rising life satisfaction, and declining
life satisfaction after age 75. 9 It turns out that their results are driven by the inclusion of four
education variables they created that seem unusual. This M-shape is not there though in their raw
data. It is also not there when their education variable is dropped and only survey, country, gender,
cohort and age controls are included, and is also not there when the standard education variable
included in the data file is used. More on this below.

Other commentators have expressed skepticism that the curve's trajectory holds true mainly in
countries where the median wage is high and people tend to live longer or, alternatively, where the
poor feel resentment more keenly during middle age and don't mind saying so. John Briley in a
recent op-ed argued that 'the curve is not universal ­ data from economically struggling countries,
for example, don't show the happiness rebound". 10 Arthur Krystal 11, for example, has suggested
that there may be a simpler explanation: "perhaps the people who participate in such surveys are
those whose lives tend to follow the curve, while people who feel miserable at seventy or eighty,
whose ennui is offset only by brooding over unrealized expectations, don't even bother to open
such questionnaires". This critique of course could apply to any research based on surveys with a
bias having nothing to do with age.

There is zero evidence that the U-shape has anything to do with differential response bias by age.
I have the U-shape in many data sets with various happiness measures including happiness itself
and life satisfaction and Cantril's ladder. It makes no difference if the dependent variable is scored,
from 1-4 say or from 1-10, the results are essentially the same. The smaller numbers of
observations for older age groups is an issue but that simply reflects the overall demographics in
the country ­ there are fewer people age eighty than age thirty and especially so in countries with
shorter life expectancy. 12 Helliwell (2019) recently argued that "to use a single life satisfaction

8
 The countries included in their study are France, Belgium, the Netherlands, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg,
Denmark, Ireland, Great Britain, Northern Ireland, Greece, Spain, Portugal, East Germany, Finland, Sweden, and
Austria.
9
    Thanks to the authors who kindly provided me with their data.
10
  John Briley, 'Does happiness in your 50s signal the end of ambition?", The Washington Post, December 18th,
2019.
11
   Arthur Krystal, 'Why we can't tell the truth about aging? A long life is a gift. But will we really be grateful for
it?', The New Yorker, October 28, 2019.
12
  According to the Census Bureau's International Population database in 2018 there were 4,675, 612 age thirty
versus 1,483,523 age eighty. In LDCs the ratio is smaller ­ in Venezuela for example the numbers are 65,319 and
519,040 respectively.

                                                            6
question in large population-based samples might represent the best use of survey resources."
Following Helliwell's advice, where feasible I use life satisfaction as my well-being measure.

I examine the happiness curve using a total of one hundred and nine distinct micro data sets ­ 33
sweeps of the General Social Survey (GSS) from 1972-2018; the 2010 Behavioral Re (BRFSS),
both for the United States; 3 sweeps of the Annual Population Survey for the UK, 2016-2018; the
2012 and 2017 sweeps of the International Social Survey Program (ISSP); sweeps 1-9 of the
European Social Surveys (ESS); forty-two sweeps of the Eurobarometer from 2009-2018 (EB);
four sweeps of the European Quality of Life Survey: sweeps 2-6 of the World Values Survey
(WVS); the Latino Barometers of 2016 and 2017 (LB); the Afro Barometer Surveys of 2016 and
2019 (AB) and the Asia Barometers of 2003-2007 (AS). 13 The ISSP and WVS both contain data
from four large non-European English speaking advanced nations ­ Australia; Canada; New
Zealand and the United States. They all give U-shapes in happiness with and without controls.

2. U-shapes in Happiness and Life Satisfaction in Advanced and Developing Countries
It is worth pursuing the possibility that a) the U-shape doesn't apply to poorer countries, where
residents have shorter life expectancies, noting that Blanchflower and Oswald (2008a) did find it
for 39 developing countries in WVS sweeps 1-4 14 averaging out at around age 43 with a set of
control variables and b) if it does, the minimum would be different and likely lower given the
shorter life expectancy. In this paper I explore that issue and find evidence that there are U-shapes
in age in developing countries with similar minima to those in advanced countries however well-
being is measured. I do this for groups of developing and advanced countries as well as for
countries individually. The minima without controls are much higher and often there is a steady
decline by age in developing countries and no minima in the raw data by age. I do find it though
in many country level equations for developing countries.

I use three methods to identify the U-shape. First, I run an OLS regression with the dependent
variable a measure of well-being, on a pooled sample of countries across all ages, with age and
age squared, without any controls although I do include country dummies and if there are multiple
survey years, then I also include sweep dummies. I then repeat and include, as far as is feasible a
consistent set of personal control variables across all studies of gender, marital status, education
and labor force status to estimate ceteris paribus effects.

Second, I then re-estimate for individual countries including the gender, education, marital and
labor force status control variables with the age of respondents limited to those under the age of


https://www.census.gov/data-tools/demo/idb/region.php?T=10&RT=0&A=both&Y=2019&C=US&R=
13
   We pooled forty-two recent sweeps of the Eurobarometer surveys on thirty-five European countries including the
EU28 plus Turkey, Turkish Cyprus; Macedonia; Montenegro; Serbia; Albania and Iceland for the years 2009-2019 ­
2009 (71.1 and 71.3); 2010 (73.4 and 74.2); 2011 (75.3; 75.4 and 76.3); 2012 (77.4 and 78.1); 2013 (79.3; 79.4; 80.1
and 80.2); 2014 (81.1; 81.4; 81.5; 82.3 and 82.4); 2015 (83.1; 83.2; 83.3; 83.4; 84.2; 84.3 and 84.4); 2016 (85.2; 86.1;
86.2; 86.3); 2017 (87.1; 87.3; 88.3 and 88.4 and 2018 (89.1; 89.2; 89.3; 90.1; 90.2; 90.4 ) and 2019 (91.2)
14
  Countries were Albania; Algeria; Argentina; Bangladesh; Belarus; Brazil; Chile; China; Colombia; Dominican
Republic; Egypt; India; Indonesia; Iran; Iraq; Jordan; Kyrgyzstan; Mexico; Moldova; Morocco; Nigeria; Peru;
Philippines; Puerto Rico; Russia; Saudi Arabia; Singapore; South Africa; Taiwan; Tanzania; Turkey; Uganda;
Ukraine; Uruguay; Venezuela; Vietnam and Zimbabwe.


                                                           7
seventy. I do this for simplicity given very different life expectancies across countries and hence
much smaller sample sizes for older age groups and likely variability at older ages. Sample sizes
are often quite small for these individual country regressions and on average many are only around
1000 observations. I find for several advanced countries that there are insignificant results using,
for example ISSP data, but when using EB or ESS when the samples are much larger the
significance of both age terms appears. I assume that there is a significant U-shape if there is a
negative sign on the age coefficient and a positive sign on the square with the T-statistic of both
above 1.5.

Finally, I re-estimate the well-being equation and replace the age and age squared term with a
complete set of single year of age variables which I then plot in a series of charts. This is to ensure
that the quadratic I fitted is not an inappropriate functional form. This way the form is freely
estimated and then plotted, with the individual coefficients added to the constant.

The well-being variables are always coded from low to high, so a positive coefficient means
happier. Sometimes I use happiness data and sometimes life satisfaction and the number of options
available varies by survey and year. Mostly there are four options, that I call 4-step, of eleven
options from 0-10 that I call 11-step, 7-step and 10-step. It doesn't seem that this makes much of
a difference. Sample size does seem to matter although it is surprising how many U-shapes are
identified even with sample size of under a thousand.

I am also able to identify U-shapes in age in both European and African nations using a broader
set of attitudinal questions on living standards as well as on an individual's financial conditions
as well as the state of the national economy. I focus in particular on questions about financial
situations individuals find themselves in as well as on the general state of the economy. These
questions are widely used in consumer confidence surveys. Respondents are asked such questions
in the Eurobarometers, as well as in the monthly consumer surveys run by the European
Commission in every EU country since the 1980s. I compare results of asking similar questions
in Europe and Africa. It seems the U-shape in age is more general than just in happiness and life
satisfaction equations and applies to other attitudinal economic variables. This suggests the
happiness curve has broader applicability to other attitudinal variables about the person and the
economy.

3. Empirical Analysis of Quadratics in Age
In this section I report the results of estimating a series of linear well-being regressions. In each
case I report coefficients and T-statistics for the age and the age squared variables with and without
controls for education, gender, marital and labor force status, country and where appropriate where
there are multiple survey years used a set of year dummies. the without controls equations include
year and country dummies. I calculate the minimum of the quadratic in age by differentiating with
respect to age and solving which means dividing the age coefficient by the Age2 coefficient
multiplied by two. Hence on row 1 of Table 1a the age coefficient is -.01771 and Age2 is -.00014
so the minimum is -1*.01771/(2*.00014)=63.25.

I turn first for the two countries that have micro data files with thousands of observations ­ the
United States and the United Kingdom.



                                                  8
i) The United States
I need to make clear at the outset that the United States does look different in the raw data. There
are two main sources of well-being data in the USA ­ the General Social Survey which has
happiness data from 1972-2018, with an average of around 2000 observations a year and the
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) which has life satisfaction available for the
years 2005-2010, with over four million observations, but this question has not been included in
subsequent years. In the GSS the question asked is ``Taken all together, how would you say things
are these days? would you say that you are very happy=3, pretty happy=2, or not too happy=1?"
In the BRFSS respondents are asked "In general, how satisfied are you with your life? Very
satisfied=4; Satisfied=3; Dissatisfied=2 and Very dissatisfied=1." (All my codes).

If I run OLS regressions and include and an age and an age squared term I get the following for
ages 18 and over (t-statistics in parentheses). All equations include year dummies.

                               Age                Age2               Minimum              N
BRFSS (life satisfaction)
Without controls          -.00253 (2.44)       +.000013 (13.63)         97             4,283,544
With controls             -.00531 (47.70)      +.000062 (59.30)         43             4,283,544

GSS (happiness)
Without controls         +.00427 (5.13)       -.00003 (3.89)            71 (max)         59,860
With controls            -.008422 (8.97)      +.000106 (10.93)          40               59,707

In the case of the BRFSS, without controls the age term is negative and the square term positive
but the minimum is close to 100. For the GSS the signs are reversed but are both significant
suggesting an inverted U-shape. In both cases when I add controls there is a significant U-shape
with a minimum of 43 and 40 respectively.

It is important to look at the raw data to determine the appropriateness of fitting a quadratic to the
two sets of data. As can be seen from Chart 1a for the BRFSS, 2005-2010 which reports scatter
plots of the coefficients of single year of age dummy variables in a life satisfaction equation a)
without any controls except year dummies, and then b) adding controls for marital and labor force
status, gender and education. In each case the individual coefficients are added to the constant. It
is clear that there is an M-shape in the raw data, with an initial decline and then a rise through the
early thirties and then the mod-life drop and subsequent pick-up. Adding controls takes away the
M and produces a clean and highly significant U-shape.

Chart 1b does the same exercise for the happiness data from GSS. As with the BRFSS without
controls the function rises through around age thirty and also doesn't have an initial dip. There is
then a dip in midlife. With controls the U-shape becomes apparent.

It turns out that there are very different patterns without controls by marital status and education,
but in all cases, there is a U-shape with controls. Chart 1c plots the married that are 55% of the
total, there is an M-shape without controls and a U-shape with them. Chart 1d reports it for the
non-married, which includes never married (11%), divorced (14%), separated (2%), widowed
(15%) and living together (2%). It shows an obvious U-shape both with and without controls. IN

                                                  9
contrast Chart 1e and Chart 1f for both college and non-college have U-shapes with and without
controls.

Graham and Pozuelo (2017) also found marked differences for the married and unmarried using
the Gallup Healthways data for the US, in sharp contrast to Europe. They found that there were
U-shapes for both groups in Europe and argued that there is a major difference in the levels of
happiness across married and unmarried cohorts in the US, with those of the married significantly
higher than those of the unmarried. In addition, they found that "the unmarried experience a much
steeper dip than do the married as beginning in the late 20s and then closing the gap with the
married in the late 50s. The married, meanwhile, have a slight upward bump in the U curve in the
late 20s to the mid-40s and then a drop again at that point." 15

The authors note rightly that it is hard to explain why there are such large differences in the
happiness of the married versus unmarried in the USA and not in Europe. They go on to argue,
which seems right, that "in theory, selection bias could be an issue, as happier people are more
likely to marry each other. Yet this is not the whole story and does not explain the differences
between these two contexts, which are otherwise very similar in terms of per capita income,
education levels, and other traits." Differences between married and unmarried subsamples are
clearly worth exploring but are not pursued here for lack of space across other countries. One
issue is that marriage versus cohabiting is much more the norm in the US than it is in the UK which
may impact the happiness of those who are unmarried by middle age.

ii) The United Kingdom
Charts 2a and 2b examine the data, for people under age 70, from the other major large cross-
section survey of well-being from the most recent sweeps available for 2016-2018 from the Annual
Population Surveys for the United Kingdom. Earlier sweeps were used in Bell and Blanchflower
(2019) to examine the well-being of the underemployed and the unemployed. These surveys
contain data on four well-being measures and overall there are about 270,000 observations on
each. The question used is as follows.

SATIS ­ 'Overall, how satisfied are you with your life nowadays? where nought is 'not at all
satisfied' and 10 is 'completely satisfied'.

Chart 2a plots the single year of age coefficients with the dependent variable life satisfaction (satis)
with age and its square without any other controls except for two, year dummies. Then I add
controls for education, marital status and labor force status and plot again. There is a clear U-
shape in both cases, with a small up-tick at around thirty in the data without controls, which
disappears with controls.

Grover and Helliwell (2019) examined happiness data for the UK using earlier sweeps of these
data and found that the U-shape in the relationship between life satisfaction and age exists
for both the married and unmarried but is deeper for the unmarried, and the difference
between married and unmarried is greatest when people are in their late 40s and 50s. I

15
     See especially their Figure 50a, p257.


                                                  10
confirm that in Chart 2b, with a U-shape for both the married and unmarried with and
without controls. It is clear that the married are happier than the unmarried.

The broad picture though is a, ceteris paribus, U-shape in well-being. A quadratic in age,
it turns out is likely a reasonable first order approximation to these data across many
countries, recognizing there may be individual nuances hidden by using the same
functional form across countries.

iii) Multiple Countries
I start out using data from the Eurobarometer surveys (EB). Concern has recently been expressed
over response rates to these surveys especially in relation to the questions on respondent's views
on the EU, with the concern that Eurosceptics do not respond to the surveys which then suggest
higher levels of support than they should. The Eurobarometer surveys differ from other surveys
that use the mail or the telephone, the EU Commission only conducts interviews with members of
the public face-to-face at home. This makes it even more difficult to achieve high response rates.

The EU Commission on 5th December 2019 defended the methods of its public opinion surveys in
response to criticism that the low rate of responses could lead to bias towards the EU. In the most
recent Eurobarometer survey for which response rates have been calculated, and obtained by the
Danish newspaper, the rate was 14 percent in Finland, 15 percent in Germany, 20 percent in
Luxembourg, 22 percent in Italy, 27 percent in the UK, 28 percent in Denmark, 31 percent in
Greece and France, 33 percent in Ireland, 34 percent in Spain, 38 percent in Latvia and 40 percent
in Portugal. Erik Gahner Larsen from the University of Kent in a blog 16 noted rightly, that the
response rate is informative but not sufficient or even necessary in order to obtain representative
samples. He finds no evidence that countries with lower response rates are much more positive
towards the EU in Eurobarometer compared to the European Social Survey. Of note is that there
seems very little evidence that responses to questions on life satisfaction in the EB have been
impacted over time by a rise in non-response rates/

Table 1a uses data on 4-step life satisfaction for over 1.2 million Europeans from forty-two sweeps
of the EB for the years 2009-2019. 17 The question asked is "On the whole, are you very satisfied,
fairly satisfied, not very satisfied or not at all satisfied with the life you lead? Not at all satisfied
(=1); not very satisfied (=2); fairly satisfied (=3) and very satisfied (=4)". It establishes the facts
in European countries, by which I mean the EU28 plus seven other countries (Iceland, Norway,
Turkey, Turkish Cyprus, Albania; Macedonia and Montenegro). There are seventeen western EU
member countries, plus Iceland and Norway, and twelve East European countries that are currently
EU members. There are six developing countries including four ex-Soviet (Albania; Macedonia,
Montenegro and Serbia) that are not EU members plus Turkey and Turkish Cyprus in that group,
all of which are so-called candidate countries.

16
     'Eurobarometer and Euroscepticism' https://erikgahner.dk/2019/eurobarometer-and-euroscepticism/
17
  Information, 'New data reveals serious problems with the EU's official public opinion polls', 3rd December 2019.
https://www.information.dk/udland/2019/12/new-data-reveals-serious-problems-with-the-eus-official-public-
opinion-polls and Eszter Zalan, 'EU Commission defends Eurobarometer methodology,' EU Observer, December 5th
2019.


                                                         11
First, eight estimates are provided for pooled samples across all age groups, with and without
controls overall and then separately for Western and Eastern Europe, and for developing countries,
with and without controls for gender, education, marital and labor force status. In all four cases
with and without controls there is a minimum in midlife in the early fifties and the minima are a
little higher without controls. There is also a U-shape with controls when a set of eight cohort
dummies are included for each ten-year period for birth from 1930. To add these cohort controls
there needs to be a long time run of data which there is in the EB and GSS surveys.

Second, separate estimates are provided by country with controls with age restricted to be under
seventy years. In all thirty-seven cases the age term is significant and negative and the squared
term significantly positive. There is some variation with a low of 29 in Luxembourg and a high
of 80 for Montenegro but mostly are in the forties and fifties.

There are significant U-shapes for the pooled sample overall and separately for the Western
Europe, Eastern European and developing country samples with and without controls.

Table 1b reports results for all Western and Eastern European countries without controls and there
are U-shapes in three of the six developing countries. In a couple of cases (Bulgaria and Romania),
the minimum is nearer to 100 than to fifty. But overall the minima are slightly higher than without
controls, but not in all. In the UK the minimum is age 43 in both.

Table 1c estimates life satisfaction equations using the 1973-2002 Manheim Eurobarometer Trend
file used by Blanchflower and Oswald (2008a) for a smaller group of eighteen EU countries plus
Norway and there are U-shapes with and without controls in the overall sample and in every one
of the 19 countries with controls for those under age 70. Somewhat surprisingly the U-shape looks
broadly similar in the years before and after the Great Recession which hit in 2008. Adding cohort
dummies does lower the minimum sharply.

Chart 3a uses single year of age plots with and without controls using the EB files from 2009-
2019, and both show U-shapes. Chart 3b adds cohort dummies to the list of controls and the U-
shape remains. Chart 3c reports single year of age estimates with and without controls from the
Mannheim Trend Files for 1973-2002 and there are U-shapes again with and without controls.
Chart 3d adds cohort dummies again and the U-shape remains.

There is an issue raised by Morgan and O'Connor (2017), henceforth MO, over whether there is
an M-shape rather than a U-shape in EB data. MO kindly sent me their data and it turns out that
in contrast to the United States there is no evidence of the M-shape either in the raw data or when
they add cohort dummies. Appendix B shows the raw plots across fifteen countries. There are U-
shapes in a dozen countries in the raw data; the exceptions are Italy, Portugal and Finland. In
Table 2b using the ESS I also did not find a U-shape in the raw data for these three countries, but
there was evidence for a U-shape with them with controls in Tables 1a, 1c, 2a and 3.

Chart 3e plots the MO data when I simply included sweep and country dummies along with single
year of age dummies and added the coefficients to the constant. There is no obvious M-shape in
either series. It emerges when the authors include education controls they constructed by country,

                                                12
although they didn't explain this in their paper that the M had nothing to do with cohort dummies.
Chart 3b and Chart 3d also using EB data, showed there is no M-shape when controls for education,
marital status and labor market status are added.

Table 2a, with controls and Table 2b without them, uses eight sweeps of the European Social
Surveys but this time the dependent variable is 11-step happiness. There are over a third of a
million observations. The question asked in the ESS is "Taking all things together, how happy
would you say you are?" and the responses are coded from 0 to 10 with zero 'extremely unhappy"
and 10 "extremely happy". The data file contains data on four developing countries ­ Israel,
Russia, Turkey and Ukraine ­ plus twenty-eight European countries.

The pooled samples in Table 2a have U-shapes although the minima are high without controls for
all three groupings, but very consistent with the results from the Eurobarometers at age 57 for
advanced countries and overall and 62 for developing with controls. There is a minimum again in
every country equation that again includes controls for those under seventy that are also in the
forties and fifties.

Table 2b without controls has a significant U-shape for 24/32 countries. All of the flour developing
countries have a U-shape and there are eight advanced countries with no U-shape (Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Italy and Lithuania, Poland and Slovenia). All six of these countries
had significant U-shapes with larger samples with the EB data.

Table 3 makes use of 10-step life satisfaction data from four sweeps (2003, 2007, 2011 and 2016)
of the European Quality of Life Survey (EQLS). Results are very similar to those from the EB
and the ESS. There are significant U-shapes everywhere, with and without controls. Minima with
controls are in the fifties for western and Eastern Europe and for the four developing countries.
Minima are a little higher without controls.

Table 4 now moves to using 7-step life satisfaction data from the 2012 ISSP which is not limited
to Europe. The question asked is "If you were to consider your life in general, how happy or
unhappy would you say you are, on the whole? Completely happy =7; Very happy=6; Fairly
happy=5; Neither happy nor unhappy=4; Fairly unhappy=3; Very unhappy=2; completely
unhappy=1?" Numbers are my coding to ensure a a larger coefficient means more happiness.

Again, the pooled samples give happiness curves for Advanced, Eastern European and developing
countries that are higher without controls than with. The overall minimum is 55 and 51 for
developing. All 31 countries have significant U-shapes, mostly in the forties and fifties again.

Table 5 does the same but with the 2017 ISSP with a slightly different 7-step life satisfaction
question. All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole nowadays?
Completely satisfied=7; Very satisfied=6; Fairly satisfied=5; Neither satisfied nor dissatisfied=4;
Fairly dissatisfied=3; Very dissatisfied=2; Completely dissatisfied=1?" Numbers are my coding
again. The overall minimum is a little lower than in earlier tables at 48. The age minimum for
advanced countries is 54 and for developing 46. There are U-shapes everywhere with and without
controls.



                                                13
Table 6 looks in turn at sweeps 2-6 of the World Values Survey. In the five sweeps there is always
a minimum between forty and fifty overall with controls, and only in Wave 2 is there no U-shape
without controls. In every one of the 137 reported country estimates, for advanced and developing
countries, remarkably, given the small sample sizes, there are significant happiness curves.

Table 7 now turns to look at 5-step happiness data in five sweeps of the Asia Barometers of 2003-
2007. 18 The question asked is "All things considered would you say that you are happy these days?
- Very happy=5; pretty happy=4' neither happy nor unhappy=3; not too happy=2 and very
unhappy=1?" Once again, the numbers refer to my codes. In each case, there is a well-defined
U-shape with controls and only without controls in two of the five sweeps. Significant U-shapes
are found in fourteen Asian developing countries ­ China; India; Laos; Maldives; Mongolia;
Myanmar; Philippines; Singapore; South Korea; Sri Lanka; Taiwan; Tajikistan; Thailand;
Uzbekistan.

Table 8 makes use of 4-step life satisfaction data from the Latino Barometers for 2017 and 2018.
The question asked was "Generally speaking, would you say you are satisfied with your life?
Would you say you are...? Very satisfied =4; Quite satisfied=3 Not very satisfied=2 and Not at all
satisfied=1?" Blanchflower and Oswald (2008a) examined data from this survey series for the
years 1997, 2000, 2001 and 2003-2005 and found a U-shape at age 50 for men and age 43 for
women with a full set of controls, so this updates that analysis. For both 2017 and 2018 there is a
well-defined U-shape that minimizes in the sixties without controls and in the fifties with them.
There are U-shapes for those under the age of seventy in twelve, for Bolivia; Brazil; Columbia;
Costa Rica; Ecuador; Honduras; Mexico; Panama; Paraguay; Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela.

Chart 4 also shows a U-shape when single year of age dummies are included with controls using
the EQLS. Chart 5a does a similar exercise using the data for advanced countries from the ESS
sweeps 1-8. There is a flattening around age seventy after a minimum in the late fifties and a pick-
up at age eighty. Chart 5b repeats but for the sample of four developing countries ­ Israel, Russia,
Turkey and Ukraine with controls. It has a U-shape with a later turning point in the early sixties
and a later pick-up. Chart 6a does the same for the ISSP 2012 while Chart 6b has it for developing
countries with controls. Charts 7a and 7b do the same for the ISSP 2017. All have U-shapes with
minima around age fifty.

I now turn to plotting well-being data only for developing countries from Wave 5 (2005-2009) and
Wave 6 (2010-2014) of the WVS. Chart 8a plots a U-shape in life satisfaction using Wave 5 and
Chart 8b in life satisfaction using sweep five of the WVS. Charts 9a and 9b do the same using
data from Wave 6 of the WVS. All have well-defined U-shapes minimizing in the mid-fifties.

Chart 10a and 10b report on 4-step life satisfaction equations from the Latino Barometers for 2017
and 2018 respectively with controls and once again show a clear well-defined U-shape. 19 Chart
10 does the same from the 2005 Asia Barometer, with controls chosen as it has a larger sample
size than the other sweeps. That also has a significant U-shape in age.


18
     Blanchflower and Oswald (2008a) used data from the 2003-2005 Asia Barometers.
19
     Easterlin et al (2010) also used the (1994-2006) LatinoBarometers.


                                                       14
There are obvious U-shapes in age in life satisfaction and happiness across the developed and
developing world from these year of age plots that do not rely on a specific functional form such
as a quadratic.

To conclude, these tables and charts suggest the following
1) There are well-being U-shapes in advanced and developing countries
2) thee answers seem to be similar using happiness or life satisfaction data.
3) It doesn't seem to matter how many steps there are in the dependent variable, essentially the
same answer is found with a 4-step, 7-step, 10 or an 11-step measure.
4) The answers are broadly the same whichever data file is used.
5) Adding cohort dummies does not remove the U-shape.
6) There is a minimum around age fifty with controls of the happiness curve in both advanced and
developing countries, and a little higher than that without controls.

4. Alternative Measures of Well-being
I now turn to other ways of measuring satisfaction, which it turns out also show U-shapes.
Easterlin (2006) found evidence of a U-shape in age in the US General Social Survey for the years
1972-1993 in answers to the question ­ We are interested in how people are getting along
financially these days. So far as you and your family are concerned, would you say that you are
pretty well satisfied with your present financial situation, more or less satisfied, or not satisfied at
all? He finds that satisfaction with one's financial situation, "declines very slightly through age
36, but thereafter rises considerably, with the biggest increase late in life." This contrasts with his
findings on happiness overall as well as happiness with the family that he found followed an
inverted U-shape. 20

I took the data Easterlin (2006) used and re-estimated, with and without controls, for a longer time
period, from 1972-2018. T-statistics are in parentheses and I restricted the sample to those under
age 70 for simplicity. Without controls year dummies are included, with controls adds controls
for gender, marital status, years of education, race and labor force status. Sample size is with
controls.
                              Without Controls                  With controls
                             Age              Age2           Age              Age2              N
Happiness             +.0028 (2.16)     -.00003 (8.58) -.0132 (8.91)       .00016 (9.45) 52,433
Family situation      +.0316 (7.35)     -.00037 (7.45) -.0252 (5.32)       .00023(4.15) 22,231
Financial situation -.0158 (10.34) +.00025 (14.40) -.0246 (14.21) .00036 (18.37) 59,836

I confirm Easterlin's findings; both happiness and family situation without controls generate
inverted U-shapes in age, whereas financial situation has a U-shape in age even without controls.
All three though have U-shapes once controls for education, marital status and work status are



20
   Data for satisfaction with family life are only available for the years 1972-1993 hence the sample restriction but in
what follows I used data for both happiness and financial situation for the years 1972-2018. The family situation
question was SATFAM: "For each area of life I am going to name, tell me the number that shows how much
satisfaction you get from that area. Your family life (my codes) - 7. A very great deal; 6. A great deal; 5. Quite a bit;
4. A fair amount; 3. Some; 2. A little; 1. None."


                                                          15
included. The minima are 41 for happiness, 55 for family situation and 32 for financial situation
with controls.

It is apparent that a U-shape seems more robust using the financial situation data than the other
two measures of well-being. I explored the characteristics of this rather intriguing financial
circumstance variable as data is available in WVS sweeps 5 and 6 for developing and developed
countries.

In Table 10 I model responses in turn from waves 5 and 6 of the WVS that contains a 10-step
question on how satisfied the respondent is with the financial situation of the household.
Responses are from 1 ­ very dissatisfied to 10 very satisfied. As with the data for the US discussed
above, I find statistically significant U-shapes with and without controls in developed and
developing countries in both wave 5 and wave 6. The minimum is in the low to mid-forties with
controls in developed and developing countries in both years. With controls in the country
equations with the sample restricted to those under 70 years of age, there are U-shapes in thirty-
four developing countries from around the world. 21

A great deal of use is made in economics of survey responses from individuals on the general state
of the economy, including in Consumer Confidence measures such as the Michigan and
Conference Board measures in the United States and conducted by the European Commission
monthly for every EU member state. For example, respondents in the EU Commission survey are
asked for their views on the "general situation of the economy over the last twelve months." and
their "financial situation over the last twelve months" 22 These variables are then collapsed into a
score. In Chart 11 I plot the two series for the EU28 as a whole: separate scores are available for
every EU member country monthly. Their decline in 2007 onwards gave early warnings as did
other similar attitudinal variables that few spotted of the oncoming global recession in 2007
(Blanchflower, 2008 and 2009b). Responses to the financial situation variable as noted above has
a U-shape in age, but the general economic situation type question appears to also have that shape
as I illustrate below. A concern is that the general economic situation series turned down at the
end of 2018.

Part a) of Table 11 uses similar data from a recent Eurobarometer Survey 90.3 from November
2018 also conducted in the EU28 countries by the European Commission. I estimate six separate
regressions starting with the life satisfaction question used in Table 1 with the same controls ­
gender, marital and labor force status and education. A well-defined U-shape in life satisfaction,
as expected is apparent with a minimum at age 55 compared with 52 with controls in Table 1 for
the years 2009-2018. I re-estimated the same equation five more times using different attitudinal
questions on the individual's situation and that of the country as follows.



21
 Algeria; Belarus; Brazil; Chile; China; Colombia; Ecuador; Egypt; Georgia; Ghana; Indonesia; Iran; Iraq; Jordan;
Kyrgyzstan; Libya; Mali; Malaysia; Mexico; Morocco; Peru; Philippines; Russia; Singapore; South Africa; South
Korea; Taiwan; Thailand; Trinidad; Turkey; Uruguay; Yemen; Zambia and Zimbabwe.
22
  See the EU consumer surveys available for download here for every EU country
https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/indicators-statistics/economic-databases/business-and-consumer-
surveys/download-business-and-consumer-survey-data/time-series_en

                                                       16
How would you judge the situation in each of the following? Very good=4; Rather good=3;
Rather bad=2 and Very bad=1
Q2. The situation in our country?
Q3. The situation of the national economy?
Q4. The financial situation of your household?
Q5. The employment situation in the country?
Q6. The presence of public services in our country?

In every case the age term is significant and negative, and the square term is positive in Table 10.
Each of the variables have well-defined and statistically significant U-shapes in age and the t-
statistics on age and its square are everywhere above five. The age minima vary from ages 47-54.

Part b) of Table 11 uses the most recently released #9 sweep of the ESS for 2018. I estimate both
happiness and life satisfaction equations (Q10 and Q11) with controls and have well-defined U-
shapes again and a minimum of 60 and 56 respectively. I then estimate for four more attitudinal
questions about the economy, government, the state of education and the state of health services.
Again, age is significant and negative and its square significant and positive, and all have U-shapes
with minima from 50-56.

Q9. On the whole how satisfied are you with the present state of the economy in [country]
Q10. Now thinking about the [country] government, how satisfied are you with the way it is
doing its job?
Q11. Please say what you think overall about the state of education in [country] nowadays?
Q12. Please say what you think overall about the state of health services in [country] nowadays?

Part c of Table 11 uses data from various sweeps of the EQLS 2003-2016. It contains a question
o the respondents' views of their financial situation in the next twelve months, which also has a U-
shape in age. It has seven 10-step satisfaction questions relating to their education, if they were
working, to their job, their family life, the local area, the way democracy works, the state of the
economy and their living standards. All have U-shapes.

Very little analysis has been done on how well-being moves by age in Africa. 23 The Afro
Barometers are a natural place to turn, but unfortunately, they don't contain any questions on
happiness or life satisfaction. Both the 2016 and 2019 surveys do though contain a question on
living standards. Participants are asked the following: "In general, how would you describe your
own present living conditions?" Possible responses include: 1 = Very bad, 2 = Fairly bad, 3 =
Neither good nor bad, 4 = Fairly good, 5 = Very good." This is broadly similar to the question I
examined in Table 11 using the EQLS, which showed a U-shape with a minimum of forty-five.

This, living standard, measure of well-being, has been widely used in the development literature
for measuring well-being in Africa. It was used by Sulemana, Doabil and Anarfo (2019) for a
23
   Or indeed of happiness in Africa, for an exception see Helliwell, Huang and Wang (2019) who found evidence over
the years 2006-2018 that happiness in the Middle East and North Africa had dropped steadily while Sub-Saharan
Africa had no overall trend. The authors identify how much happiness has changed over the last decade and how low
it is in Africa. They note big declines in happiness in Rwanda, Malawi; Tanzania; Central African Republic; and
Botswana (their Figure 2.8)


                                                       17
study of well-being in Sub-Saharan Africa. They justified its use arguing that "the question taps
into the individual's evaluations of their life we used this construct as a suitable measure of
subjective wellbeing." The authors argued that "many other studies have constructed well-being
measures in the same way," which turns out to be correct. Deutsch et al (2016) used this variable
from the 2008 Afro arometer as did Pokimica et al (2012) and Sulemana (2015b) in their studies
of well-being in Ghana. Sulemana (2015a) in a study of the impact of crime on well-being in Africa
used data from the 4th sweep of the Afro Barometer for 2008. Sulemana et al (2017) used this
measure with the Afro Barometer data in their study of the relationship between corruption and
well-being in Africa.

Others have been creative in their use of measures of well-being for Africa. Bookwalter et al.
(2011) in a study of South Africa use a household level life satisfaction variable. Life satisfaction
in both surveys was reported at the household level. The head of the household was asked, "Taking
everything into account, how satisfied is this household with the way it lives these days?"
Responses were given on a five-point scale that we have ordered: very dissatisfied (1), dissatisfied
(2), neutral (3), satisfied (4), and very satisfied (5).

Table 12 reports the results from estimating an OLS equation with this as a dependent variable
with and without controls. Here controls are gender, race, education, marital and labor force status.
There is a U-shape minimizing at age 67 in 2016 and 59 in 2019 without controls and with them
53 and 55 respectively. Limiting age to less than seventy there are 22 countries with significant
U-shapes in 2016 and seventeen in 2019. Charts 12a and 12b plot the single year of age plots for
the two years with controls and there are obvious U-shapes again, with minima mostly in the mid-
fifties. There are U-shapes for thirty African countries using the Afro Barometer data for those
under age seventy. 24

The U-shape appears to have broad applicability to a range of attitudinal questions on the economy
and an individual's personal economic situation as well as to their happiness and life satisfaction.

5. Conclusions
No ifs, no buts, well-being is U-shaped in age. In this paper I undertook what Deaton (2018) called
a "daunting task" of drawing systematic comparisons across data files and countries of the
relationship between well-being, variously defined, and age. I found evidence of that in one
hundred and thirty-two countries, including ninety-five developing and thirty-seven developed. I
found it in Europe, Asia, North and South America, in Australasia and Africa. I identified it in
every member country of the European Union, as well as a further thirteen European countries.25


24
  Algeria; Benin; Botswana; Burkina Faso; Burundi; Cameroon; Cape Verde; Cote d'Ivoire; eSwatini; Gabon; Ghana;
Kenya; Lesotho; Liberia; Madagascar; Malawi; Mauritius; Mozambique; Namibia; Niger; Nigeria; São Tomé;
Senegal; South Africa; Swaziland; Tanzania; Togo; Tunisia; Uganda and Zimbabwe.
25
  There are fifty one European countries https://www.countries-ofthe-world.com/countries-of-europe.html. The only
ones I didn't find it for were small and only Kazakhstan I had data for, while the remaining five I had zero data -
Andorra, Liechtenstein, Monaco, San Marino and Vatican City. The thirteen non-EU European countries are Albania;
Armenia; Belarus; Georgia; Iceland, Norway, Macedonia; Montenegro, Russia; Serbia; Switzerland, Turkey and
Ukraine.


                                                        18
I have a well-being U-shape for every one of the thirty-five member countries of the OECD. 26
There were very few countries I did not find it for, and that happened mostly where there were
small samples or I had no data.

I found the well-being U-shape in English-speaking countries and non-English speaking countries.
A U-shape is revealed in countries ranked highly in the CIA World Factbook for countries with
both high and low life expectancy at birth. 27 I found it in twelve countries ranked in the top twenty
for life expectancy of 82 or more. 28 I also found a U-shape in ten countries in the bottom twenty
for life expectancy of 223 countries in the world according to the CIA. 29 The U-shape is found
with or without cohort controls.

The curve's trajectory holds true in countries where the median wage is high and where it is not
and where people tend to live longer and where they don't.

I found additional evidence from an array of attitudinal questions that were worded slightly
differently. Evidence of a U-shape was found in a variety of questions across European countries
relating to an individual's finances as well as to the state of the economy and democracy and how
public services work. In Africa I used a question that development scholars had used relating to
living standards and found a U-shape for Africa as well as for thirty African countries. This
suggests the U-curve in age may have much broader applicability than just in well-being data.

It seems to make relatively little difference in finding a U-shape if controls are included or not
although in the former case the minima have a tendency to be higher. It does seem more
appropriate to include them rather than not, given I am able to do so in a consistent way across
countries, time and a variety of data sets. Education, marital status and unemployment are the
major influences in a well-being equation. Unemployment, for example has seen major swings
since 1973 and needs to be controlled for and has impacted various groups differently.
Unemployment enters negatively in happiness equations and is a major source of hurt. Low
education groups have been impacted especially hard by the Great Recession. Being married
conveys markedly more happiness than being single, and especially more than, say being
separated. These are all standard controls in happiness equations.

Averaging across the 257 individual country estimates from developing countries gives an
age minimum of 48.2 for well-being and doing the same across the 187 country estimates
for advanced countries gives a similar minimum of 47.2.

26
 Australia; Austria; Belgium; Canada; Chile; Czech Republic; Denmark; Estonia; Finland; France; Germany; Greece;
Hungary; Iceland; Ireland; Israel; Italy; Japan; Latvia; Lithuania; Luxembourg; Mexico; Netherlands; New Zealand;
Norway; Poland; Portugal; Slovenia; South Korea; Spain; Sweden; Switzerland; Turkey; United Kingdom and the
United States.
27
     https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/resources/the-world-factbook/fields/355rank.html
28
  (Japan (2), Iceland (7), Israel (10), Malta (11), Switzerland (12), South Korea (13), Australia (14), Italy (15);
Luxembourg (16); Sweden (17); Canada; (18) and France (19).
29
   Lesotho (221); Mozambique (218); Uganda (217), Niger (216); Eswatini (215); Nigeria (211); Cameroon (210)
Cote d'Ivoire (209); Mali (206) at 6.8 and Zimbabwe (205). Those countries ranked below 209th with life expectancies
of less than sixty years at birth.

                                                          19
The happiness curve is found in 132 countries. No myth.




                                             20
                             Compliance with Ethical Standards:
                     The author declares that I have no conflicts of interest.


                                          References
Argyle, M. (1999). Causes and correlates of happiness. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz
(Eds.), Wellbeing: The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 353­373). New York: Russell
Sage.

Argyle, M. (2001). The psychology of happiness (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.

Baird, B., R.E. Lucas and M.B. Donovan, M.B. (2010). `Life satisfaction across the life span:
findings from two nationally representative panel studies', Social Indicators Research, 99(2), pp.
183­203.

Beja, E.L. Jr. (2018), 'The U-shaped relationship between happiness and age: evidence using
World Values Survey data,' Quality and Quantity, 52, pp.1817­1829.

Bell, D.N.F. and D.G. Blanchflower (2019), 'The well-being of the overemployed and the
underemployed and the rise in depression in the UK', Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization, 161, May, pp. 180-196.

Blanchflower D.G. (2009a), 'International evidence on well-being' in Measuring the Subjective
Well-Being of Nations: National Accounts of Time Use and Well-Being edited by Alan B.
Krueger, editor (p. 155 - 226), NBER and University of Chicago Press.

Blanchflower D.G. (2009b), 'Where next for the UK economy?', Scottish Journal of Political
Economy, 56(1), 2009, February, pp. 1-23.

Blanchflower D.G. (2008), 'Inflation expectations and monetary policy', Bank of England
Quarterly Bulletin, 2008Q2, pp. 229-237 plus appendix https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-
/media/boe/files/speech/2008/inflation-expectations-and-monetary-policy
Blanchflower, D.G. and, A. Clark (2019), 'Children, unhappiness and family finances: evidence
from one million Europeans', NBER Working Paper #25597, February.

Blanchflower, D.G. and, A.J. Oswald (2019), 'Do modern humans suffer a psychological low in
midlife? Two approaches (with and without controls) in seven data sets', in The Economics of
Happiness. How the Easterlin Paradox Transformed Our Understanding of Well-Being and
Progress, edited by Mariano Rojas, 2019, Springer.

Blanchflower, D.G. and, A.J. Oswald (2016), 'Anti-depressants and age: a new form of evidence
for U-shaped well-being through life', Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 127, pp.
46­58.

Blanchflower, D.G. and, A.J. Oswald (2011), 'International happiness: a new view on the measure
of performance', Academy of Management Perspectives, February 2011, 25(1), pp. 6-22.

                                                21
Blanchflower, D.G. and, A.J. Oswald (2009), `The U-shape without controls: A response to
Glenn', Social Science and Medicine, 69, pp. 486-488.

Blanchflower, D.G. and, A.J. Oswald (2008a), 'Is well-being U-shaped over the life cycle?' Social
Science and Medicine, 66, pp. 1733-1749.

Blanchflower, D.G. and, A.J. Oswald (2008b), 'Hypertension and happiness across
nations', Journal of Health Economics, 27(2), pp. 218-233.

Blanchflower, D.G. and, A.J. Oswald (2004), 'Well-being over time in Britain and the USA,'
Journal of Public Economics, 88, Issues 7-8, July, pp. 1359-1386.

Blanchflower, D.G., A.J. Oswald and S. Stewart-Brown (2012), 'Is psychological well-being
linked to the consumption of fruit and vegetables?' Social Indicators Research: An International
and Interdisciplinary Journal for Quality-of-Life Measurement, 114(3), pp. 785-801, December.

Bookwalter, J., B. Fitch-Fleischmann and D. Dalenberg (2011), 'Understanding life-satisfaction
changes in post-apartheid South Africa,' MPRA Paper No. 34579.

Cantril, H., (1965), The Pattern of Human Concerns, Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick,
NJ.

Carstensen, L.L., B. Turan, S. Scheibe, R. Ram, H. Ersnser-Hershfield, G.R. Samanez-Larkin,
K.P. Brooksand J.R. Nesselroade (2011), 'Emotional experience improves with age: Evidence
based on over 10 years of experience sampling,' Psychology and Aging, 26, pp. 21-33.

Charles, S.T., C.A. Reynolds and M. Gatz (2001), 'Age-related differences and change in positive
and negative affect over 23 years,' Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, PP. 136-151.

Cheng, T.C., N. Powdthavee and A.J. Oswald, (2017) 'Longitudinal evidence for a midlife nadir:
Result from four data sets', Economic Journal, 127, February, pp.126-142.

Clark, A.E. (2019), 'Born to be mild? cohort effects don't (fully) explain why well-being is U-
shaped in Age,' in The Economics of Happiness. How the Easterlin Paradox Transformed Our
Understanding of Well-Being and Progress, 2019, edited by Mariano Rojas, Springer, pp 387-408.

Clark, A.E. and A.J. Oswald (1994), 'Unhappiness and unemployment,' The Economic Journal,
104 (May), pp. 648-659.

'Deaton, A. (2018) 'What do self-reports of wellbeing say about life-cycle theory and policy?',
Journal of Public Economics, 162, June, pp. 18-25.

Deutsch, J., H. Musahara, H., and J. Silber, (2016), 'On the measurement of multidimensional well-
being in some countries in eastern and southern Africa, in Poverty and Well-being in East Africa
(pp. 191­214). Cham: Springer.


                                               22
Diener, E., E.M. Suh, R.E. Lucas, R. E., and H.L. Smith (1999), 'Subjective well-being: three
decades of progress,' Psychological Bulletin, 125, pp. 302­376.

Easterlin, R.A. (2003), 'Explaining happiness.', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
100(19), pp. 11176-11183.

Easterlin, R.A. (2006), 'Life cycle happiness and its sources: Intersections of psychology,
economics and demography,' Journal of Economic Psychology, 27(4), pp. 463-482.

Easterlin, R.A., L.A. McVey, S. Malgorzata, O. Sawangfa, and J.S. Zweig (2010), The happiness­
income paradox revisited,' Proceedings National Academy of Sciences of the United States, 2010
Dec 28; 107(52), pp. 22463­22468.

Fortin, N. J.F. Helliwell and S. Wang (2015), 'How does subjective well-being vary around the
world by gender and age?' in World Happiness Report, 2015, edited by John Helliwell, Richard
Layard and Jeffrey Sachs

Frijters, P., and T. Beaton (2012), 'The mystery of the U-shaped relationship between happiness
and age,' Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 82, 525-542.

Glenn, N. (2009), 'Is the apparent U-shape of well-being over the life course a result of
inappropriate use of control variables? A commentary on Blanchflower and Oswald (66:8, 2008,
1733­1749),' Social Science and Medicine, 69(4), 481­485.

Graham, C. and J. R. Pozuelo (2017), `Happiness, stress, and age: how the U curve varies across
people and places', Journal of Population Economics, 30, pp.225­264.
Grover, S. and J.F. Helliwell (2019), 'How's life at home? New evidence on marriage and the set
point for happiness,' Journal of Happiness Studies, February, 20(2), pp 373­390| .

Giuntella, O., S. McManus, R. Mujcic, A. J. Oswald, N. Powdthavee, A. Tohamy (2019), 'Why is
there so much midlife distress in affluent nations?', Working Paper April.

Hellevik, O. (2017), 'The U-shaped age-happiness relationship: real or methodological artifact?'
Quality and Quantity, 51, pp. 177-197.

Helliwell, J.F., (2019), 'Measuring and using happiness to support public policies,' NBER Working
Paper #26529.

Helliwell, J.F., H. Huang and S. Wang (2019). 'Changing world happiness', in The World
Happiness Report, 2019, edited by J.F. Helliwell, R. Layard and J.D. Sachs.

Helliwell, J.F., M.B. Norton, H. Huang and S. Wang (2019), 'Happiness at different ages: the
social context matters,' in The Economics of Happiness. How the Easterlin Paradox Transformed
Our Understanding of Well-Being and Progress, edited by Mariano Rojas, 2019, Springer.



                                               23
Hudson, N.W., R.E. Lucas and M.B Donellan (2016), Getting older, feeling less? A cross-sectional
and longitudinal investigation of developmental patterns in experiential well-being,' Psychology
and Aging, 31, pp. 847-861.
Kassenboehmer, S.C. and J.P. Haisken-DeNew, J.P. (2012). `Heresy or enlightenment? The well-
being age U-shape effect is flat', Economic Letters, 117(1), pp. 235­8.

Laaksonen, S. (2018), 'A research note: happiness by age is more complex than U-shaped,' Journal
of Happiness Studies, 19, pp. 471­482.

Lachman, M.E. (2015), 'Mind the gap in the middle: A call to study midlife,' Research in Human
Development, 12, pp. 327-334.

Leland, J. (2018), Happiness Is a Choice You Make: Lessons from a Year Among the Oldest Old,
Sarah Crichton Books.

Marcelli, E.A. and Richard A. Easterlin (2005), 'Beyond gender differences in U.S. life cycle
happiness.' working paper.

Morgan, R, and K.J. O'Connor (2017), 'Experienced life cycle satisfaction in Europe', Review of
Behavioral Economics, 4, pp. 371­396

Mroczek, D.K., and C.M. Kolanz, C.M. (1998), 'The effect of age on positive and negative affect:
A developmental perspective on happiness,' Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, pp.
1333-1349.

Mroczek, D.K., and A. Spiro (2005), 'Change in life satisfaction during adulthood: Findings from
the Veterans Affairs Normative Aging study,' Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88,
pp. 189-202.

Myers, D. G. (2000), 'The funds, friends, and faith of happy people,' American Psychologist, 55(1),
pp. 56­67.

Palmore, E., Luikart, C., (1972), 'Health and social factors related to life satisfaction,' Journal of
Health and Social Behavior 13 (1), pp. 68­78.

Pokimica, J., I. Addai, I., B.K. Takyi (2012) 'Religion and subjective well-being in Ghana,' Social
Indicators Research, 106, pp. 61­79.

Price, A. (2015), 'Sliding down the U-shape? A dynamic panel investigation of the age-well-
being relationship, focusing on young adults,' Social Science and Medicine,143, pp. 54-61

Ranjbar, S. and S. Sperlich (2019), 'A Note on empirical studies of life-satisfaction: unhappy with
semiparametrics?', Journal of Happiness Studies, First Online16 September 2019

Rauch, J. (2018), The U-shape of Happiness. New York: St. Martin's Press.


                                                 24
Schwandt, H. (2016), 'Unmet aspirations as an explanation for the age U-shape in well-being.
Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization,' 122, pp. 75-87.

Shields, M.A. and S. W. Price (2005), 'Exploring the economic and social determinants of
psychological well-being and perceived social support in England, Journal of the Royal Statistical
Society (Series A), 168, pp. 513-537.

Steptoe, A., A. Deaton and A.A. Stone (2015), 'Subjective wellbeing, health, and ageing,' The
Lancet, 385, pp. 640­648.

Stone, A.A., J.E. Schwartz, J.E., Broderick and A. Deaton (2010), 'A snapshot of the age
distribution of psychological well-being in the United States,' Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, 107, pp. 9985­999.

Sulemana, I. (2015a), 'The effect of fear of crime and crime victimization on subjective well-being
in Africa,' Social Indicators Research, 121(3), pp. 849­872.

Sulemana, I. (2015b), 'An empirical investigation of the relationship between social capital and
subjective well-being in Ghana,' Journal of Happiness Studies, 16(5), pp. 1299­1321.

Sulemana, I., L. Doabil and E.B. Anarfo (2019), 'International remittances and subjective
wellbeing in Sub-Saharan Africa: a micro-level study', Journal of Family and Economic Issues,
40(3), pp. 524-539, September.

Sulemana, I., A.M. Iddrisu and J.E. Kyoore (2017), 'A micro-level study of the relationship
between experienced corruption and subjective wellbeing in Africa,' The Journal of Development
Studies, 53(1), pp. 138­155.

Ulloa, B.F.L., Moller, V. and A. Sousa-Poza (2013), 'How does subjective well-being evolve with
age? A literature review,' Journal of Population Ageing, 6, pp. 227-246.

Weiss, A., J.E. King, M. Inoue-Murayama M, T. Matsuzawa and A.J. Oswald AJ (2012),
`Evidence for a midlife crisis in great apes consistent with the U-shape in human well-being',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, December 4, 109 (49), pp. 19949-19952.

Whitbourne. S.K. (2018), 'That midlife happiness curve? It's more like a line,' Psychology Today,
September 18th. https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/fulfillment-any-age/201809/midlife-
happiness-curve-its-more-line

Wunder, C., A. Wiencierz, J., Schwarze and H. Küchenhoff (2013), 'Well-being over the life span:
Semi-parametric evidence from British and German longitudinal data', Review of Economics and
Statistics, 95, pp. 154-167.




                                                25
Table 1a. Life satisfaction equations 2009-2019 Eurobarometers. Country estimates age<70 with controls
                       Age           T           Age2         T               N       Age minimum
Without controls         -.01771    97.22       .00014      79.93       1,221,863          63
With controls            -.01940    87.74       .00018      85.88       1,219,888          54
+9 cohort dummies        -.01188    22.46       .00011      22.59       1,219,898          54
Western Europe
Without controls         -.01380    61.55       .00012      52.78         743,565          58
With controls            -.01658    60.74       .00016      62.09         742,392          52
1. Austria               -.01362     6.92       .00014        6.04          34704          49
2. Belgium               -.03140    17.60       .00038      17.45           34717          41
3. Cyprus                -.03481    10.45       .00037        9.84         19,407          47
4. Denmark               -.02931    18.58       .00034      19.67          31,369          43
5. Finland               -.03194    17.90       .00033      16.89          31,009          48
6. France                -.03595    17.83       .00036      15.65           33864          50
7. Greece                -.03572    13.40       .00029        9.76          33219          62
8. Iceland (non-EU) -.03378          8.12       .00035        6.80           6,293         50
9. Ireland               -.02291    12.63       .00026      12.71          35,756          48
10. Italy                -.01211     5.42       .00010        4.20         36,190          61
11. Luxembourg           -.01042     5.73       .00018        6.43          19087          29
12. Malta                -.03002    11.01       .00031      10.35           17646          48
13. Netherlands          -.04123    20.72       .00047      21.69          35,011          44
14. Norway (non-EU) -.02444          5.14       .00027        5.03            3451         45
15. Portugal             -.01992    10.29       .00019        8.70         35,008          52
16. Spain                -.03868     8.46       .00041      17.57           34432          47
17. Sweden               -.03424    16.86       .00038      16.86          27,961          45
18. UK (GB+NI)           -.03611    20.19       .00042      20.57          32,181          43
19. West Germany         -.03062    15.66       .00035      15.60          31,394          44
EU28 Eastern Europe
Without controls         -.02419    74.73       .00018      58.06         396,928          55
With controls            -.02233    56.99       .00020      52.96         396,289          53
20. Bulgaria             -.01587     6.78       .00011        4.02         35,829          72
21. Croatia              -.02960    12.90       .00027        9.83         33,818          55
22. Czech Republic       -.02841    14.57       .00028      12.90          37,772          51
23. East Germany         -.01637     6.57       .00019        6.60         18,477          43
24. Estonia              -.03630    18.09       .00035      15.58           31225          52
25. Hungary              -.03927    17.60       .00041      15.93          35,863          48
26. Latvia               -.04094    21.87       .00039      18.37          36,568          52
27. Lithuania            -.04869    20.79       .00047      17.79          30,346          52
28. Poland               -.02474    13.19       .00023      10.59          35,405          54
29. Romania              -.01904     8.52       .00015        5.68         37,442          63
30. Slovakia             -.02524    12.04       .00026      10.80          36,206          72
31. Slovenia             -.02231    11.05       .00019        8.47          34052          49
Developing countries
Without controls         -.02256    22.67       .00019      17.77          81,370          59
With controls            -.02188    17.43       .00020      14.52          81,217          55
32. Albania              -.02035     3.49       .00014        2.14           7,125         73
33. Macedonia            -.03428     8.19       .00036        7.49         14,871          48
34. Montenegro           -.02081     3.80       .00013        1.88           9,434         80
35. Serbia               -.02852     6.29       .00022        4.19         12,213          65
36. Turkey               -.01241     3.63       .00011        2.60         19,150          56
37. Turkish Cyprus       -.01172     3.02       .00011        2.49         13,655          53

                                                 26
Table 1b. Life satisfaction equations from 2009-2018 Eurobarometers with no controls just year
dummies. Country estimates age<70 (ALL 49 1b and 1c no control ESTIMATES AVERAGE 56.6)
                           Age          T         Age2         T              N        Age minimum
Western Europe average                                                                       55
Austria                  -.00930     5.98        .00007       3.92         34,751            66
Belgium                  -.01834    13.29        .00020      12.99         34,800            46
Cyprus                   -.02730     9.64        .00024       9.64         19,417            57
Denmark                  -.01210     9.58        .00014      10.10         31,396            68
Finland                  -.01409    10.02        .00013       8.69         31,051            54
France                   -.03193    20.75        .00030      17.30         33,890            53
Greece                   -.04138    22.36        .00033      15.49         33,244            63
Iceland                  -.01421     4.10        .00009       2.08           6,337           79
Ireland                  -.01450     9.90        .00016       9.41         35,817            45
Italy                    -.01088     6.95        .00008       4.39         36,244            68
Luxembourg               -.01651     9.08        .00019       8.96         19,109            43
Malta                    -.01932     9.86        .00016       7.41         17,685            60
Netherlands              -.01758    13.12        .00018      12.03         35,034            49
Norway                   -.01498     3.61        .00017       3.57           3,451           44
Portugal                 -.02166    15.17        .00016       9.55         35,074            68
Spain                    -.03215    20.86        .00033      18.36         34,452            49
Sweden                   -.01351     8.63        .00016       9.12         27,794            42
UK (GB+NI)               -.02317    15.62        .00027      15.82         32,260            43
West Germany             -.01521    10.05        .00017       9.85         31,428            45
Eastern Europe average                                                                       75
Bulgaria                 -.01575     9.04        .00005       2.51         35,925           158
Croatia                  -.02561    14.38        .00020       9.58         33,898            64
Czech Republic           -.02217    16.36        .00019      12.45         37,802            58
East Germany             -.01895     8.46        .00019       7.39         18,150            50
Estonia                  -.02210    14.43        .00014       7.93         31,269            79
Hungary                  -.03007    18.19        .00027      14.40         35,899            75
Latvia                   -.03841    26.81        .00033      19.97          36625            58
Lithuania                -.04770    28.03        .00042      21.24         30,364            57
Poland                   -.01469    10.66        .00009       5.57         35,625            82
Romania                  -.01675    10.12        .00009       4.79         37,533            93
Slovakia                 -.02196    13.90        .00019      13.90         36,296            58
Slovenia                 -.01965    13.28        .00014       8.61         34,132            70
Developing countries average                                                                 53
Albania                  -.00682     1.76        .00005       1.14           7,125           n/a
Macedonia                -.03835    12.96        .00040      11.80         14,886            48
Montenegro               -.01419     3.55        .00006       1.29           9,494           n/a
Serbia                   -.03210    10.09        .00026       7.59         12,253            62
Turkey                   -.00358     1.29        .00003       0.13         17,389            n/a
Turkish Cyprus           -.03368     9.38        .00035       7.98          13662            48




                                                27
Table 1c. Life satisfaction equations Mannheim Trends File, 1973-2002, Eurobarometers. Country
estimates age<70 with controls
                       Age           T          Age2          T              N       Age minimum
All ages
Without controls         -.00985    39.42      .00009        35.37        648,083         55
With controls            -.01944    44.16      .00016        85.88        603,656         61
+ 7 cohort dummies -.01250          24.26      .00014        31.27        603,656         45
Age<70 with controls
Average                                                                                   45
38. Belgium              -.02100    11.86      .00022        10.85         45,628         48
39. Denmark              -.01660    13.04      .00019        13.04         44,411         44
40. Finland              -.03699    11.23      .00040        10.20          8,954         46
41. France               -.02484    13.58      .00029        13.36         47,005         43
42. Greece               -.02240     9.11      .00021         7.55         36,510         53
43. Ireland              -.01535     8.92      .00021        10.67         45,926         37
44. Italy                -.02381    13.21      .00023        11.23         48,159         52
45. Luxembourg           -.01157     4.65      .00014         4.97         18,297         41
46. Netherlands          -.02033    14.94      .00023        14.34         46,280         44
47. Norway               -.02487     5.49      .00028         5.40          6,395         44
48. Portugal             -.02537    10.29      .00025        10.60         28,515         51
49. Spain                -.02963    13.19      .00031        12.01         28,636         48
50. Sweden               -.03336    10.16      .00037         9.51          8,723         45
51. UK (GB+NI)           -.01670    12.99      .00023        14.82         60,011         36
52. Germany              -.01452    11.05      .00018        11.45         65,534         40




                                               28
Table 2a. Happiness using European Social Surveys Sweeps 1-8, 2002-2016, country estimates age<70
Controls include gender, marital and labor force dummies, education, country and sweep dummies.
Without controls includes sweep and country dummies only.
                          Age      T              Age2         T          N       Age minimum
All ages
Without controls       -.0300     34.41          .00019      21.49      370,542        80
With controls          -.0670     56.74          .00059      49.78      361,072        57
Developing countries
Without controls       -.0347      11.24         .00014       4.58       40,594       124
With controls          -.0703      17.18         .00057      13.92       39,790        62
53. Israel             -.0892      9.74          .00086       8.29       12,251        52
54. Russia             -.0912      7.31          .00077       5.29       10,934        59
55. Turkey             -.1105      4.83          .00128       4.80         3,870       43
56. Ukraine            -.1065      7.37          .00090       5.44         7,896       59
Advanced Countries
Without controls       -.0289      31.93         .00019       2.72      329,948        77
With controls          -.0658      53.47         .00058      47.52      321,130        57
57. Austria            -.0619      5.63          .00056       4.32         9,197       55
58. Belgium            -.0621      7.92          .00066       7.37       12,256        47
59. Bulgaria           -.1931      1.51          .00161       8.01         6,594       60
60. Croatia            -.1445      6.29          .00129       5.01         2,413       56
61. Cyprus             -.0580      3.18          .00061       2.93         3,702       48
62. Czech Republic     -.0772      6.94          .00070       5.68       12,766        55
63. Denmark            -.0591      7.40          .00066       7.44         9,153       45
64. Estonia            -.0813      7.40          .00061       4.92         9,612       67
65. Finland            -.0633      9.01          .00061       7.47       12,145        52
66. France             -.1013      1.65          .00093       8.39       12,512        54
67. Germany            -.1160     15.26          .00119      14.00       19,681        49
68. Great Britain      -.0950     11.06          .00109      11.14       14,204        44
69. Greece             -.1188      9.14          .00109       7.47         8,025       54
70. Hungary            -.1205      9.60          .00104       7.31       10,877        58
71. Iceland            -.0566      3.35          .00064       3.39         1,798       44
72. Ireland            -.0880      1.68          .00103      11.10       15,169        43
73. Italy              -.0752      4.39          .00071       3.63         3,874       53
74. Lithuania          -.0942      5.80          .00072       3.92         6,443       65
75. Luxembourg         -.0810      3.97          .00104       4.46         2,703       39
76. Netherlands        -.0651      9.18          .00069       8.77       12,700        47
77. Norway             -.0647      8.42          .00066       7.59       11,665        49
78. Poland             -.1034      1.01          .00091       7.61       12,220        57
79. Portugal           -.0856      8.74          .00072       6.54       11,185        59
80. Slovakia           -.0964      7.14          .00090       5.82         7,231       54
81. Slovenia           -.0962      8.43          .00075       5.72         8,876       64
82. Spain              -.0980     11.53          .00089       9.25       12,877        55
83. Sweden             -.0630      8.18          .00064       7.23       12,089        49
84. Switzerland        -.0598      7.70          .00064       7.20       11,697        47




                                                29
Table 2b. Happiness using European Social Surveys Sweeps 1-8, 2002-2016, country estimates age<70
Without controls includes sweep dummies only.
                          Age     T             Age2         T           N     Age minimum
Israel                 -.02761    4.15         .00018       2.23      12,609         77
Russia                 -.06047    7.08         .00038       3.88      10,545         80
Turkey                 -.08041    4.73         .00095       4.54       3,893         42
Ukraine                -.05717    5.49         .00024       2.04       8,054       119
Austria                -.02304    2.86         .00020       2.00       9,329         58
Belgium                -.02346    4.75         .00025       4.07      12,400         47
Bulgaria               -.11103    8.21         .00072       4.79       6,625         77
Croatia                -.05479    3.23         .00030       1.53       2,512         91
Cyprus                 -.03245    2.72         .00025       1.77       3,780         65
Czech Republic         -.05518    8.11         .00040       5.18      13,198         69
Denmark                -.00740    1.30         .00014       2.05       9,340        n/a
Estonia                -.01312    1.86        -.00018       2.18      11,024        n/a
Finland                -.00403    0.88        -.00018       0.34      13,760        n/a
France                 -.05389    8.08         .00043       5.68      12,548         63
Germany                -.04673    9.16         .00048       8.19      19,860         49
Great Britain          -.07341 11.13           .00089      11.81      14,310         41
Greece                 -.05968    6.04         .00040       3.73       8,074         75
Hungary                -.06819    7.87         .00042       4.21      11,071         81
Iceland                -.01544    1.20         .00025       1.66       1,923        n/a
Ireland                -.04960    7.89         .00061       8.49      15,488         41
Italy                  -.02180    1.87         .00001       0.70       4,035       n/a
Lithuania              -.04611    4.88         .00010       0.87       6,542       n/a
Luxembourg             -.05249    3.94         .00067       4.22       2,839         39
Netherlands            -.02791    5.31         .00028       4.70      12,811         50
Norway                 -.02957    5.36         .00035       5.31      11,742         42
Poland                 -.03566    5.09         .00011       1.31      12,333       n/a
Portugal               -.04785    6.84         .00025       3.16      11,643         96
Slovakia               -.05393    5.81         .00035       3.37       7,510         77
Slovenia               -.02880    3.82        -.00000       0.04       9,304       n/a
Spain                  -.04653    7.84         .00040       5.43      13,073         58
Sweden                 -.02261    4.15         .00028       4.47      12,156         40
Switzerland            -.01886    3.42         .00021       3.28      11,846         45




                                                30
Table 3. European Quality of Life Surveys, 2003-2016, Life satisfaction

                         Age      T             Age2           T             N      Age minimum
All ages
Without controls       -.04367   25.49         .00037        21.90        141,780      59
With controls          -.05529   26.85         .00054        26.08        139,721      51
Western Europe
Without controls       -.02403   11.60          .00024       11.88         84640       50
With controls          -.03593   14.59          .00039       15.92         83182       46
85. Austria            -.06627    3.29          .00079        3.37          3835       42
86. Belgium            -.05045    2.86          .00059        2.92          3344       43
87. Denmark            -.08580    5.39          .00110        6.27          3193       39
88. Germany            -.07925    5.08          .00091        5.16          6236       44
89. Greece             -.07616    3.45          .00060        2.42          3270       63
90. Finland            -.09116    6.52          .00111        7.02          3218       41
91. France             -.05428    3.44          .00062        3.34         4,040       44
92. Iceland            -.09464    3.26          .00104        3.22            864      46
93. Ireland            -.07595    4.45          .00095        4.89         3,515       40
94. Italy              -.10606    6.95          .00113        6.62         5,823       47
95. Malta              -.04918    2.42          .00055        2.39         3,036       45
96. Netherlands        -.05084    3.75          .00065        4.23         3,468       39
97. Portugal           -.07764    4.14          .00078        3.68         3,205       50
98. Spain              -.06332    3.80          .00064        3.36         3,692       49
99. Sweden             -.04340    2.70          .00058        3.22          3,325      37
100. United Kingdom    -.10431    6.41         -.00120        6.43          4,738      43
Eastern Europe
Without controls       -.07389   21.91         .00054        16.37         41,016      68
With controls          -.08249   20.21         .00070        17.27         40,571      59
101. Bulgaria          -.10310    4.45         .00089         3.35          3,208      58
102. Croatia           -.13786    5.30         .00125         4.26          2,503      55
103. Czech Republic    -.05031    2.31         .00048         1.92          3,718      52
104. Estonia           -.11716    5.31         .00113         4.52          2,742      52
105. Hungary           -.10976    4.86         .00104         4.02          3,302      53
106. Latvia            -.11664    5.41         .00104         4.14          3,093      56
107. Lithuania         -.17038    7.36         .00163         6.13          3,170      52
108. Poland            -.08943    4.97         .00067         3.20          4,922      67
109. Romania           -.11735    5.36         .00121         4.83          3,789      48
110. Slovenia          -.07331    3.13         .00069         2.60          3,030      53
111. Slovakia          -.06724    2.91         .00058         2.16          3600       58
Developing countries
Without controls       -.05603    9.00         .00049         7.47         16,124      57
With controls          -.05817    7.54         .00054         6.65         15,968      54
112. Albania           -.17222    2.90         .00199         3.04            883      43
113. Kosovo            -.09041    2.17         .00105         2.13          1,021      43
114. Macedonia         -.12428    4.50         .00125         3.95          2,661      50
115. Montenegro        -.12197    3.87         .00121         3.21          1,840      50
116. Serbia            -.17651    5.17         .00169         4.33          1,822      52
117. Turkey            -.09548    5.77         .00115         5.89          6,582      42




                                                  31
Table 4. ISSP 2012 coefficients in a happiness equation. Uses gender, education, marital and labor force
status as controls and single country results age<70
                          Age        T             Age2       T             N       Age minimum
All ages
Without controls         -.0162     12.03         .00012      8.60       60,664           68
With controls            -.0355     21.88         .00032     19.81       60,664           55
Advanced
Without controls         -.0142       7.64        .00012      6.72        26534           59
With controls            -.0375     16.36         .00033     14.68        26534           57
118. Australia           -.0240       1.51        .0002       1.50        1,297           60
119. Belgium             -.0490       3.20        .0005       3.02        1,794           49
120. Canada              -.0537       2.33        .0004       1.94           735          67
121. Finland             -.0402       2.24        .0003       1.91        1,054           67
122. France              -.0432       2.85        .0003       1.85        1,926           72
123. Germany             -.0430       3.31        .0003       2.61        1,450           72
124. Iceland             -.0298       2.04        .0003       1.78        1,040           50
125. Japan               -.0584       2.59        .0004       1.91           982          73
126. Netherlands         -.0626       3.43        .0005       2.87        1,021           63
127. Norway              -.0495       3.22        .0004       2.79        1,292           62
128. Spain               -.0839       6.58        .0008       5.66        2,161           52
129. Sweden              -.0372       1.83        .0003       1.52           873          62
130. UK                  -.0369       1.69        .0003       1.56           748          62
131. USA                 -.0411       2.58        .0004       2.49         1,109          51
Eastern Europe
Without controls         -.0321       1.21        .0002       5.73       10,177           89
With controls            -.0588     14.49         .0008      11.65       10,177           35
132. Bulgaria            -.0737       3.20        .0005       2.03           794          74
133. Croatia             -.0774       3.93        .0006       2.92           915          65
134. Czech Republic -.0635            3.5         .0005       2.69        1,596           64
135. Hungary             -.0794       3.84        .0007       3.30           890          57
136. Latvia              -.0800       4.29        .0007       3.07           953          57
137. Lithuania           -.1161       6.39        .0011       5.76        1,004           53
138. Poland              -.0733       3.95        .0007       3.54           964          52
139. Slovakia            -.0868       3.89        .0008       3.27           968          54
140. Slovenia            -.0819       3.52        .0007       2.87           832          59
Developing
Without controls         -.0096       3.99        .00006      2.32       23,953           85
With controls            -.0238       8.53        .00023      8.23       23,953           51
141. Chile               -.0399       2.87        .0004       2.85        1,335           45
142. China               -.0760       8.64        .0008       8.59        5,287           46
143. Israel              -.0678       3.69        .0006       3.00        1,049           54
144. Mexico              -.0225       1.56        .0002       1.33        1,379           49
145. Russia              -.0485       2.93        .0005       2.43         1,249          50
146. South Africa        -.0584       3.46        .0006       3.31         2,316          44
147. South Korea         -.0659       2.92        .0005       2.51         1,135          55
148. Taiwan              -.0468       3.00        .0005       3.03        1,838           43




                                                   32
Table 5. ISSP 2017 coefficients in a life satisfaction equation. Uses gender, education, marital and labor
force status as controls. Country equations are all for age<70
                           Age        T             Age2         T            N        Age minimum
All countries
Without controls         -.01294     7.46         .00012          6.87     43,606           54
With controls            -.03016    14.56         .000316         6.32     43,565           48
Advanced countries
Without controls        -.01226     5.78         .00011         5.16       25,397           56
With controls           -.03021    11.43         .00028        10.87       25,371           54
149. Australia          -.04215     2.18         .00048         2.30          965           44
150. Austria            -.05726     3.00         .00057         2.63          982           50
151. Czech Republic     -.06298     2.84         .00061         2.45         1197           52
152. Croatia            -.05966     3.00         .00053         2.26          950           56
153. Denmark            -.04000     1.85         .00045         1.85          855           44
154. France             -.05346     2.09         .00058         2.00        1,133           46
155. Germany            -.02691     1.62         .00028         1.54        1,405           48
156. Japan              -.05663     2.55         .00054         2.29        1,232           52
157. Lithuania          -.07204     3.02         .00055         2.06          883           65
158. New Zealand        -.02872     1.64         .00036         1.85        1,130           40
159. Spain              -.04027     2.37         .00032         1.59        1,440           63
160. Sweden             -.04947     2.55         .00055         2.57          897           45
161. Switzerland        -.06241     3.61         .00069         3.55          914           45
162. UK                 -.04805     2.71         .00054         2.70        1,246           44
163. USA                -.04234     2.21         .00047         2.21        1,001           45
Developing countries
Without controls        -.01486      5.01        .00015         4.83       18,209           50
With controls           -.03099      9.10        .00034         9.76       18,194           46
164. China              -.04507      4.20        .00054         4.72        3,602           42
165. Taiwan             -.03097      1.98        .00041         2.38        1,721           38
166. India              -.04818      2.41        .00047         2.00        1,395           51
167. Israel             -.04486      2.13        .00041         1.78        1,015           55
168. Russia             -.04625      2.39        .00041         1.85        1,392           56
169. South Africa       -.08626      7.48        .00103         7.59        2,853           42
170. Surinam            -.05566      2.36        .00065         2.44        1,094           43




                                                    33
Table 6. Life satisfaction using WVS 2-6. Controls are gender, education marital and labor force
status
                     Age         T           Age2         T          N         Age minimum
    a) Wave 2 Life satisfaction
Developing
Without controls   +.0071       1.11       -.00705        0.44     18,082         n/a
With controls       -.0371      4.75        .00046        5.31     18,062         40
Age <70
171. Argentina      -.1152      3.20        .00148        3.54        921         39
172. Brazil         -.153       3.84        .00222        4.33       1770         34
173. Nigeria        -.2765      4.43        .00327        3.97        979         42
174. Russia         -.0678      2.04        .00089        2.27       1812         38
175. South Africa   -.0752      2.55        .00095        2.74       2602         40
176. Turkey         -.1104      2.50        .00110        2.04       1001         50
Advanced
Without controls    -.0081      0.94        .00013        1.10       6168        n/a
With controls       -.0492      4.48        .00055        4.83       6163         45
Age <70
177. Czech Rep.     -.1212      2.90        .00138        2.82        878         44
178. Poland         -.1412      2.92        .00158        2.87        875         45
179. Slovakia       -.1271      2.09        .00172        2.39        446         37

b) Wave 3 Life satisfaction
Developing
Without controls     -.0236     6.14        .00016       3.68      48,849         74
With controls        -.0570    12.06        .00058      10.94      48,813         49
Age <70
180. Albania         -.1169      3.18       .00134        3.19        964         44
181. Azerbaijan      -.1040      3.04       .00114        2.79      1,928         46
182. Argentine       -.1039      2.70       .00113        2.54        990         46
183. Armenia         -.0922      3.03       .00085        2.28      1,920         54
184. Belarus         -.0908      3.07       .00084        2.39      1,902         54
185. Bosnia          -.1149      2.30       .00111        1.94        767         52
186. China           -.0734      1.84       .00082        1.73      1,454         45
187. Dominican R. -.3589         3.09       .00489        2.81        405         37
188. El Salvador     -.0809      2.31       .00075        1.76      1,183         54
189.Georgia          -.0754      2.79       .00051        1.61      1,887         74
190. Macedonia       -.1041      2.28       .00092        1.67        955         57
191. Mexico          -.1511      4.86       .00187        4.81      1,442         40
192. Moldova         -.1419      3.08       .00153        2.70        904         46
193. Montenegro      -.1938      2.09       .00252        2.35        228         38
194. Nigeria         -.1075      2.66       .00143        2.87      1,943         38
195. Philippines     -.0853      2.20       .00111        2.36      1,168         38
196. Russia          -.2076      6.24       .00224        6.24      1,812         46
197. Serbia          -.0868      2.07       .00092        1.91     11,617         47
198. South Africa    -.1061      3.36       .00138        3.62      2,916         38
199. Turkey          -.1558      4.81       .00187        4.77      1,848         42
                                              34
200. Ukraine        -.0932     3.47     .00087    2.77    2,438   54

Advanced countries
Without controls   -.0539     13.00     .00050   11.69   26,041   54
With controls      -.0889     17.86     .00093   17.75   26,035   48
Age <70
201. Australia     -.0721        3.39   .00083    3.30    1,836   43
202. Bulgaria      -.0996        2.37   .00093    1.86      930   54
203. Croatia       -.0865        2.36   .00075    1.76    1,098   58
204. Czech Rep.    -.0765        2.12   .00086    2.08    1,015   44
205. Estonia       -.1430        3.63   .00151    3.13      968   47
206. Finland       -.1402        5.31   .00168    5.36      911   42
207. Germany       -.0934        3.37   .00108    3.29     1854   43
208. Hungary       -.1548        3.04   .00133    2.25      579   58
209. Japan         -.0645        1.74   .00065    1.59      973   50
210. Latvia        -.1912        5.07   .00120    4.29    1,124   80
211. New Zealand   -.0843        2.26   .00130    3.00     1008   32
212. Norway        -.1115        3.59   .00129    3.59    1,023   43
213. Poland        -.1454        4.00   .00153    3.74      997   48
214. Romania       -.0963        2.50   .00092    2.10    1,162   52
215. Slovakia      -.1746        4.29   .00204    4.31    1,009   43
216. Slovenia      -.1208        3.14   .00122    2.68      914   50
217. Spain         -.0954        2.88   .00091    2.42    1,062   52
218. Sweden        -.1925        3.60   .00140    3.38      910   69
219. Switzerland   -.0828        2.29   .00103    2.48    1,053   40
220. USA           -.0884        3.06   .00106    3.22     1262   42

c) Wave 4 Life satisfaction
Developing
Without controls     -.0271      6.87   .00027    5.93   49,166   50
With controls        -.0534     10.76   .00061   11.13   48,004   44
Age <70
221. Argentina       -.1078      3.20   .00110    2.82    1,169   49
222. Bangladesh      -.1448      3.54   .00193    3.75    1,375   38
223. China           -.1214      2.14   .00147    2.20      934   41
224. Iraq            -.0612      2.09   .00069    1.93    2,199   44
225. Israel          -.0973      2.59   .00077    1.74    1,046   63
226. Jordan          -.0770      1.85   .00102    2.06    1,173   38
227. Mexico          -.0683      2.05   .00079    1.96    1,423   43
228. Peru            -.0673      1.81   .00081    2.78    1,483   42
229. Philippines     -.0971      2.38   .00119    2.46    1,146   41
230. Puerto Rico     -.0777      1.81   .00103    2.09      620   38
231. Singapore       -.0513      1.78   .00072    2.02    1,479   36
232. South Africa    -.1691      6.36   .00206    6.41    2,837   41
233. South Korea     -.0956      1.93   .00125    2.18    1,159   38
234. Tanzania        -.1319      2.42   .00162    2.48    1,067   41

                                          35
235. Turkey         -.1286     4.64   .00139    4.17    3,005   46
236. Zimbabwe       -.1581     3.31   .00182    3.15      959   43
Advanced countries
Without controls   -.0376      5.41   .00039    5.40   10,103   48
With controls      -.0808      9.45   .00085    9.49    9,900   48
Age <70
237. Canada        -.1388      5.64   .00158    5.39    1,682   44
238. Japan         -.1163      3.22   .00134    3.39    1,084   43
239. Macedonia     -.1519      3.17   .00177    3.18      980   43
240. Serbia        -.1388      3.05   .00129    2.52     1070   54
241. Sweden        -.0734      2.12   .00083    2.08      927   44
242. USA           -.1522      5.49   .00193    5.83    1,109   39

c) Wave 5 Life satisfaction
Developing countries
Without controls    -.0175     5.53   .00011    3.04   57,707   82
With controls       -.0395     1.01   .00040    9.17   55,014   50
Age <70
243. Chile          -.1238     3.44   .00123    2.95      907   50
244. China          -.1538     4.43   .00188    4.95    1,727   41
245. Georgia        -.1501     4.46   .00145    3.66    1,297   52
246. Ghana          -.0777     1.86   .00083    1.66    1,498   47
247. Indonesia      -.0512     1.51   .00069    1.71    1,880   37
248. Iran           -.1074     3.65   .00124    3.26    2,587   43
249. Malaysia       -.0938     2.53   .00122    2.49    1,196   38
250. Mali           -.0949     2.38   .00098    2.03    1,169   48
251. Russia         -.1250     4.06   .00109    2.98    1,863   57
252. Serbia         -.1185     3.02   .00097    2.07    1,053   61
253. Vietnam        -.0624     2.28   .00072    2.31    1,377   43
254. South Africa   -.0766     3.10   .00092    3.08    2,804   42
255. Taiwan         -.0580     1.51   .00066    1.53    1,138   44
256. Trinidad       -.1118     3.05   .00126    2.86      916   44
257. Turkey         -.1040     2.95   .00111    2.60    1,310   47
258. Uruguay        -.0795     2.45   .00087    2.31      847   46
Advanced countries
Without controls    -.0827     6.50   .00051    3.97   25,092   81
With controls       -.0651    14.26   .00062   13.40   24,602   53
259. Australia      -.0904     3.13   .00112    3.42    1,180   41
260. Bulgaria       -.1137     2.50   .00104    2.03      871   55
261. Canada         -.1037     5.01   .00122    4.92    1,812   43
262. Finland        -.0592     1.94   .00067    1.90      876   44
263. France         -.1289     3.18   .00134    2.76      854   48
264. Germany        -.1445     5.20   .00143    4.54    1,701   51
265. Hungary        -.1526     3.80   .00152    3.28      912   50
266. Italy          -.1233     3.52   .00121    3.13      914   51
267. Japan          -.1628     4.21   .00174    4.15      924   47

                                        36
268. New Zealand     -.0978     2.50   .00125    2.85      744    39
269. Romania         -.1304     3.78   .00127    3.18    1,384    51
270. Slovenia        -.1184     3.12   .00106    2.41      897    56
271. Switzerland     -.1142     3.48   .00122    3.45    1,018    47
272. UK              -.0663     2.29   .00077    2.07      885    43
273. USA             -.1258     4.45   .00138    4.22    1,084    46

d) Wave 6 life satisfaction
Developing countries
Without controls      -.0080    8.72   .00004    4.50   69,468   100
With controls         -.0378   11.03   .00038    1.03   69,541    50
274. Algeria          -.2262    5.23   .00275    5.22    1,119    41
275. Armenia          -.1442    3.08   .00127    2.29      935    57
276. Belarus          -.1377    4.18   .00133    3.44    1,394    52
277. Brazil           -.0514    1.76   .00065    1.89    1,382    40
278. China            -.0513    2.03   .00059    2.09    2,142    43
279. Egypt            -.1150    2.68   .00145    2.85    1,452    40
280. Georgia          -.1746    4.77   .00144    3.34    1,070    61
281. Iraq             -.0791    2.12   .00098    2.18    1,176    40
282. Kuwait           -.0859    1.93   .00108    1.98    1,196    40
283. Lebanon          -.0715    1.99   .00067    1.58    1,117    53
284. Libya            -.0734    2.16   .00095    2.33    2,065    39
285. Mexico           -.0592    2.67   .00069    2.55    1,908    43
286. Philippines      -.1024    2.31   .00108    2.00    1,134    47
287. Russia           -.1170    4.41   .00137    3.62    2,152    43
288. South Africa     -.0616    2.59   .00068    2.28    3,428    45
289. Tunisia          -.1188    2.71   .00133    2.67    1,145    45
290. Ukraine          -.0919    2.33   .00080    1.75    1,267    57
291. Uzbekistan       -.1500    4.78   .00159    4.07    1,411    47
292. Zimbabwe         -.0851    2.56   .00104    2.41    1,467    43
Advanced countries
Without controls      -.0355    7.92   .00032    7.29   19,197    55
With controls         -.0777   14.48   .00078   14.42   19,058    50
293. Australia        -.0990    3.16   .00185    3.47    1,198    27
294. Estonia          -.1566    5.18   .00148    4.31    1,272    53
295. Germany          -.0737    2.94   .00066    2.33    1,709    56
296. Japan            -.1523    5.91   .00161    5.82    2,021    47
297. Netherlands      -.0861    3.75   .00103    4.06    1,535    42
298. New Zealand      -.0929    2.23   .00115    2.46      660    40
299. Poland           -.2224    5.67   .00224    4.91      832    51
300. Romania          -.1395    3.66   .00135    3.11    1,294    52
301. Slovenia         -.0851    1.91   .00078    1.54      890    55
302. Spain            -.1252    3.83   .00128    3.40    1,002    49
303. Sweden           -.1311    4.85   .00161    5.17      997    41
304. USA              -.0740    3.36   .00076    3.06    1,965    49



                                         37
Table 7. Asiabarometers, 2005-2007
                     Age         T     Age2     T        N      Age minimum
a) 2003 5-step Happiness
Without controls    -.00385     0.57   .00000   0.01    8,068    n/a
With controls       -.02886     3.56   .00029   2.82    7,989    50
305. South Korea    -.10070     3.42   .00112   3.11      795    45
306. Uzbekistan     -.07822     2.33   .00080   2.82      792    49

b) 2004 5-step Happiness
Without controls   -.00465      0.82   .00005   0.74    9,644     47
With controls      -.02063      3.13   .00024   2.94    9,640     43
307. Laos          -.05175      2.47   .00069   2.54      798     38
308. Myanmar       -.06889      2.72   .00089   2.72      800     39
309. Singapore     -.04518      1.77   .00049   1.57      793     46

c) 2005 5-step happiness
Without controls    -.01325     3.06   .00010   1.99   12,097     64
With controls       -.02041     3.85   .00021   3.38   11,953     49
310. India          -.03704     2.28   .0004    2.15    1,221     46
311. Maldives       -.0277      1.63   .00038   1.89      773     36
312. Mongolia       -.03163     1.93   .00046   2.35      796     34
313. Sri Lanka      -.05025     3.00   .00051   2.69      799     49
314. Tajikistan     -.06382     2.50   .00074   2.39      794     43

d) 2006 5-step happiness
Without controls    -.00934     1.97   .00008   1.39    8,060     58
With controls       -.03064     5.12   .0003    4.3     8,044     51
315. China          -.03414     2.67   .00037   2.55    1,998     46
316. Japan          -.07872     4.99   .0008    4.66      992     49
317. South Korea    -.07771     3.87   .00067   3.1     1,019     58
318. Taiwan         -.06723     3.10   .00078   3.31    1,003     43

e) 2007 5-step happiness
Without controls    -.00955     2.03   .00007   1.23    7,008    n/a
With controls       -.01284     2.34   .00014   2.13    6,999    64
319. Philippines    -.02286     1.63   .00031   1.92      996    37
320. Thailand       -.03389     2.49   .00035   2.21    1,000    48




                                         38
Table 8. Life satisfaction using 2017-2018 Latino Barometers

                     Age          T             Age2           T        N      Age minimum
   a) 2017
Without controls -.01597           8.46        .00013          6.32   20,053     61
With controls    -.01809           8.53        .00017          7.33   20,010     53

Age <70
321. Bolivia      -.02478          1.97        .00022          1.53    1,140     56
322. Brazil       -.02110          2.15        .00024          2.01    1,116     44
323. Columbia     -.01970          1.70        .00021          1.53    1,143     46
324. Costa Rica   -.02899          2.35        .00041          2.82      931     35
325. Mexico       -.03885          3.34        .00040          2.92    1,097     49
326. Panama       -.03176          2.40        .00034          2.28      924     47
327. Paraguay     -.03891          3.26        .00044          3.17    1,161     44
328. Peru         -.03623          2.61        .00034          2.12    1,102     53
329. Uruguay      -.02791          2.44        .00027          5.28    1,059     52

   b) 2018
Without controls -.01715           9.11        .00013          6.42   20,052     65
With controls    -.01876           8.78        .000168         7.16   19,991     56

Age <70
330. Bolivia      -.02193          1.82        .00022          1.51    1,133     50
331. Brazil       -.03451          3.47        .00031          2.59    1,097     56
332. Columbia     -.03239          2.96        .00035          2.67    1,126     46
333. Costa Rica   -.03634          2.83        .00039          2.57      923     47
334. Ecuador      -.02633          2.14        .00027          1.84    1,136     49
335. Honduras     -.03077          2.37        .00026          1.69      945     59
336. Uruguay      -.03675          3.23        .00041          3.09    1,058     45
337. Venezuela    -.02649          1.69        .00028          1.51    1,145     47




                                                 39
Table 9. Satisfaction with financial conditions in the household, WVS Wave 6

1) Wave 6
                          Age          T        Age2         T            N      Age minimum
a) Developed
Without controls        -.0487       9.11      .00056       10.61       19,100     43
With controls           -.0947      14.91      .00108       16.99       18,976     44
Age <70 with controls
338. Australia          -.1755        4.71     .00211        5.20        1,196     42
339. Cyprus             -.1524        3.20     .00172        3.13          913     44
340. Estonia            -.1319        3.92     .00132        3.43        1,276     50
341. Germany*           -.0473        2.42     .00062        3.11        1,702     38
342. Japan              -.1498        4.85     .00171        5.17        1,964     44
343. Netherlands        -.1025        3.48     .00134        4.12        1,534     38
344. New Zealand        -.1408        2.92     .00169        3.12          656     42
345. Poland             -.2514        5.40     .00261        4.92          831     48
346. Romania            -.2027        4.79     .00199        4.11        1,297     51
347. Slovenia           -.1825        3.47     .00204        3.41          892     45
348. Spain              -.0854        2.33     .00113        2.66        1,012     38
349. Sweden             -.1335        3.59     .00183        4.30          993     36
350. USA                -.1078        3.88     .00127        4.06        1,966     42
* all ages
b) Developing
Without controls        -.0342      11.31      .00030        9.00       69,644     57
With controls           -.0428      11.78      .00047       11.69       69,546     46
Age <70 with controls
351. Algeria            -.1350        3.08     .00153        2.89        1,131     44
352. Belarus            -.0947        2.82     .00088        2.22        1,395     54
353. Brazil             -.1106        3.07     .00129        3.03        1,384     43
354. Colombia           -.0541        1.68     .00064        1.65        1,441     42
355. Ecuador            -.1008        3.46     .00109        3.18        1,146     46
356. Egypt              -.1269        3.10     .00165        3.39        1,452     38
357. Georgia            -.1766        5.13     .00168        4.15        1,070     53
358. Ghana              -.0864        2.40     .00096        2.16        1,533     45
359. Jordan             -.0964        2.54     .00101        2.30        1,144     48
360. Kyrgyzstan         -.0624        1.64     .00073        1.56        1,445     43
361. Libya              -.0948        2.61     .00122        2.81        2,074     39
362. Mexico             -.1026        3.39     .00118        3.18        1,908     43
363. Morocco            -.0980        2.28     .00138        2.82        1,181     36
364. Peru               -.0808        2.29     .00079        1.89        1,146     51
365. Philippines        -.1376        2.91     .00140        2.58        1,134     49
366. Russia             -.1119        3.78     .00131        3.72        2,161     43
367. Singapore          -.0551        2.21     .00077        2.69        1,809     36
368. South Africa       -.0448        1.80     .00051        1.63        3,416     44
369. South Korea        -.0896        2.22     .00094        2.13        1,129     48
370. Trinidad           -.0924        2.08     .00112        2.12          890     41
371. Uruguay            -.0779        1.97     .00077        1.64          876     51
372. Yemen              -.0859        1.68     .00114        1.79          969     38
373. Zimbabwe           -.0850        2.48     .00116        2.75        1,467     37

2) WVS Wave 5

                                                 40
                         Age        T      Age2    T        N       Age minimum
a) Developed
Without controls        -.0328     7.33   .00040    8.81   25,026     41
With controls           -.0752    13.90   .00092   16.65   24,591     41
Age <70 with controls
374. Australia          -.0583     1.53   .00097    2.28    1,170     30
375. Bulgaria           -.1360     3.14   .00131    2.70      894     52
376. Canada             -.2150     7.96   .00260    8.17    1,807     41
377. Finland            -.1729     4.50   .00228    5.14      876     38
378. Germany            -.1003     3.15   .00112    3.09    1,694     45
379. Hungary            -.1076     2.48   .00116    2.32      905     46
380. Italy              -.1186     3.08   .00133    3.13      912     45
381. Japan              -.1720     3.66   .00208    4.07      861     41
382. New Zealand        -.1084     2.28   .00164    3.07      748     33
383. Poland             -.1687     3.86   .00183    3.60      877     46
384. Romania            -.1391     4.00   .00146    3.66    1,468     48
385. Slovenia           -.1565     3.65   .00162    3.24      897     48
386. Sweden             -.20321    4.65   .00274    5.58      873     37
387. Switzerland        -.0771     1.86   .00104    2.32    1,024     37
388. UK                 -.1758     4.26   .00241    4.94      879     36
389. USA                -.1186     3.21   .00135    3.24    1,077     44
b) Developing
Without controls        -.0303     8.83   .00023    5.92   54,611     66
With controls           -.0461    10.75   .00049   10.48   51,915     47
Age <70 with controls
390. Brazil             -.0773     2.19   .00079    1.88    1,393     49
391. Chile              -.1374     3.53   .00151    3.34      907     45
392. China              -.1378     3.66   .00172    4.18    1,732     40
393. Egypt              -.0540     1.94   .00062    1.90    2,905     44
394. Georgia            -.1264     4.01   .00110    2.99    1,307     57
395. Indonesia          -.1030     3.03   .00144    3.51    1,867     36
396. Iran               -.1584     5.36   .00175    4.61    2,555     45
397. Iraq               -.0511     1.94   .00070    2.17    2,538     36
398. Mali               -.0674     1.66   .00081    1.64    1,184     42
399. Malaysia           -.0556     1.55   .00097    2.06    1,195     29
400. Taiwan             -.0646     1.55   .00092    1.95    1,137     35
401. Thailand           -.0551     1.71   .00059    1.63    1,352     47
402. Trinidad           -.1504     3.45   .00176    3.38      916     43
403. Turkey             -.1007     3.12   .00122    3.09    1,306     41
404. Uruguay            -.0815     2.07   .00078    1.70      849     52
405. Zambia             -.0798     1.94   .00093    1.73    1,421     43




                                            41
Table 11. Various Broad Satisfaction Equations
    a) Eurobarometer 90.3, November 2018
                                          Age                 t                Age2              t                 N         Age minimum
1. Life satisfaction                     -.0324             13.74              .00029          11.1           27,122              55
2. Situation in the country              -.0222              8.77              .00021           7.6           26,282              52
3. Situation with the national economy -.0191                7.51              .00020           7.1           26,063              47
4. Own financial situation               -.0322             13.44              .00033          12.4           26,187              48
5. Employment situation                  -.0183              7.05              .00019           6.4           25,953              49
6. Public services                       -.0172              6.41              .00011           5.3           25,644              54
Q1. On the whole, are you very satisfied, fairly satisfied, not very satisfied or not at all satisfied with the life you lead? Very
satisfied=4; Fairly satisfied=3; Not very satisfied=2; Not at all satisfied=1
How would you judge the situation in each of the following? Very good=4; Rather good=3; Rather bad=2 and Very bad=1
Q2. The situation in our country?
Q3. The situation of the national economy?
Q4. The financial situation of your household?
Q5. The employment situation in the country?
Q6. The presence of public services in our country?

   b) ESS Sweep 9 ­ 2018
                                            Age              T                   Age2            T                N          Age minimum
7. Happiness                              -.0524            14.15              .000433         11.99            35,300           60
8. Life                                   -.0649            15.79              .000577         14.39            35,255           56
9. Present state of the economy           -.0436             9.99              .000428          1.03            34,534           51
10. National government                   -.0621            12.29              .000618         12.54            34,187           50
11. Way democracy works in country        -.0463             9.42              .000458          9.52            34,144           51
12. State of education                    -.0401             8.79              .000361          8.09            34,112           56
13. State of health services              -.0603            12.89              .000584         12.80            35,188           52
Q7. Taking all things together, how happy would you say you are? Extremely unhappy=1 to extremely happy=10
Q8. All things considered, how satisfied are you with your life as a whole nowadays? Please answer using this card, where 0 means extremely11
dissatisfied and 10 means extremely satisfied.
Q9. On the whole how satisfied are you with the present state of the economy in [country]
Q10. Now thinking about the [country] government, how satisfied are you with the way it is doing its job?
Q11. Now thinking about the way democracy is working in our country.
Q12. Please say what you think overall about the state of education in [country] nowadays?

                                                                      42
Q13. Please say what you think overall about the state of health services in [country] nowadays?

    c)   EQLS 2003-2016
                                            Age                T                  Age2               T        N      Minimum
14. Financial situation next 12 mths (3-4)-.02046             25.50              .00016            20.26    79,116    64

10-step Satisfaction with:
15. Education (1-4)                         -.00953            4.22              .00016             7.22   138,202    30
16. Job (1-4)                               -.02961            6.08              .00043             7.65    65,540    34
17. Family life (1-4)                       -.04679           22.50              .00044            21.03   138,493    53
18. Local area (4)                          -.00919            2.22              .00015             3.57    36,542    31
19. Way democracy works (4)                 -.03987            8.37              .00037             7.93    35,535    54
20. State of the economy (4)                -.04291            9.88              .00041             9.60    35,780    52
21. Living standards (1-4)                  -.05273           24.64              .00058            26.96   139,551    45

Q14. Financial situation since 12 months ago ­ worse=1; same=2; better=3.

Q15. Satisfaction with education. 1=very dissatisfied...10=very satisfied
Q16. Satisfaction with job. 1=very dissatisfied...10=very satisfied
Q17. Satisfaction with your family life. 1=very dissatisfied...10=very satisfied
Q18. Satisfaction with your local area. 1=very dissatisfied...10=very satisfied
Q19. Satisfaction with the way democracy works. 1=very dissatisfied...10=very satisfied
Q20. Satisfaction with the state of the economy. 1=very dissatisfied...10=very satisfied
Q21. Satisfaction with your standard of living 1=very dissatisfied...10=very satisfied




                                                                       43
Table 12. Satisfaction with living conditions, Afrobarometers controls education; labor force status and
race. Without controls includes country dummies.
                     Age            T             Age2         T            N           Age minimum

    a) 2019
Without controls       -.0247      13.11         .00021         1.17      45,642           n/a
With controls          -.0207      11.26         .00019         8.53      45,579           55
406. Botswana          -.0740       5.13         .00089         5.19       1,115           42
407. Burkina Faso       .0486       2.64        -.00062         2.74       1,155           39
408. Cameroon          -.0409       3.09         .00040         2.72       1,198           51
409. Cote d'Ivoire     -.0506       2.7          .00057         2.42       1,177           44
410. eSwatini          -.0567       3.39         .00057         2.86       1,135           50
411. Kenya             -.0654       4.28         .00064         3.48        1527           51
412. Lesotho           -.0368       2.02         .00033         1.55       1,065           56
413. Liberia           -.0669       2.99         .00070         2.50       1,174           48
414. Malawi            -.0343       2.02         .00033         1.57       1,146           52
415. Mozambique         .0271       2.01        -.00030         1.73       2,285           45
416. Namibia           -.0502       2.62         .00058         2.47       1,167           43
417. Niger             -.0473       2.88         .00050         2.54       1,140           47
418. Swaziland         -.0497       3.86         .00055         3.47       1,163           45
419. South Africa      -.0538       3.14         .00059         2.90       1,766           46
420. Tanzania          -.0192       2.26         .00021         1.67       2,308           46
421. Togo              -.0594       3.36         .00056         2.55       1,162           53
422. Tunisia           -.0679       3.94         .00065         3.30       1,144           52

    b) 2016
Without controls       -.0256      13.58         .00019         1.38      53,306           n/a
With controls          -.0218      12.43         .00021         1.65      53,306           53
423. Algeria           -.0284       2.06         .00037         2.50       1,191           38
424. Benin             -.0494       3.64         .00048         3.17       1,198           51
425. Botswana          -.0155       1.51         .00021         2.06       1,197           37
426. Burundi           -.0463       3.61         .00053         3.7        1,198           44
427. Cape Verde        -.0263       3.00         .00030         3.39       1,183           44
428. Cote d'Ivoire     -.0350       2.32         .00040         2.3        1,199           44
429. Gabon             -.0582       3.83         .00049         2.83       1,198           59
430. Ghana             -.0359       4.06         .00030         3.63       2,334           60
431. Kenya             -.0263       3.15         .00024         2.52       2,393           55
432. Lesotho           -.0363       3.12         .00028         2.41       1,192           65
433. Madagascar        -.0157       1.59         .00018         1.64       1,200           44
434. Malawi            -.0498       4.92         .00051         4.43       2,373           49
435. Mauritius         -.0203       1.66         .00028         2.12       1,200           36
436. Namibia           -.0430       3.59         .00048         3.78       1,199           45
437. Nigeria           -.0309       2.85         .00037         2.79       2,370           42
438. São Tomé          -.0365       4.40         .00032         3.43       1,171           57
439. Senegal           -.0337       2.64         .00034         2.43       1,191           50
440. South Africa      -.0309       3.09         .00029         2.64       2,380           53
441. Swaziland         -.0331       2.90         .00025         2.04       1,194           66
442. Togo              -.0498       4.03         .00050         3.64       1,191           50
443. Uganda            -.0244       2.92         .00020         2.19       2,375           61
444. Zimbabwe          -.0245       3.28         .00020         2.72       2,387           61


                                                   44
                            Chart 1a. BRFSS Life Satisfaction, 2005-2011
3.65


 3.6
                                                   no controls      with controls

3.55


 3.5


3.45


 3.4


3.35


 3.3
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98100
                                                                   Age

                                   Chart 1b. GSS Happiness, 1972-2018
3.65


 3.6


                                                    no controls        with controls
3.55


 3.5


3.45


 3.4


3.35


 3.3
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98100
                                                                  itAge



                                                                  45
                   Chart 1c. BRFSS Life Satisfaction, Married, 2005-2011

3.54

3.52

 3.5

3.48

3.46

3.44
                           no controls    with controls
3.42

 3.4

3.38

3.36

3.34

3.32

 3.3
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
                                                           Age

                  Chart 1d. BRFSS Life Satisfaction Unmarried, 2005-2011
3.45


 3.4


3.35

                                 no controls       with controls
 3.3


3.25


 3.2


3.15


 3.1


3.05
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86
                                                            Age

                                                          46
                Chart 1e. BRFSS Life Satisfaction Education No Controls
 3.6


3.55                                            non college      college

 3.5


3.45


 3.4


3.35


 3.3


3.25


 3.2
       20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86
                                                          Age

                   Chart 1f. BRFSS Education With Controls, 2005-2011
3.85

 3.8

3.75

 3.7                                        non college       college

3.65

 3.6

3.55

 3.5

3.45

 3.4

3.35

 3.3
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86
                                                          Age




                                                        47
                    Chart 2a. Life satisfaction in the UK, 2016-2018

8.50



8.30
                                    No controls      With controls


8.10



7.90



7.70



7.50



7.30
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70
                                              Age


              Chart 2b. Life satisfaction in the UK by marital status with and
                                      without controls.
 8.6
                             Married with controls               Married no controls
 8.4
                             Unmarried no controls               Unmarried with controls

 8.2


 8.0


 7.8


 7.6


 7.4


 7.2


 7.0


 6.8
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70
                                                     Age


                                                     48
3.35
                   Chart 3a. Eurobarometers, Life Satisfaction, 2009-2019
 3.3

3.25

 3.2
                                         no controls   with controls
3.15

 3.1

3.05

   3

2.95

 2.9

2.85

 2.8

2.75

 2.7
       16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84
                                                         Age

                  Chart 3b. Eurobarometers, Life Satisfaction with Cohort
 3.3                        Dummies and Controls, 2009-2019

3.25



 3.2



3.15



 3.1



3.05



  3



2.95
       16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84
                                                        Age


                                                        49
3.05
                   Chart 3c. Eurobarometers, Life Satisfaction Mannheim Trend
  3                                    File, 1973-2002
2.95
                                              with controls   no controls

 2.9


2.85


 2.8


2.75


 2.7


2.65


 2.6


2.55
       16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80
                                                        Age

                 Chart 3d. Eurobarometers, Life Satisfaction, 1973-2001
  2.9            Mannheim Trend File with Controls and Cohort Dummies


2.85



  2.8



2.75



  2.7



2.65



  2.6
        16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80
                                                        Age

                                                       50
                   Chart 3e. Eurobarometers, Life Satisfaction, 1973-2016
2.94


2.92
                                                      no controls           plus cohort dummies
 2.9


2.88


2.86


2.84


2.82


 2.8


2.78
       20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76
                                                           Age

                 Chart 4. EQLS Life Satisfaction With Controls, 2004-2016


  8



 7.8



 7.6



 7.4



 7.2



  7
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
                                                            Age



                                                          51
                     Chart 5a. 11-step happiness ESS 1-8 2004-2016 advanced
                                      countries with controls
8.8


8.6


8.4


8.2


 8


7.8


7.6


7.4


7.2
      16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94
                                                                  Age


 6.2
                          Chart 5b. 11-step happiness Ess 1-8 2004-2016, 4 developing
 6.1
                                             countries with controls
      6
 5.9
 5.8
 5.7
 5.6
 5.5
 5.4
 5.3
 5.2
 5.1
      5
 4.9
 4.8
 4.7
 4.6
 4.5
          16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94
                                                                   Age

                                                                 52
              Chart 6a. 7-step life satisfaction ISSP 2012 advanced countries
6.1                                     with controls.
 6

5.9

5.8

5.7

5.6

5.5

5.4

5.3

5.2

5.1

 5
      16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94
                                                               Age



 6



5.9



5.8



5.7



5.6



5.5



5.4
      16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94
                                                               Age




                                                                53
                   Chart 7a. 7-step life satisfaction ISSP 2017 advanced countries
                                              with controls
5.6


5.5


5.4


5.3


5.2


5.1


 5


4.9
      18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92
                                                              Age

                 Chart 7b. 7-step life satisfaction ISSP 2017 developing countries
 5.3                                        with controls

 5.2


 5.1


      5


 4.9


 4.8


 4.7


 4.6


 4.5


 4.4
          18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92
                                                                Age



                                                               54
7.8                Chart 8a. 10-step life satisfaction WVS wave 5 devleoping
7.7
                                     countries with controls
7.6
7.5
7.4
7.3
7.2
7.1
 7
6.9
6.8
6.7
6.6
6.5
6.4
      16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
                                                              Age

                  Chart 8b. 4-step happiness WVS wave 5 developing countries with controls
  3.45


      3.4


  3.35


      3.3


  3.25


      3.2


  3.15


      3.1


  3.05


       3
            16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
                                                                  Age


                                                                55
                 Chart 9a. 10-step life satisfaction WVS wave 6 developing countries with
6.4                                                 controls
6.3

6.2

6.1

 6

5.9

5.8

5.7

5.6

5.5

5.4
      16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
                                                               Age

                   Chart 9b. 4-step happiness WVS wave 6 developing countries with controls
 3.5




 3.4




 3.3




 3.2




 3.1




      3




 2.9
          16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90
                                                                Age


                                                               56
                 Chart 10a. 4-step life satisfaction Latinobarometers, 2017 with controls
 3.6
3.55
 3.5
3.45
 3.4
3.35
 3.3
3.25
 3.2
3.15
 3.1
3.05
  3
2.95
 2.9
2.85
 2.8
2.75
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94
                                                            Age

                    Chart 10b. 4-step life satisfaction Latinobarometers 2018 with controls


 3.1



   3



 2.9



 2.8



 2.7



 2.6



 2.5
       18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80 82 84 86 88 90 92 94
                                                              Age


                                                              57
 2.95
                                                   Chart 11. 5-step Happiness in Asia, with controls, 2005

              2.9

 2.85

              2.8

 2.75

              2.7

 2.65

              2.6

 2.55

              2.5
                              16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70
                                                                                   Age


                                     Chart 12. Consumer Attitudes in European Union 28 - over the last twelve
                                                       months from the EU Commission
                              0.0                                                                                                      0.0
                                     Nov-85
                                     Nov-86
                                     Nov-87
                                     Nov-88
                                     Nov-89
                                     Nov-90
                                     Nov-91
                                     Nov-92
                                     Nov-93
                                     Nov-94
                                     Nov-95
                                     Nov-96
                                     Nov-97
                                     Nov-98
                                     Nov-99
                                     Nov-00
                                     Nov-01
                                     Nov-02
                                     Nov-03
                                     Nov-04
                                     Nov-05
                                     Nov-06
                                     Nov-07
                                     Nov-08
                                     Nov-09
                                     Nov-10
                                     Nov-11
                                     Nov-12
                                     Nov-13
                                     Nov-14
                                     Nov-15
                                     Nov-16
                                     Nov-17
                                     Nov-18
                                     Nov-19
                              -5.0
                             -10.0
                             -15.0                                                                                                     -5.0
                             -20.0
General Economic Situation




                             -25.0


                                                                                                                                               Financial situation
                             -30.0                                                                                                     -10.0
                             -35.0
                             -40.0
                             -45.0                                                                                                     -15.0
                             -50.0
                             -55.0
                             -60.0                                                                                                     -20.0
                             -65.0
                             -70.0
                             -75.0                                                                                                     -25.0

                                     General Economic situation over last 12 months (LHS)   Financial situation last 12 months (RHS)



                                                                                 58
                  Chart 13a. Living conditions with controls Afrobarometers, 2016
3.3



3.2



3.1



  3



2.9



2.8



2.7
      18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80
                                                    Age

2.7
             Chart 13b. Living Conditions With Controls Afrobarometer, 2019

2.6




2.5




2.4




2.3




2.2




2.1
      18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76 78 80
                                                   Age


                                                    59
Appendix 1. Developing countries by data set
    a) World Values Survey
Wave 6 (2010-2014)
Algeria; Azerbaijan; Argentina; Armenia; Brazil; Belarus; Chile; China; Taiwan; Colombia;
Ecuador; Georgia; Palestine; Ghana; Haiti; Hong Kong; India; Iraq; Kazakhstan; Jordan; South
Korea; Kuwait; Kyrgyzstan; Lebanon; Libya; Malaysia; Mexico; Morocco; Nigeria; Pakistan;
Peru; Philippines; Qatar; Russia; Rwanda; Singapore; South Africa; Zimbabwe; Thailand;
Trinidad and Tobago; Tunisia; Turkey; Ukraine; Egypt; Uruguay; Uzbekistan and Yemen.

Wave 5 (2005-2009)
Andorra; Argentina; Brazil; Chile; China; Taiwan; Colombia; Ethiopia; Georgia; Ghana;
Guatemala; Hong Kong; India; Indonesia; Iran; Iraq; Jordan; South Korea; Malaysia; Mali;
Mexico; Moldova; Morocco; Peru; Russia; Rwanda; Serbia; Vietnam; South Africa; Thailand;
Trinidad and Tobago; Turkey; Ukraine; Egypt; Burkina Faso; Uruguay and Zambia.

Wave 4 (1999-2004)
Albania; Algeria; Argentina; Bangladesh; Chile; China; India; Indonesia; Iran; Iraq; Israel; Jordan;
South Korea; Kyrgyzstan; Mexico; Moldova; Morocco; Nigeria; Pakistan; Peru; Philippines;
Puerto Rico; Saudi Arabia; Singapore; Vietnam; South Africa; Zimbabwe; Turkey; Uganda;
Macedonia; Egypt; Tanzania; Venezuela; Serbia and Montenegro.

Wave 3 (1995-1998)
Albania; Azerbaijan; Argentina; Bangladesh; Armenia; Brazil; SrpSka Republic; Belarus; Chile;
China; Taiwan; Colombia; Dominican Rep.; El Salvador; Georgia; India; South Korea; Mexico;
Moldova; Nigeria; Pakistan; Peru; Philippines; Puerto Rico; Russia; South Africa; Turkey;
Macedonia; Uruguay; Venezuela; Serbia; Montenegro and Bosnia.

Wave 2 (1990-1994)
Argentina; Brazil; Belarus; Chile; China; India; South Korea; Mexico; Nigeria; Russia; South
Africa and Turkey.

   b) International Social Survey Programme
2017
China; Taiwan ; India; Israel; Mexico; Philippines; Russia; South Africa; Surinam; Thailand

2012
Argentina; Chile; China; Taiwan; India; Israel; South Korea; -Mexico; Philippines; Russia; South
Africa; Turkey; Venezuela

   c) Asiabarometers
2007
Malaysia; Indonesia; Philippines; Thailand; Myanmar; Cambodia and Laos

2006
China; Hong Kong; Japan; Singapore; South Korea; Taiwan and Vietnam



                                                60
2005
Afghanistan; Bangladesh; Bhutan; India; Kazakhstan; Kyrgyzstan; Maldives; Mongolia; Nepal;
Pakistan; Sri Lanka; Tajikistan; Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan

   d) Latinobarometers
2017 and 2018
Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Chile; Colombia; Costa Rica; Dominican Rep of; Ecuador; El
Salvador; Guatemala; Honduras; Mexico; Nicaragua; Panama; Paraguay; Peru; Uruguay and
Venezuela




                                           61
Appendix B. Raw Plots of data from MO's Eurobarometer Data Series, 1973-2016

                          France                   3.6                  Netherlands
 3.6
3.55                                               3.5
 3.5
3.45                                               3.4
 3.4
                                                   3.3
3.35
 3.3
                                                   3.2
3.25
 3.2                                               3.1
3.15
 3.1                                                3
       16       26   36     46     56    66   76         16       26    36    46     56   66   76
                             Age                                              Age


  4.1
                          Belgium                                       West Germany
                                                    3.25
 4.05
                                                     3.2
       4
                                                    3.15
 3.95
                                                     3.1
  3.9                                               3.05
 3.85                                                    3
  3.8                                               2.95

 3.75                                                2.9
                                                    2.85
  3.7
                                                     2.8
 3.65                                                        16    26    36   46     56   66   76
           16   26   36      46     56   66   76
                                                                               Age
                             Age


  2.7                      Italy                    3.15                Luxembourg
 2.65
  2.6                                                3.1
 2.55
                                                    3.05
  2.5
 2.45                                                    3
  2.4
                                                    2.95
 2.35
  2.3                                                2.9
 2.25
  2.2                                               2.85
           16   26   36      46     56   66   76             18    28    38    48    58   68   78
                             Age                                               Age
                  Denmark                       3.3
                                                                        UK
3.65
                                               3.25
 3.6
                                                3.2
3.55
                                               3.15
 3.5
3.45                                            3.1

 3.4                                           3.05
3.35                                                3
 3.3
                                               2.95
3.25
                                                2.9
 3.2
                                                        18   28    38    48    58   68   78
       18   28   38      48     58   68   78
                         Age                                            Age

                      Spain                                         Portugal
                                               3.4
3.9
                                               3.3
3.8
                                               3.2
3.7
                                               3.1
3.6
                                                 3

3.5                                            2.9

3.4                                            2.8

3.3                                            2.7
      18    28   38      48     58   68   78          18     28    38   48     58   68   78
                         Age                                            Age

                      Ireland                                     East Germany
3.25                                            2.8
 3.2                                           2.75
                                                2.7
3.15
                                               2.65
 3.1
                                                2.6
3.05                                           2.55
  3                                             2.5
                                               2.45
2.95
                                                2.4
 2.9
                                               2.35
2.85                                            2.3
       18   28   38      48     58   68   78            18   28    38    48    58   68   78
                         Age                                            Age



                                               63
                            Austria                                                  Finland
 3.4                                                               3.75
                                                                    3.7
3.35                                                               3.65
                                                                    3.6
 3.3
                                                                   3.55
3.25                                                                3.5
                                                                   3.45
 3.2                                                                3.4
                                                                   3.35
3.15                                                                3.3
                                                                   3.25
 3.1
                                                                    3.2
3.05                                                               3.15
       18        28    38         48        58    68        78            16   26   36   46    56   66   76
                                  Age                                                    Age

                            Sweden
3.9

3.8

3.7

3.6

3.5

3.4

3.3
      16    26    36   46    56        66   76   86    96   106
                              Age




                                                                  64
