                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH? UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF A
                        DECLINING POPULATION

                                       Charles I. Jones

                                     Working Paper 26651
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26651


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




I am grateful to Sebastian Di Tella, Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, Jeremy Greenwood, Pete
Klenow, Chris Tonetti, and David Weil for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Charles I. Jones. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The End of Economic Growth? Unintended Consequences of a Declining Population
Charles I. Jones
NBER Working Paper No. 26651
January 2020
JEL No. E0,J11,O4

                                         ABSTRACT

In many models, economic growth is driven by people discovering new ideas. These models
typically assume either a constant or a growing population. However, in high income countries
today, fertility is already below its replacement rate: women are having fewer than two children
on average. It is a distinct possibility -- highlighted in the recent book, "Empty Planet" -- that
global population will decline rather than stabilize in the long run. What happens to economic
growth when population growth turns negative?


Charles I. Jones
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305-4800
and NBER
chad.jones@stanford.edu
                              THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                      1


1. Introduction

In many growth models based on the discovery of new ideas, the size of the population
plays a crucial role. Other things equal, a larger population means more researchers
which in turns leads to more new ideas and to higher living standards. This basic fea-
ture is shared by the original endogenous growth models of Romer (1990), Aghion and
Howitt (1992), and Grossman and Helpman (1991) as well as by the semi-endogenous
growth models of Jones (1995), Kortum (1997), and Segerstrom (1998) in which stan-
dard policies have level effects instead of growth effects. It is a feature of numerous
other models.1
      In a recent book entitled Empty Planet, Bricker and Ibbitson (2019) make the case
based on a rich body of demographic research that global population growth in the
future may not only fall to zero but may actually be negative. For example, the natural
rate of population growth (i.e. births minus deaths, ignoring immigation) is already
negative in Japan and in many European countries such as Germany, Italy, and Spain
(United Nations, 2019).
      Figure 1 shows historical data on the total fertility rate for various regions. This
measure is the average number of live births a cohort of women would have over their
reproductive life if they were subject to the fertility rates of a given five-year period.
To sustain a constant population requires a total fertility rate slightly greater than 2
in order to compensate for mortality. The graph shows that high income countries
as a whole, as well as the U.S. and China individually, have been substantially below
2 in recent years. According to the U.N.'s World Population Prospects 2019, the total
fertility rate in the most recent data is 1.8 for the United States, 1.7 for China and for
High Income Countries on average, 1.6 for Germany, 1.4 for Japan, and 1.3 for Italy
and Spain. In other words, fertility rates in the rich countries of the world are already
consistent with negative long-run population growth: women are having fewer than
two children throughout much of the developed world.
      A sharp downward trend in India and for the world as a whole is also evident in the
figure. As countries get richer, fertility rates appear to decline to levels consistent, not
with a constant population, but actually with a declining population.
  1
    Examples include Kremer (1993), Acemoglu (1998), Ngai and Samaniego (2011), Doepke and Zilibotti
(2014), Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018), Akcigit and Kerr (2018), Atkeson and Burstein (2019), and Buera
and Oberfield (2019).
   2                                         CHARLES I. JONES




                  Figure 1: The Total Fertility Rate (Live Births per Woman)
           LIVE BIRTHS PER WOMAN



           6


           5

                                                      India
           4


           3
                                                                                    World
                                                              U.S.
           2
                                                                                      High income
                                                                     China             countries

           1950       1960         1970   1980      1990      2000           2010       2020
  Note: The total fertility rate is the average number of live births a hypothetical cohort of women
  would have over their reproductive life if they were subject during their whole lives to the fertility
  rates of a given period and if they were not subject to mortality. Each data point corresponds to a
  five-year period. Source: United Nations (2019).



   Conventional wisdom holds that in the future, global population will stabilize at
something like 8 or 10 billion people. But maybe that is not correct. We surely do not
know for certain what will happen in the future. The fact that so many rich countries al-
ready have fertility below replacement indicates that a future with negative population
growth is a possibility that deserves further consideration.
   The models of economic growth cited above assume a constant or growing popu-
lation, and for understanding economic growth historically, that is clearly the relevant
case. The demographic evidence, however, suggests that this may not be the case in the
future. Hence the focus of this paper: what happens to economic growth if population
growth is negative?
   We show below -- first in models with exogenous population growth and then later
in a model with endogenous fertility -- that negative population growth can be par-
ticularly harmful. When population growth is negative, both endogenous and semi-
endogenous growth models produce what we call an Empty Planet result: knowledge
and living standards stagnate for a population that gradually vanishes. In a model
with endogenous fertility, a surprising result emerges: even the social planner can get
stuck in this trap if society delays implementing the optimal allocation and suffers from
                            THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                 3


inefficient negative population growth for a sufficiently long period. In contrast, if the
economy switches to the optimal allocation soon enough, it can converge to a balanced
growth path with sustained exponential growth: an ever-increasing population benefits
from ever-rising living standards. Policies related to fertility may therefore determine
whether we converge to an "empty planet" or to an "expanding cosmos"; they may be
much more important than we have appreciated.



1.1 Literature Review

Many models feature endogenous fertility, modeled in a variety of ways. Becker and
Barro (1988) and Barro and Becker (1989) take an altruistic approach in which the
utility of children enters the utility function for parents, giving rise to a dynastic utility
function. Papers that follow this approach include Doepke and Zilibotti (2005) and
Manuelli and Seshadri (2009). Other papers emphasize a "warm-glow" effect in which
parents care about the number of their offspring; for example, see De La Croix and
Doepke (2003), Hock and Weil (2012), and Doepke and Tertilt (2016). Finally, many
papers feature a quantity-quality tradeoff and assign a key role to education, often in
the context of explaining the demographic transition and the emergence of modern
economic growth. These include Becker, Murphy and Tamura (1990), Galor and Weil
(1996, 2000), Greenwood and Seshadri (2002), and Kalemli-Ozcan (2002).
   On the empirical side, Jones and Tertilt (2008) provide a detailed account of the
decline in U.S. fertility using Census data, while Delventhal, Fernandez-Villaverde and
Guner (2019) study the demographic transition using data from 186 countries and 250
years. Feyrer, Sacerdote and Stern (2008) highlight negative population growth in Japan
and parts of Europe and raise the possibility that it could revert back to being positive
as the status of women in society improves. Doepke and Tertilt (2016) and Greenwood,
Guner and Vandenbroucke (2017) provide general surveys of family macroeconomics,
including fertility. In general, this literature sometimes recognizes the possibility that
population growth could ultimately be negative, but that is not its emphasis.
   More generally, demographic forces are garnering broader attention in the macroe-
conomic literature. Several recent papers suggest that falling labor force growth may
explain a substantial part of the decline in firm entry and dynamism in the U.S. econ-
omy, including Karahan, Pugsley and Sahin (2019), Hopenhayn, Neira and Singhania
   4                                  CHARLES I. JONES



(2018), Engbom (2019), and Peters and Walsh (2019).
   The literature that explicitly considers negative population growth in a growth con-
text is much smaller. Manuelli and Seshadri (2009) explain the heterogeneity in inter-
national fertility rates by emphasizing that taxes and transfers in Europe may in part
be responsible for low fertility. Sasaki and Hoshida (2017) study negative population
growth in a semi-endogenous growth setting. They show that the rate of technological
change falls to zero as people endogenously exit the research sector. More surprisingly,
they provide a setting where negative population growth leads to positive steady-state
growth in income per person because capital per person rises as the number of people
declines. However, this result is incomplete in that they assume a zero depreciation
rate for capital: if there is a fixed amount of capital but the population declines, then
capital per person grows. One can easily generalize their result to positive depreciation
rates using a Solow model. If the rate of population decline is  and capital depreciates
at rate  , then there are two possible regimes. If  >  , i.e. the rate of population
decline is faster than the depreciation rate of capital, then K/L rises asympotically
along a balanced growth path. But when  <  , instead, you get the standard Solow
result of constant K/L in steady state. Empirically, rates of population decline are
perhaps 1% or smaller, whereas depreciation rates are 3% or 5% or more. The Sasaki
and Hoshida (2017) case of exponential growth in capital per person from declining
population therefore seems implausible as an empirical matter. Christiaans (2011) has
results along these lines in a model with increasing returns that results from externali-
ties to capital, showing the two possible regimes.
   This motivates Sasaki (2019a) to consider a model with non-renewable resources,
where a zero depreciation rate is more natural. In that case, though, one might wonder
about elasticities of substitution: if a single Robinson Crusoe populated an earth full
of land and natural resources, would her income be extremely high? Sasaki (2019b)
considers a Solow model with CES production and finds that with an elasticity of sub-
stitution less than unity, the long-run growth rate is determined only by the rate of
technological progress, with no contribution from the rising capital-labor ratio that
results from negative population growth. Because capital is not essential, even an infi-
nite capital-labor ratio gives finite output. These results suggests that capital and non-
renewable resources can be omitted from the model without much loss in generality,
                          THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                              5


which is what we do below.



2. The Empty Planet Result

How do idea-based growth models behave when population declines? We begin by
introducing exogenous, negative population growth into a simplified version of the
Romer (1990), Aghion and Howitt (1992), and Grossman and Helpman (1991) endoge-
nous growth models. This case turns out to be especially easy to analyze. Then we
consider semi-endogenous growth models.


2.1 Fully Endogenous Growth as in Romer/AH/GH

Consider the following simplified version of idea-driven endogenous growth models:


                                  Yt = At Nt                                           (1)
                                 At
                                    = Nt                                               (2)
                                 At
                                  Nt = N0 e-t ,  > 0                                   (3)


   According to equation (1), a single consumption-output good is produced using
people Nt and the stock of ideas ("knowledge") At . Crucially, as in Romer (1990), there
is constant returns in this production function to rival inputs -- here just people --
and therefore increasing returns to people and ideas together. The degree of increasing
returns is parameterized by  .
   Equation (2) is the endogenous growth equation. It says that the growth rate of
knowledge is proportional to the population. The literature often distinguishes be-
tween researchers and workers who produce the consumption good, but not always.
Here, we make the simplifying assumption that is closer in spirit to learning by doing:
people can work to make consumption goods and get new ideas at the same time. An
exogenous split of people into workers and researchers would deliver identical results
to those below. One can also allow this allocation to be determined endogenously.
   Finally, equation (3) specifies that the population declines exogenously at the rate
 . For example,  = .005 corresponds to a population that declines exponentially at a
half a percent per year. We write the model here and throughout the paper so that all
   6                                   CHARLES I. JONES



parameter values (Greek letters) are positive.
   Combining (2) and (3) gives the following differential equation, in which the growth
rate of knowledge declines exponentially:

                                      t
                                      A
                                         = N0 e-t .
                                      At

This differential equation is easy to solve, yielding the following result (detailed deriva-
tions for this and other results are available in Appendix A):

Result 1 (Romer/AH/GH with Negative Population Growth): In the Romer/AH/GH model
with negative population growth, the stock of knowledge At is given by

                                                 gA0
                             log At = log A0 +       1 - e-t
                                                  

Both At and income per person yt  Yt /Nt converge to constant values A and y  as t
goes to infinity, where
                                                   gA0
                                   A = A0 exp
                                                    
                                                   gy 0
                                    y  = y0 exp
                                                    
where variables indexed by 0 denote initial values.

   We refer to this as the Empty Planet result. Economic growth stagnates as the
stock of knowledge and living standards settle down to constant values. Meanwhile,
the population itself falls at a constant rate, gradually emptying the planet of people.
This outcome stands in stark contrast to the conventional result in growth models in
which knowledge, living standards, and even population grow exponentially: not only
do we get richer over time, but these higher living standards apply to an ever rising
number of people.
   The last equation in Result 1 is amenable to calibration. For example, if gy0 = 2%
and  = 1%, so that the population is falling at 1% per year, the long-run level of
GDP per person will be e2  7.4 times higher than current income. Obviously, slower
declines in population would make this factor even higher.
   In what follows, we explore the robustness of this finding. First, we see that it occurs
in semi-endogenous growth models as well, and then we consider what happens when
                              THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                       7


the population growth rate itself is an endogenous outcome.



2.2 Semi-Endogenous Growth with Declining Population

With positive rates of population growth, semi-endogenous growth models in the tra-
dition of Jones (1995), Kortum (1997), and Segerstrom (1998) give very different results
from the fully endogenous growth models. We see next that with negative population
growth, the Empty Planet result still emerges.
       A simplified semi-endogenous growth model is obtained by changing the idea pro-
duction function:


                                        Yt = At Nt                                                  (4)
                                       At
                                          = Nt A-
                                                t
                                                  
                                                                                                    (5)
                                       At
                                       Nt = N0 e-t .  > 0                                           (6)


In particular, we introduce the parameter  > 0, capturing the extent to which new
ideas (proportional improvements in productivity) are getting harder to find.2
       Combining (5) and (6) gives the following differential equation:

                                       At
                                              -t -
                                          = N0 e At .
                                       At

Integrating this differential equation gives the next result.


Result 2 (Semi-Endogenous Growth with Negative Population Growth): In the semi-
endogenous growth model with negative population growth, the stock of knowledge At
is given by
                                                                   1/
                                              gA0
                             At = A0 1 +          1 - e-t               .
                                              
Defining   / to capture the overall degree of increasing returns to scale in this
economy, both At and income per person yt  Yt /Nt converge to constant values A and

   2
   An alternative in the literature is to write the idea production function as A t = Nt
                                                                                        
                                                                                         At with  < 1.
These are equivalent, with  = 1 - .
   8                                       CHARLES I. JONES



y  as t goes to infinity, where

                                                            1/
                                                    gA0
                                     A = A0 1 +                    .
                                                    

                                                           /
                                                    gy 0
                                      y  = y0 1 +              .                          (7)
                                                    
Along the transition path, the growth rate satisfies

                                           -
                       y
                       t              yt                     gy0 e-t
                          = gy 0 ·             e-t =        gy0      -t )
                       yt             y0               1+    (1 - e


In other words, the growth rate falls to zero slightly faster than e-t .


   This result confirms that both endogenous growth and semi-endogenous growth
lead to the Empty Planet outcome. Rather than sustained exponential growth in living
standards and population, living standards stabilize for a vanishing number of people.
   Quantitatively, however, the level at which lower living standards stagnate can be
much lower with semi-endogenous growth. To illustrate, we need to calibrate one
additional parameter relative to what we had before. Across a range of different case
studies, Bloom, Jones, Van Reenen and Webb (2019) find estimates of   3 when
 = 1 (a normalization in the general case where we do not observe ideas directly) and
 = 1 (a standard value in the literature), which gives  = 1/3. Plugging these values
into equation (7), the long-run level of GDP per person would be (1 + 3 · 2)1/3  1.9
times higher than current income. The difference versus the endogenous growth case
is striking: with  = 0 (so that  = ), long run income was 7.4 times higher than
current income for the same parameter values.



3. Endogenous Fertility and the Equilibrium Allocation

We now endogenize the population growth rate itself. There are many related ways to
accomplish this, and the literature has not converged on a single best practice; see the
literature review at the start of this paper for references. Almost all approaches assume
that having offspring is a time intensive activity, and this is at the center of the approach
we take below.
                           THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                9


   In models of endogenous fertility, population growth in a decentralized equilibrium
can be optimal or may be either above or below the optimal rate. In fact, because the
number of people is endogenous, the definition of "optimal" is itself not obvious; for
example, see Golosov, Jones and Tertilt (2007). The most natural case of interest here is
one in which parents do not fully internalize the fact that their offspring create nonrival
ideas that benefit the entire economy, so that equilibrium fertility is too low.
   But there are also other possible nuances. For example, Farhi and Werning (2007)
note that the social planner may care about future generations both because individu-
als care about their own children and because the social planner puts weight on each
generation. This means that social welfare will generally put more weight on future
generations than individuals do, also leading optimal fertility to be higher than equilib-
rium fertility. Externalities to human capital in models with a quality-quantity tradeoff
can also give rise to inefficiently low fertility. Alternatively, one can construct idea-
based models in which optimal fertility is below equilibrium fertility; see Jones (2003)
and Futagami and Hori (2010) for some discussion. Here, we do not attempt to draw
any firm conclusion about the range of possible externalities that may exist. Instead,
we focus on one interesting case in which the equilibrium features negative population
growth while the optimal allocation has positive population growth.
   To simplify, we abstract from the demographic transition. That is, we are not fo-
cused on how fertility fell from 5 to 3 to 1.5 children per woman. Instead, the focus is
on the stable fertility rate at the end of the demographic transition, and what happens
if it implies negative population growth.



3.1 Environment

The economic environment for the setup with endogenous fertility is in Table 1. It
builds on our earlier model, with one enhancement. There is now a single allocative
decision that has to be made at each date: each person is endowed with one unit of
time that can be used to produce either consumption or offspring. Devoting t units
of time to producing children leads to a fertility rate of b(t ) = ¯
                                                                   bt . The linear function
is convenient analytically but not essential. There is a constant death rate,  , and the
population growth rate is nt = ¯b -  . Thus if t is sufficiently small, the population
growth rate can be negative.
   10                                     CHARLES I. JONES




            Table 1: Economic Environment: Endogenous Fertility Model


                   Final output                                 Yt = At (1 - t )Nt
                                                               t
                                                               N
                   Population growth                           Nt    = nt = b(t ) - 

                   Fertility                                          b(  t ) = ¯
                                                                                bt
                                                                      t
                   Ideas                                             A
                                                                     At   = Nt A-
                                                                                t
                                                                                  

                                                        -t        ~t )dt,     ~t  Nt /N0 ,   
                   Generation 0 utility       U0 =    0 e  u(ct , N           N              ¯+ 

                   Flow utility                                   ~t ) = log ct +  log N
                                                           u(ct , N                    ~t

                   Consumption                                        ct = Yt /Nt




   This setup excludes many other considerations that would be interesting to explore
in the future such as human capital, physical capital, and a quantity-quality tradeoff.
We instead focus on the simplest model that allows us to make our points.
   People obtain utility from consumption and from having descendents. The ex-
pected lifetime utility of a member of the generation born at date 0 is

                                          
                               U0 =          e-(¯
                                                + )t        ~t )dt
                                                     u(ct , N
                                      0


where                                                               ~t  Nt /N0 is the
      ¯ is the pure rate of time preference, ct is consumption, and N
number of descendents of generation 0 at date t. Discounting also occurs because of
the death rate, and we define   ¯ +  as the overall discount rate. The flow of utility at
date t is
                               ~t ) = log(N
                        u(ct , N          ~  ct ) = log ct +  log N
                                                                  ~t .
                                            t


This is a special case of the preferences considered by Becker and Barro (1988) as used
by Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995). The log functional forms are convenient in several
ways. First, log ct leads income and substitution effects to cancel, so that a constant
                                                           ~t is helpful for time consis-
fertility rate is consistent with balanced growth. The log N
tency and for simplifying the value function in solving for transition dynamics. This
setup can be generalized in various ways and the qualitative results will be preserved.
                                 THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                          11


But the analysis of the transition dynamics is sufficiently subtle that it is very helpful to
illustrate them with the simplest possible setup.3



3.2 A Competitive Equilibrium with Externalities

As in Romer (1990), the nonrivalry of ideas leads to increasing returns. Some departure
from pure perfect competition is necessary, and the equilibrium in general will not be
efficient. We consider a simple equilibrium in which the production of ideas is purely
external. Also, we start with the equilibrium allocation because it is designed to be
simple. Section 4 below considers an optimal allocation.
       Firms produce final output in perfectly competitive markets, taking the stock of
ideas At as exogenous. Each person chooses time spent raising children versus working
in the market sector, t versus 1 - t , in order to maximize utility, also taking the time
path of At as exogenous. Hence ideas evolve according to the idea production function
entirely as an externality: people do not recognize that by having children, their kids
may produce new knowledge in the future that makes the entire economy more pro-
ductive. Markets are perfectly competitive, subject to the idea externality, and the only
price is the wage per unit of work, given by wt = At in equilibrium.

       Taking {wt } as given, people in each generation solve

                                                     
                                        max                        ~t )dt
                                                        e-t u(ct , N
                                        { t }    0


subject to
                                           N t = (b(t ) -  )Nt

                                                ct = wt (1 - t )

and given the function forms assumed in Table 1.
       The Hamiltonian for this problem is

                                              ~t ) + vt (b(t ) -  )Nt
                                   H = u(ct , N

   3
    Here are some examples of how things can be generalized. We currently have all people generating
ideas rather than only people who work in the market sector. Introducing a 1 - t into the idea production
function just leads to a level effect and so should not change the results below. Allowing the flow of utility
        
to be Nt u(ct ) can also be permitted, as long as u(c) is CRRA with curvature between 0 and 1.
   12                                        CHARLES I. JONES



where vt is the shadow price (in utils) of another person.
   The first-order condition for this problem with respect to t is

                                                               ~t )wt =     1
                          vt N t b (  t )      =      uc (ct , N                .       (8)
                                                                          1 - t
                    MU of time in fertility
                                                    MU of time in making goods

On the left side, spending a little more time on fertility leads each of Nt people to have
b (t ) additional offspring, valued at shadow price vt . Alternatively, the time could be
spent working to earn the wage wt , which is converted to utility units using the marginal
utility of consumption. At the maximum, individuals are indifferent between these two
options.
   The first-order condition for Nt gives an arbitrage-like equation for the shadow
price of people:
                                            v
                                            t   1     
                                   =          +          + vt nt .                      (9)
                                            vt vt     Nt
To solve further, define Vt  vt Nt to be the shadow value in utils of the entire popula-
tion. Then (9) can be written as
                                              t = Vt - .
                                             V

                                                              = /. Simple inspection
This differential equation obviously has a steady state at Veq
of the differential equation reveals that this steady state is unstable: if Vt differs from
   , then either V speeds off to  violating the transversality condition or the law of
Veq               t

motion would require t < 0, which is not allowed. The solution is therefore

                                                          
                                             Vt = Veq =
                                                          

so that Vt is constant at all points in time.
   Substituting this into (8) and using our functional form assumptions gives the equi-
librium amount of time spent on fertility. This is stated in our next result:



Result 3 (The Equilibrium with Endogenous Fertility): In the equilibrium with endoge-
nous fertility, the allocation of time devoted to offspring is constant and given by

                                   1       1       
                          t = 1 - ¯ = 1 - ¯  = 1 - ¯  eq                               (10)
                                  bVt     bVeq     b
                           THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                               13


Equilibrium population growth is then also constant at the rate neq = ¯
                                                                      b -  - /.
Depending on parameter values, equilibrium population growth can be positive or neg-
ative.

   Fertility is constant at each point in time, even along the transition path. A higher
rate of time preference () lowers fertility, while a higher preference for offspring () or
a better fertility technology (¯
                               b) raises fertility. This setup, therefore, does not explain
the demographic transition or how we got to the situation we are in today; that's not its
purpose.
   Instead, it allows us to study the current situation: depending on parameter values,
equilibrium population growth can be positive or negative. The negative case is the
one of interest here. In that case, we have an equilibrium setup with endogenous
fertility that feeds naturally into the results from Section 2. The negative population
growth combined with the idea production function implies that the equilibrium with
endogenous fertility features a growth rate that falls to zero so that output per person
converges to a steady state, as in equation (7). Therefore, the Empty Planet result can
be supported as an equilibrium outcome with endogenous fertility.



4. The Optimal Allocation

Now instead consider the optimal allocation in this economic environment. With en-
dogenous fertility, there is no unique criterion for social welfare, as discussed by Golosov,
Jones and Tertilt (2007). Instead, we consider the allocation that maximizes the utility of
a representative generation. The key reason this differs from the equilibrium allocation
considered above is that the optimal allocation takes into account the fact that a larger
population generates more nonrival ideas, raising everyone's income. This will lead
optimal fertility to be higher than its equilibrium rate.
   Defined this way, the optimal allocation solves

                                              
                                 max                        ~t )dt
                                                 e-t u(ct , N
                                  { t }   0


subject to
                                     N t = (b(t ) -  )Nt
   14                                       CHARLES I. JONES



                                            t
                                            A
                                               = Nt A-
                                                     t
                                                       
                                            At
                                            ct = Yt /Nt .

   The Hamiltonian for the optimal allocation is

                                  ~t ) + µt N  A1- + vt (b(t ) -  )Nt
                       H = u(ct , N          t t


where µt is the shadow price of an idea and vt is the shadow price of another person.
The first-order condition for this problem with respect to t is

                                                              ~t )yt
                                                     uc (ct , N          1
                          vt N t b (  t )     =                      =       .      (11)
                                                         1 - t         1 - t
                    MU of time in fertility
                                                   MU of time in making goods

Notice that this equation has the same form as the equilibrium first-order condition;
however, the shadow value of people, vt , will be different. (We abuse notation for now
by not using a different letter for the equilibrium versus optimal vt .)
   The first-order condition with respect to At can be expressed as an arbitrage equa-
tion:
                                 µ
                                 t   1             yt              t
                                                                   A
                          =        +         uc       + µt (1 -  )          .       (12)
                                 µt µt             At              At

The required rate of return is , and the production of ideas yields both a capital gain
and a dividend. Continuing this analogy, this equation can be solved to yield the shadow
price of an idea along a balanced growth path as the initial dividend divided by "r-g":

                                            1 yt
                                            ct  At              /A t
                            µt   =                          =                       (13)
                                      - gµ - (1 -  )gA           + gA

where the second equality uses the fact that the growth rate of the dividend (and hence
the growth rate of µ) equals -gA along a BGP.
   Similarly, the first-order condition for Nt in arbitrage form is

                                   v
                                   t   1               t
                                                       A
                            =        +           + µt     + vt nt       .           (14)
                                   vt vt      Nt       Nt

Comparing this equation to the equivalent condition in the equilibrium, equation (9),
                               THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                             15


reveals that they differ because of the second term in parentheses: the optimal alloca-
tion values people not only for the direct utility they provide, but also because of the
additional ideas they produce.



4.1 Steady State Balanced Growth

Using (13), the social value of people along a balanced growth path is given by

                                                     + z 
                                    Vsp = vt Nt =                                       (15)
                                                      

where
                                                   gA
                                    z   µ   
                                         t At =        .                                (16)
                                                   + gA
We use zt to denote the social value of the new ideas produced at a point in time.
Therefore, equation (15) makes clear that the social planner values people for both the
utility they bring, via , as well as the additional ideas they produce, via z  .
   Finally, if the planner solution features positive population growth in the steady
state, i.e. if nsp > 0, then


                                   
                                         nsp
                                  gA =                                                  (17)
                                         
                                                         
                                  gy = nsp , where        .                             (18)
                                                         

As usual in semi-endogenous growth models, the long-run growth rate is the product of
the overall degree of increasing returns to scale,   / , and the rate at which scale is
growing, nsp . Alternatively, if the planner solution features zero or negative population
                                   = g  = 0.
growth in the steady state, then gA   y

   These two growth regimes -- the focus of the first half of the paper -- are shown
graphically in Figure 2. If steady-state population growth is positive, then steady-state
knowledge growth is proportional to n. But if population growth is negative, then steady-
state knowledge growth is zero. This kink -- these two regimes -- gives rise to the
possibility of multiple steady states, which we will see shortly.
   Equations (15) and (16) make clear the difference between the equilibrium and the
                                                                           =       
optimal allocations in steady state. The equilibrium value of people is Veq        ,   while
       16                                        CHARLES I. JONES




            Figure 2: Knowledge Growth and Population Growth in Steady State




                       0
                                                           0


   Note: There is a fundamental "kink" in the technology for generating steady-state growth in the
   model. If population growth is positive, then steady-state knowledge growth is proportional to n.
   But if population growth is negative, then steady-state knowledge growth is zero. This kink -- these
   two regimes -- gives rise to the possibility of multiple steady states.




the social value includes an additional term reflecting the ideas that are produced:
                                                           
                                                           1  +
                                                                         
                               +    z                                     
                                                                       1+ n
                                                                                  if n > 0
                       Vsp   =              V (n) =                                                           (19)
                                                           
                                                                                  if n  0

Both allocations value an extra person because of the additional utility that descen-
dents provide, via . Only the optimal allocation values the extra ideas produced at the
margin by the extra person. However, if n  0, then the growth rate gA
                                                                     is also zero,

implying from (16) that z  = 0. That is, the value of the additional ideas produced
by people falls to zero.4 Importantly, this implies that with zero growth in ideas, the
optimal and equilibrium allocations value additional people only because of the utility
                    = V .
benefit, so that Vsp   eq


   4
    In (16), there is a price effect and a quantity effect: the quantity of new ideas, A , is zero in this case. The
price of ideas, µt , is given by (13) and remains finite; intuitively, if income and consumption are constant
and finite in some steady state, then the price of a new idea is as well. So if A  t is zero, then so is the social
value of new ideas.
                               THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                         17



        Figure 3: A Unique Steady State for the Optimal Allocation when neq > 0




                                                               Steady State




                            Equilibrium




   Note: When equilibrium fertility is positive, there is a unique solution to equations (19) and (20).
   That is, the optimal allocation features a unique steady state with n      
                                                                        sp > neq .




    Solving (11) gives the optimal allocation of time along a BGP as well as the implied
population growth rate:

                                       1                     1
                             sp = 1 - ¯           n(V ) = ¯
                                                          b-- ,                                      (20)
                                      bVsp                   V

where we've left implicit the constraint that   0 implying n  - .
    Equations (19) and (20) give two nonlinear equations in two unknowns, n and V that
characterize the optimal allocation in steady state. These equations are characterized
graphically in Figures 3 and 4.
    Figure 3 considers the case in which equilibrium fertility is positive. In this case,
there is a unique solution to equations (19) and (20). The optimal allocation features a
unique steady state in which optimal population growth exceeds the equilibrium rate,
i.e. n      
      sp > neq .

    The case of interest in this paper, however, is when equilibrium population growth
is negative, and this case gives rise to a rich set of outcomes, as suggested by Figure 4.
       18                                     CHARLES I. JONES




            Figure 4: Multiple Steady States in the Optimal Allocation when neq < 0




                                                       High Steady State
                                                     (Expanding Cosmos)




                                   Middle Steady State
                              Equilibrium = Low Steady State
                                (Empty Planet)




   Note: When equilibrium fertility is negative and there exists an "expanding cosmos" steady state
   for the planner problem, there are generically three candidate solutions to equations (19) and (20)
   that characterize the steady state. We will see later that the middle steady state is unstable and can
   be ruled out.




With neq < 0, the optimal allocation generically features three candidate steady states. A

high "expanding cosmos" steady state has positive population growth. The low steady
state has the same population growth rate as the equilibrium allocation and features
negative population growth; this is the Empty Planet outcome. Finally, there is a middle
steady state in between. We will see shortly that this steady state is unstable and would
never be reached along the optimal path. But even the presence of two stable steady
states suggests that the dynamics of the optimal allocation are rich.5




   5
    The middle and high steady states can  be characterized analytically as the solution to a quadratic
                               + ¯ +(¯
                                     b-) ± (+   ¯ +(¯
                                                    b-) )2 -4¯ (+ )
                           
equation. In particular, Vsp =                 2 ¯
                                                                    , where ¯ ¯ b- . For some parameter
choices (e.g. for  sufficiently small, which rotates the V (n) schedule back to the left), the term inside
the square root can be negative so that the only steady state is the equilibrium solution with negative
population growth.
                           THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                            19


4.2 Stability and Transition Dynamics

The transition dynamics turn out to be economically interesting but must be solved for
numerically. We begin by describing the baseline parameter values that we use in the
analysis; the results are robust to a range of alternative values.


Parameter values.     Table 2 summarizes our parameter choices for the numerical ex-
amples. They are chosen to be somewhat realistic, but the main point is to show quali-
tatively what the transition dynamics of the model look like.
    Because we do not observe ideas directly, it is convenient to normalize  = 1 so that
A has the units of total factor productivity. The extensive evidence on idea production
functions in Bloom, Jones, Van Reenen and Webb (2019) suggests that  > 0 so that the
exponential growth of ideas is getting harder to achieve. We choose  = 1.25, a typical
value. With little lost, we assume  = 1 so that the overall implied degree of increasing
returns to scale is   / = 0.80.
    We assume a conventional rate of time preference of  = 1% and set  = 1%,
implying an expected lifetime of 100 years.
    Motivated by the recent fertility experience in the OECD, Japan, and the United
States, we assume neq = -0.5%, so that in equilibrium, the population will decline

at half a percent per year. Finally, we assume that the typical person spends about 1/8
of his or her time endowment producing and raising children.
    Given these assumptions, the following four equations determine the values of ¯
                                                                                  b,  ,
n         
 sp , and sp :


                                 n     ¯
                                  eq = beq -  = -0.5%                               (21)
                                           
                                  eq = 1 - ¯ = 1/8                                  (22)
                                           b
                                 n =¯
                                  
                                   sp
                                         
                                       b - 
                                          sp                                        (23)
                                               
                                  sp = 1 - ¯                                        (24)
                                           b( + z  )

where z  is given by (16) and (17).


Implied Parameter Values and Steady-State Results.         The implied parameter values
and steady-state outcomes (corresponding to the "high" steady state of the planner
20                                     CHARLES I. JONES




Table 2: Parameter Values and Steady-State Results for the Numerical Examples


                           Key Assumed Values as Inputs to Numerical Examples

         Parameter/Moment           Value    Comment

                                      1      Normalization
                                      1      Duplication effect of ideas; 0.75 possible
                                     1.25    Bloom, Jones, Van Reenen and Webb (2019)
                                     .01     Standard value
                                     1%      Death rate
                   neq              -0.5%    Suggested by fertility rates in Europe, Japan, U.S.
                    
                   eq                1/8     Time spent raising children


               Implied Parameter Values and "Expanding Cosmos" Steady-State Results

                  Result            Value    Comment
                     ¯
                     b                       n     ¯
                                     .04      eq = beq -  = -0.5%
                                     .286    From equation (22) for eq
                   nsp              1.74%    From equations (23) and (24) for         
                                                                              sp and nsp
                    sp               0.68    From equations (23) and (24) for         
                                                                              sp and nsp
                 sp    sp
                gy  = gA            1.39%    Equals nsp with  = 1
                    ...             64.0%    Idea share of social value of people: z  /( + z  )

Note: The first panel in the table shows key assumptions that are an input into the numerical
examples. The second panel shows implied parameter values and steady-state results given these
assumptions. The steady-state for the planner problem corresponds to the "high" steady state.
                             THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                  21


problem) are then shown in the bottom part of Table 2. It is worth noting that the
optimal population growth rate given these values is substantially higher than the equi-
librium rate: 1.74% versus -0.5%. Even with sharp dynamic diminishing returns in the
idea production function ( = 1.25), there is a large positive externality to offspring in
this calibration. The associated steady-state growth rate of income per person is 1.39%.
   Equation (19) suggests an alternative way to make the point about the size of the
                                                                     = / while the
population externality. The equilibrium social value of people is Veq
optimal value in steady state is ( + z  )/. The last row of Table 2 reports the fraction
of the optimal social value of people that is associated with ideas: z  /( + z  )  64%.
Of course, this is not a formal calibration that one should take too seriously, but the
values give a sense of the magnitudes that may be relevant.



Stability and Dynamics.       Given the presence of three candidate steady states in the
optimal allocation, the transition dynamics are subtle. We derive the results in detail in
Appendix B. Here, we summarize the key findings.
   While there are two fundamental state variables in our environment (Nt and At ), it
is convenient for studying transition dynamics to consider the state variables as Nt and
xt  A    
     t /Nt . We will refer to xt as "knowledge per person," which is a slight abuse of

language in that it ignores the exponents. As shown in Appendix B, the optimal alloca-
tion of labor can be expressed solely as a function of xt , which means that population
growth can as well. This allows us to study the transition dynamics in a simple two-
dimensional plane. It is also useful to keep in mind that with this definition of the state,
A t /At = 1/xt . That is, the state-like variable xt can also be interpreted as the inverse
of the growth rate of knowledge. Along any balanced growth path, xt will be constant.
Finally, notice that a bigger x is not necessarily better: it is the ratio of two state variables
that are each good for welfare, A and N .
   Figure 5 shows the transition dynamics for the equilibrium allocation. The equi-
librium features a constant negative rate of population growth, which causes xt to in-
crease over time: intuitively, At goes to a constant, while Nt is falling, which causes xt
to increase. These dynamics are very simple, but this is a good way to introduce the
figure and it complements the more complicated dynamics of the optimal allocation,
which we turn to now.
22                                        CHARLES I. JONES




            Figure 5: Transition Dynamics for the Equilibrium Allocation
        POPULATION GROWTH, n(x)
           2.5%



           2.0%



           1.5%



           1.0%



           0.5%



           0%

                                                                      Asymptotic Low SS
                       Equilibrium rate                                (Empty Planet)
           -0.5%
                  25            100       400         1600          6400

                                                   KNOWLEDGE PER PERSON, x

Note: This figure shows the transition dynamics in the equilibrium allocation. The state variable
on the horizontal axis is x  A /N  , which we somewhat loosely refer to as "knowledge per
person." Arrows indicate transition dynamics. The equilibrium features a constant negative rate
of population growth, which causes xt to increase over time.
                               THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                         23



                   Figure 6: Transition Dynamics for the Optimal Allocation
           POPULATION GROWTH, n(x)
             2.5%



             2.0%
                                     High Steady State
                                      (Expanding Cosmos)

             1.5%



             1.0%



             0.5%



                                                Middle Steady State
              0%
                                                                           Asymptotic Low SS
                                                                            (Empty Planet)
                             Equilibrium rate
             -0.5%
                        25           100            400           1600   6400

                                                           KNOWLEDGE PER PERSON, x

  Note: This figure shows the transition dynamics in the optimal allocation. The state variable on
  the horizontal axis is x  A /N  , which we somewhat loosely refer to as "knowledge per person."
  Arrows indicate transition dynamics. If the economy begins with a stock of knowledge per person
  that is not too high, it converges to the stable "high" steady state. Alternatively, if knowledge per
  person is sufficiently high, the economy converges to the low steady state with negative population
  growth, which equals the equilibrium rate. The candidate "middle steady state" is unstable with
  imaginary eigenvalues that generate a spiral path locally. The dynamics shown correspond to the
  path that maximizes welfare for each value of the state variable and correspond to the upper and
  lower arms of the spiral. See the appendix for details.




   Figure 6 shows the more complicated dynamics of the optimal allocation. The high
"expanding cosmos" steady state is saddle-path stable. There are a wide range of po-
tential starting points for knowledge per person, x, such that the optimal allocation
ultimately converges to the high steady state. This is what one would generally expect
in a problem like this.
   The middle steady state is unstable: linearizing the first-order conditions from the
Hamiltonian of the optimal problem reveals that it is unstable with imaginary eigen-
values, generating spiral dynamics. In other words, for a given value of knowledge
per person, x, close to the middle steady state, there are multiple candidate paths that
satisfy the first-order conditions from the Hamiltonian. A stylized picture of the spiral
dynamics around the middle steady state is shown in Figure 7.
24                                        CHARLES I. JONES




Figure 7: A Stylized Depiction of the Spiral Dynamics for the Middle Steady State
           POPULATION GROWTH, n(x)




                                                          KNOWLEDGE PER PERSON, x

Note: For our baseline parameter values, the linearized dynamics around the middle steady state
features imaginary eigenvalues with positive real parts, generating an unstable spiral out away from
the steady state.
                                    THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                            25



                   Figure 8: Population Growth Near the Middle Steady State
              POPULATION GROWTH, n(x) (percent)
                 0.7
                            50.79
                 0.6
                                     60.86
                 0.5

                                             69.85
                 0.4

                 0.3                                   78.01

                 0.2                                           83.74

                         Middle Steady State
                 0.1                                              87.19
                                    69.12                         87.19
                                                       77.73
                  0                                            83.67
                                             77.75
                -0.1                                 83.74
                                                         87.30

                -0.2

                -0.3
                  1000              1500                 2000              2500       3000          3500

                                                                          KNOWLEDGE PER PERSON, x

  Note: The graph zooms in on the spiral around the middle steady state. The blue line is the upper
  arm and the green line is the lower arm. Solid lines are optimal paths, while dashed lines are points
  that are dominated. The numbers in red report welfare for N = 1 (we subtract 500 from the welfare
  numbers to make the graph easier to read). The jump between the upper arm and the lower arm is
  the point where the welfares are equal.




      For the parameter values in Table 2, the path that delivers the highest welfare is
shown in Figure 6: it involves staying on the "upper" arm of the spiral for values of x
slightly higher than xmiddle and then a jump down to the "lower" outer arm of the spiral
for even higher values of x; see Figure 8, discussed next, for more details. This jump
does not violate any first-order condition because the dynamics are unstable around
the jump: the economy never jumps along an optimal path.
      Figure 8 zooms in on the middle candidate steady state and gives the details under-
lying the jump. The blue line is the upper arm and the green line is the lower arm. Solid
lines are optimal paths, while dashed lines are points that are dominated. The numbers
in red report welfare for N = 1.6 The jump between the upper arm and the lower arm
occurs where the welfares are equal. Additional spirals not visible to the eye exist near

  6
      We subtract 500 from the welfare numbers to make the graph easier to read.
    26                                       CHARLES I. JONES



the middle steady state, but these too are dominated.7
    If the starting value for x is below the jump point in Figure 6, the economy converges
to the "expanding cosmos" steady state. Conversely, if the starting value for x is above
the jump point, then the economy asymptotically converges to the "low" steady state,
the Empty Planet outcome. This features negative population growth at a rate that
asymptotically equals the equilibrium rate neq and occurs as knowledge per person,

x  A /N  , goes off to infinity. This happens because Nt falls due to the negative
population growth while the stock of knowledge At stabilizes at some positive value, as
in Result 2.
    The intuition for the two steady states -- and for the stability of both -- goes as fol-
lows. An increase in knowledge per person x causes optimal fertility to decline because
the extra ideas produced by offspring have a diminishing marginal benefit; this explains
the negative slope of n(x) in Figure 6. If equilibrium fertility is positive, then optimal
fertility will also remain positive -- the planner values people at least as much as the
equilibrium. But if equilibrium fertility is negative, then for x high enough, optimal
fertility becomes negative as well. This is because as x goes to infinity, the stock of
knowledge divided by the number of people is so high that the "knowledge value" of
additional offspring falls to zero. But once population growth is negative, x increases
over time rather than decreasing since the denominator of x  A /N  is falling. That
causes x to increase, reinforcing the change. That is the intuition for the bifurcation in
Figure 6 and the perhaps surprising stability of the Empty Planet outcome.8
    What do the transition dynamics look like for different parameter values? The in-
tuition for the answer can be found by looking back at the n(V ) and V (n) figure that
characterized the multiple steady states, Figure 4. If we reduce the importance of ideas
in the economy -- i.e. if we reduce  , say by making ideas even harder to find via a
higher  -- the V (n) curve rotates back to the left. This pushes down the "expanding
cosmos" steady state and raises the middle steady state. That is, the two points get
closer together. In Figure 6, this shrinks the range of x values for which the transition

   7
     This type of unstable middle steady state in economics is called a "Skiba point" after Skiba (1978).
Theoretical analysis of one-state models can be found in Beyn, Pampel and Semmler (2001) and suggest
that additional analytic progress could be made in this application. We leave this to future research.
   8
     In fact, the intuition is slightly more subtle. For different parameter values, it is possible for the
population growth rate on the lower arm after the jump to be, temporarily, positive. Nevertheless, x
continues to increase because the rate of population growth is slow relative to the rate of knowledge
growth. See footnote 9 for more details.
                                 THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                          27


dynamics lead xt to decline. If we continue to lower  and reduce the importance
of ideas, eventually the n(V ) and V (n) curves are tangent -- the "high" and "middle"
steady states become the same point. In Figure 6, the transition dynamics then always
involve x increasing, and the only steady state is the Empty Planet outcome. This same
general result obtains if we reduce the importance of ideas even further, so that the
n(V ) curve in Figure 4 lies entirely below the V (n) schedule. Intuitively, if ideas are not
very important, both the equilibrium and the optimal allocations will feature negative
population growth.9


4.3 The Economics of the Transition Dynamics

The transition dynamics lead to an important economic point, summarized in Figure 9.
Consider an economy that is governed by the equilibrium allocation. It features nega-
tive population growth at rate neq , and suppose the economy is initially endowed with a

certain population and stock of knowledge such that knowledge per person, x0 , equals
50. The social planner would like the economy to have a much higher fertility rate
and converge to the "expanding cosmos" steady state, with positive population growth
and positive economic growth: both the number of people and the amount of income
per person would rise exponentially forever. In contrast, the equilibrium allocation
will simply move the economy steadily to the right, to higher values of x, along the
lower line: there will be a constant negative rate of population growth, so knowledge
per person, x, will rise as the number of people declines.
       At any point in time, society may adopt better institutions, such as a fertility subsidy,
that move the economy to the optimal allocation. If this occurs at x = 100 or x = 400
or x = 1600, then the economy will eventually transition to the high steady state and
exhibit exponential growth forever. However -- and this is the surprising point -- if the
economy delays adopting good institutions for too long, eventually knowledge per per-
son x will rise above the jump point (around 1990 in the figure). Once this happens, the
   9
    A few other points are worth noting. First, as discussed in Appendix B, the law of motion for xt 
A    
 t /Nt  is x
            t =  - nt xt . Clearly if nt is negative, then x
                                                            > 0, but this is sufficient rather than necessary:
x t > 0 can occur with positive population growth as long as nt is sufficiently small. This explains how
the transition dynamics can feature rising xt throughout for  sufficiently small. Second, the imaginary
eigenvalues that deliver the spiral dynamics around the middle steady state also disappear eventually as
we reduce  . In that case, the middle steady state is an unstable source with two exit paths that converge
to the high and low steady states. This is intuitive if you imagine what the middle state looks like as the
spiral gets smaller and smaller.
28                                            CHARLES I. JONES




                          Figure 9: Transition Dynamics: Summary
        POPULATION GROWTH, n(x)
           2.5%



           2.0%
                                   High Steady State
                                    (Expanding Cosmos)

           1.5%



           1.0%



           0.5%



                                              Middle Steady State
           0%
                                                                         Asymptotic Low SS
                                                                          (Empty Planet)
                           Equilibrium rate
           -0.5%
                     25            100            400           1600   6400

                                                         KNOWLEDGE PER PERSON, x

Note: The bottom line in the figure shows the transition dynamics for the equilibrium allocation
while the curved lines show the dynamics for the optimal allocation. An economy governed by the
equilibrium dynamics can get trapped in the Empty Planet outcome if it waits too long to switch to
the optimal allocation. In this example, that would occur if knowledge per person, x, rises above
about 1990.
                           THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                             29


optimal regime changes. Adopting good institutions that deliver the optimal allocation
will involve negative population growth, albeit at a higher rate than the equilibrium.
This means that knowledge per person will continue to grow -- not because of large
increases in knowledge but rather because of declines in the number of people -- and
the economy will converge to the low steady state. Population will decline, knowledge
will remain below an upper bound, and income per person will stagnate. This is the
Empty Planet outcome. The surprise is that if society waits too long to adopt good in-
stitutions, the optimal allocation switches from one of sustained exponential growth
in population, knowlege, and living standards to one of stagnation and an empty
planet.
   This is summarized in our last main result:


Result 4 (The Optimal Allocation with Endogenous Fertility): The allocation that max-
imizes the welfare of each generation converges to one of two steady states. If the econ-
omy adopts the optimal allocation while knowledge per person, x, is sufficiently low, it
leads to the Expanding Cosmos outcome of sustained exponential growth in population,
knowledge, and living standards. Alternatively, if the economy waits too long to switch
to the optimal path, it converges to the Empty Planet outcome: living standards stagnate
as the population gradually declines toward zero.




5. Conclusion

Historically, fertility rates in high-income countries have fallen from 5 children per
women to 4, 3, 2, and now even fewer. From a family's standpoint, there is nothing
special about "above two" versus "below two" and the demographic transition may lead
families to settle on fewer than two children. The macroeconomics of the problem,
however, make this distinction one of critical importance: it is the difference between
an Expanding Cosmos of exponential growth in both population and living standards
and an Empty Planet, in which incomes stagnate and the population vanishes.
   Endogenizing fertility leads to an additional subtlety. When the equilibrium fertility
rate is negative, the optimal allocation features two stable steady states. If the economy
adopts the optimal allocation soon enough, it converges to the Expanding Cosmos. But
   30                                     CHARLES I. JONES



if the economy waits too long to switch, even the optimal allocation can be trapped by
the Empty Planet outcome.
   These results are not a forecast, of course -- the paper is designed to suggest that
a possibility we have not considered carefully until now deserves more attention. Still,
there are many ways in which this model could be misleading. Automation could en-
hance our ability to produce ideas sufficiently that growth in living standards continues
even with a declining population, for example. Or new discoveries could eventually
reduce the mortality rate to zero, allowing the population to grow despite low fertility.
Nevertheless, the emergence of negative population growth in many countries and the
fact that it has profound implications for the future of economic growth make this a
topic worthy of further exploration.


References
Acemoglu, Daron, "Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical Change
  and Wage Inequality," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1998, 113, 1055­1089.

   and Pascual Restrepo, "The Race between Man and Machine: Implications of Technology
  for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment," American Economic Review, June 2018, 108 (6),
  1488­1542.

Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt, "A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction," Econo-
  metrica, March 1992, 60 (2), 323­351.

Akcigit, Ufuk and William R. Kerr, "Growth through Heterogeneous Innovations," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2018, 126 (4), 1374 ­ 1443.

Atkeson, Andrew and Ariel Burstein, "Aggregate Implications of Innovation Policy," Journal of
  Political Economy, 2019, forthcoming, xxx­xxx.

Barro, Robert J. and Gary S. Becker, "Fertility Choice in a Model of Economic Growth,"
  Econometrica, March 1989, 57 (2), 481­501.

  and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, Economic Growth, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995.

Becker, Gary S. and Robert J. Barro, "A Reformulation of the Economic Theory of Fertility,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1988, 108 (1), 1­25.

  , Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert Tamura, "Human Capital, Fertility and Economic Growth,"
  Journal of Political Economy, October 1990, 98, S12­S37.
                                THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                31


            ¨
Beyn, Wolf-Jurgen, Thorsten Pampel, and Willi Semmler, "Dynamic optimization and Skiba sets
  in economic examples," Optimal Control Applications and Methods, 2001, 22 (5-6), 251­280.

Bloom, Nicholas, Charles I. Jones, John Van Reenen, and Michael Webb, "Are Ideas Getting
  Harder to Find?," 2019. Stanford University manuscript.

Bricker, Darrell and John Ibbitson, Empty Planet: The Shock of Global Population Decline,
  Crown Publishing Group, 2019.

Buera, Francisco J and Ezra Oberfield, "The Global Diffusion of Ideas," April 2019. Princeton
  University manuscript.

Christiaans, Thomas, "Semi-Endogenous Growth when Population is Decreasing," Economics
  Bulletin, 2011, 31 (3), 2667­2673.

Croix, David De La and Matthias Doepke, "Inequality and Growth: Why Differential Fertility
  Matters," American Economic Review, 2003, 93 (4), 1091­1113.

Delventhal, Matthew J., Jesus Fernandez-Villaverde, and Nezih Guner, "Demographic Transi-
  tions Across Time and Space," March 2019. UPenn unpublished paper.

Doepke, M. and M. Tertilt, "Families in Macroeconomics," in John B. Taylor and Harald Uhlig,
  eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, Vol. 2, Chapter 23, Elsevier, 2016, pp. 1789 ­ 1891.

Doepke, Matthias and Fabrizio Zilibotti, "The Macroeconomics of Child Labor Regulation,"
  American Economic Review, December 2005, 95 (5), 1492­1524.

  and    , "Culture, Entrepreneurship, and Growth," in Philippe Aghion and Steven N. Durlauf,
  eds., Handbook of Economic Growth, Vol. 2, Chapter 1 of Handbook of Economic Growth,
  Elsevier, 2014, pp. 1 ­ 48.

Engbom, Niklas, "Firm and Worker Dynamics in an Aging Labor Market," 2019. NYU unpub-
  lished manuscript.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Ivan Werning, "Inequality and Social Discounting," Journal of Political
  Economy, 2007, 115 (3), 365­402.

Feyrer, James, Bruce Sacerdote, and Ariel Dora Stern, "Will the Stork Return to Europe and
  Japan? Understanding Fertility within Developed Nations," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  September 2008, 22 (3), 3­22.

Futagami, Koichi and Takeo Hori, "Technological Progress and Population Growth: Do We Have
  Too Few Children?," The Japanese Economic Review, 2010, 61 (1), 64­84.
   32                                    CHARLES I. JONES



Galor, Oded and David N. Weil, "The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth," American Economic
  Review, June 1996, 86 (3), 374­387.

   and David Weil, "Population, Technology, and Growth: From the Malthusian Regime to the
  Demographic Transition," American Economic Review, September 2000, 90, 806­828.

Golosov, Mikhail, Larry E. Jones, and Michele Tertilt, "Efficiency with Endogenous Population
  Growth," Econometrica, 2007, 75 (4), 1039­1071.

Greenwood, Jeremy and Ananth Seshadri, "The U.S. Demographic Transition," American
  Economic Review, May 2002, 92 (2), 153­159.

  , Nezih Guner, and Guillaume Vandenbroucke, "Family Economics Writ Large," Journal of
  Economic Literature, December 2017, 55 (4), 1346­1434.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991.

Hock, Heinrich and David N. Weil, "On the dynamics of the age structure, dependency, and
  consumption," Journal of Population Economics, 2012, 25 (3), 1019­1043.

Hopenhayn, Hugo, Julian Neira, and Rish Singhania, "From Population Growth to Firm Demo-
  graphics: Implications for Concentration, Entrepreneurship and the Labor Share," Working
  Paper 25382, National Bureau of Economic Research December 2018.

Jones, Charles I., "R&D-Based Models of Economic Growth," Journal of Political Economy,
  August 1995, 103 (4), 759­784.

  , "Population and Ideas: A Theory of Endogenous Growth," in P. Aghion, R. Frydman,
  J. Stiglitz, and M. Woodford, eds., Knowledge, Information, and Expectations in Modern
  Macroeconomics: In Honor of Edmund S. Phelps, Princeton University Press, 2003, pp. 498­
  521.

Jones, Larry and Michele Tertilt, "An Economic History of Fertility in the U.S.: 1826-1960," in
  Peter Rupert, ed., Frontiers of Family Economics, Elsevier, 2008, pp. 165­230.

Kalemli-Ozcan, Sebnem, "Does the Mortality Decline Promote Economic Growth?," Journal of
  Economic Growth, Dec 2002, 7 (4), 411­439.

Karahan, Fatih, Benjamin Pugsley, and Aysegul Sahin, "Demographic Origins of the Startup
  Deficit," Working Paper 25874, National Bureau of Economic Research May 2019.

Kortum, Samuel S., "Research, Patenting, and Technological Change," Econometrica, 1997, 65
  (6), 1389­1419.
                            THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                  33


Kremer, Michael, "Population Growth and Technological Change: One Million B.C. to 1990,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, August 1993, 108 (4), 681­716.

Manuelli, Rodolfo E. and Ananth Seshadri, "Explaining International Fertility Differences*," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 05 2009, 124 (2), 771­807.

Moll, Benjamin, "Lecture 3: Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman Equations," Spring 2018. Unpublished
  lecture slides.

Ngai, Rachel and Roberto Samaniego, "Accounting for Research and Productivity Growth Across
  Industries," Review of Economic Dynamics, July 2011, 14 (3), 475­495.

Peters, Michael and Conor Walsh, "Declining Dynamism, Increasing Markups and Missing
  Growth: The Role of the Labor Force," 2019 Meeting Papers 658, Society for Economic
  Dynamics 2019.

Romer, Paul M., "Endogenous Technological Change," Journal of Political Economy, October
  1990, 98 (5), S71­S102.

Sasaki, Hiroaki, "Non-Renewable Resources and the Possibility of Sustainable Economic De-
  velopment in a Positive or Negative Population Growth Economy," 2019. MPRA Paper No.
  92204.

  , "The Solow Growth Model with a CES Production Function and Declining Population," 2019.
  Kyoto University unpublished manuscript.

  and Keisuke Hoshida, "The Effects of Negative Population Growth: An Analysis using a Semi-
  endogenous R&D Growth Model," Macroeconomic Dynamics, 2017, 21 (7), 1545­1560.

Segerstrom, Paul, "Endogenous Growth Without Scale Effects," American Economic Review,
  December 1998, 88 (5), 1290­1310.

Skiba, A. K., "Optimal Growth with a Convex-Concave Production Function," Econometrica,
  1978, 46 (3), 527­539.

United Nations, "World Population Prospects 2019," Technical Report 2019.
                     Appendix to "The End of Economic Growth?
                Unintended Consequences of a Declining Population"


  A. Derivation of Results

Derivation of Result 1. Romer/AH/GH with Negative Population Growth

     Integrate the differential equation:

                                      dAt
                                          = N0         e-t dt
                                       At

  which gives
                                                   N0 -t
                                   log At = C0 -     e
                                                   
  Setting t = 0 to solve for the constant gives

                                                       N0
                                     C0 = log A0 +
                                                       

  Next, note that gA0 = N0 . Then the time path for the stock of ideas over time:

                                                   gA0
                               log At = log A0 +       1 - e-t
                                                    

  So that as t  ,
                                                                  gA0
                               log At  log A  log A0 +
                                                                   
  In other words, an exponentially declining growth rate leads to a steady state level of
  technology and income per person.

                                                               
                                   yt  y   A0 e gA0 /


  Finally, converting fully into output terms using gy = gA :

                                  y                     gy 0
                                     = e gy0 / = exp              .
                                  y0                     




                                              34
                            THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                            35


Derivation of Result 2. Semi-Endogenous Growth with Negative Population Growth

   Integrate the differential equation:

                                      -1        
                                    At   dAt = N0          e-t dt


which gives
                                    1           
                                               N0
                                     At = C0 -    e-t
                                               
Setting t = 0 to solve for the constant gives

                                               1  N0  
                                      C0 =      A0 +
                                                     

Then the time path for the stock of ideas over time:

                                                
                                               N0
                               A     
                                t = A0 +          1 - e-t
                                               

Dividing by A                          -
             0 and noting that gA0 = N0 A0 gives

                                                                1/
                             At               gA0
                                =        1+       1 - e-t
                             A0               

   Converting to output using y = A and defining   / to measure the overall
degree of increasing returns to scale:

                                                               /
                              yt              gy 0
                                 =       1+        1 - e-t                          (25)
                              y0              

   Taking the limit as t  ,

                                                           /
                                     y              gy 0
                                        =      1+
                                     y0             

   Taking logs and derivatives of equation (25) gives the growth rate over time:

                                          -
                      y
                      t             yt                      gy0 e-t
                         = gy 0 ·             e-t =        gy0
                      yt            y0                 1 +     (1 - e-t )
   36                                  CHARLES I. JONES



Derivation of Result 3. The Equilibrium with Endogenous Fertility

   These results are all derived in the main text.


Derivation of Result 4. The Optimal Allocation with Endogenous Fertility

   These results are derived in the main text and in Appendix B on transition dynamics.




B. Solving Numerically for Transition Dynamics

The numerical solution of the transition dynamics for the optimal allocation proceeds
in four broad steps, first listed here and then described in more detail below:


  1. We linearize the transition dynamics from the FONC associated with Hamiltonian
      to see that the high steady state is stable while the middle steady state is unstable
      with spiral dynamics.


  2. We state the optimal allocation problem in terms of a value function and a Hamilton-
      Jacobi-Bellman (HJB) equation, which can be specialized so that the policy func-
      tion depends on a single state variable (xt ).


  3. We solve the HJB equation numerically; see the Matlab program HJB.m.


  4. We solve the original Hamiltonian system numerically; see the Matlab program
      HamiltonianDynamics.m.


Solving the transition dynamics in these two ways helps in understanding the dynamics
(and allows for an independent check that the solution is correct).



B.1     Linearizing around the Candidate Steady States

                                    t /At = N  A- as well equations (12) and (14),
Using the idea production function A         t t

the FOCN conditions from the Maximum Principle for the optimal allocation can be
expressed in terms of three key variables, a state-like variable xt  A    
                                                                      t /Nt and the two
                           THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                               37


                                                   t:
costate-like jump variables, Vt  vt Nt and zt  µt A


                                 x
                                  t =  - f (Vt )xt
                                  t = Vt - ( + zt )
                                 V
                                                        
                                 z
                                 t = ( + f (Vt ))zt -
                                                        xt

where nt = f (Vt )  ¯
                    b -  - 1/Vt .
   In steady state, each of these key variables is constant. Linearizing this differential
system around the steady state gives


               t = -n (xt - x ) - x f  (V  )(Vt - V  )
              x
               t = (Vt - V  ) - (zt - z  )
              V
                     
              t =  2 (xt - x ) + z  f  (V  )(Vt - V  ) + ( + n )(zt - z  )
              z
                   (x )

where f  (V  ) = (1/V  )2 . Expressing the linearized system in matrix form with X 
                                   t = B (Xt - X  ) where B is the matrix of coefficients,
[x V z ] allows us to write it as X
which in turn depends on various steady-state values.
   We can now evaluate this linearized system around the candidate steady states us-
ing the parameter values in Table 2. First, consider the "high" steady state. The matrix
Bhigh has one negative eigenvalue and two positive eigenvalues, all real, indicating a
saddle-path stable steady state. In contrast, the "middle" steady state is unstable: all its
eigenvalues have positive real parts, and two are imaginary. These results are computed
in the Matlab program HamiltonianDynamics.m.
   The imaginary eigenvalues that deliver the spiral dynamics around the middle steady
state can disappear for alternative parameter values, for example for  sufficiently small.
In that case, the middle steady state is an unstable source with two exit paths that
converge to the high and low steady states. This is intuitive if you imagine what the
middle state looks like as the spiral gets smaller and smaller.
   This general characterization is broadly robust to the parameter values and shows
our first point: the high steady state is stable, while the middle steady state is an unsta-
ble source.
   38                                   CHARLES I. JONES



B.2     The Value Function Approach

We begin by setting up the value function using the "natural" state variables, A and N .
The Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation for the optimal allocation is


         V (A, N ) = max  log A + log(1 - ) +  log N + VA N  A1- + VN N n()         (26)
                         


Taking the FOC with respect to  gives

                                             1
                                       =1- ¯     .                                  (27)
                                           bVN N

This expression for the planner takes the same form as the equilibrium solution in
equation (10), where VN N replaces Vt : time invested in children depends on the value
of people in both cases.




The Value Function Approach, Revisited.         We now show how to redefine the state
variables to simplify the problem. Define new state variables to be pt  log Nt and
      A
xt     .
       t
      Nt
           We will refer to xt as "knowledge per person"; because of the exponents, this
is not strictly accurate, but it is convenient and helps with intuition. Notice that in
terms of these states,
                                          t
                                          A    1
                                             =
                                          At   xt
and
                                            
                                                
                         ct = At (1 - t ) = xt Nt (1 - t ),   /
                                             




and therefore flow utility is


                            u = log c +  log N
                                
                              = log x + ( +  ) log N + log(1 - )
                                
                                
                              = log x + ( +  ) p + log(1 - ).
                                

Also, the law of motion for x is
                                     x
                                      t =  - n()xt .                                (28)
                            THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                            39


   With this setup, the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation for the optimal allocation is

    ~ (x, p) = max ( +  ) p +                         ~ p n() + W
                                                                ~ x [ - n()x]
    W                             log x + log(1 - ) + W                             (29)
                                 

Key progress is made by guessing a partial form of this value function. In particular, we
guess that
                                 ~ (x, p) = p + W (x)
                                 W                                                  (30)

                                    ~ p = , W
for some constant . With this guess W       ~ pp = 0, and W
                                                          ~ xp = 0. Computing these
derivatives of the value function in equation (31) directly, using the envelope theorem,
gives
                      ~ p = ( +  ) + W
                      W              ~ pp n() + W
                                                ~ xp [ - n()x]

Applying our guess for the form of the value function means that

                                          1
                                     =      ( +  ) ,
                                          

and verifies that our guess is correct: the value function can be written as a separable
function, linear in the log of population.
   Because W ~ x = Wx , we can rewrite the key part of the HJB equation as

                             
             W (x) = max      log x + log(1 - ) + n() + Wx [ - n()x.]               (31)
                             

This reduces our two-state problem to a one-state problem that is much easier to ana-
lyze both graphically and numerically. Notice that under the initial condition N0 = 1 (a
free normalization given that we can choose the units of population), W (x) = W  ~ (x, 0)
and the value functions are equal; otherwise, welfare just shifts up based on the size of
the population.
   Taking the FOC with respect to  gives

                                                1
                                      =1-                                           (32)
                                               ¯
                                               bV^

                                                              ^ is the "social" value
      ^   - Wx x. Comparing this to (27) earlier reveals that V
where V
of people.
   40                                      CHARLES I. JONES




                               Figure 10: The Phase Diagram


            0.07


            0.06


            0.05


            0.04


            0.03


            0.02


            0.01

                                  Steady State
              0


           -0.01

                     25           100            400          1600       6400

                                                       KNOWLEDGE PER PERSON, x

           Note: Numerical solution of the HJB equation using the Matlab program HJB.m.




B.3     Numerical Transition Dynamics using the HJB Value Function

We solve for the value function numerically using the finite difference approach dis-
cussed by Moll (2018). Given that we have reduced the problem to a single state vari-
able, the method discussed in those notes applies directly.
   The only subtlety is the presence of the unstable middle candidate steady state.
However, the numerical solution using the FONC from the Hamiltonian, discussed next
in Section B.4 delivers values for the outer arms of the spirals, providing good guesses
for the place where the transition path become vertical so that x
                                                                 = 0. These points can
be used as endpoints for the grid for x in the numerical solution.
   Figure 10 shows the phase diagram in (x, x
                                             ) space. From equation (28), as x  ,
x/x
     -neq > 0. The phase diagram makes the nature of the transition dynamics

clear and justifies the dynamics shown in the main text in Figure 6.
   Figure 11 shows the numerical solution of the value function, which is nicely con-
                            THE END OF ECONOMIC GROWTH?                                 41



                              Figure 11: The Value Function
          WELFARE, W(x)
           800


           750


           700


           650


           600


           550


           500


           450


           400


           350
                    2000   4000      6000   8000   10000   12000   14000   16000

                                                    KNOWLEDGE PER PERSON, x

          Note: From the numerical solution of the HJB equation using the Matlab pro-
          gram HJB.m.



cave and appears continuous despite the jump in the phase diagram. This is because
the jump point occurs precisely where welfare is the same on either side of the jump.


B.4   Numerical Transition Dynamics using the Original Hamiltonian

Earlier in the appendix in Section B.1, we stated the differential system from the FONC
for the Hamiltonian approach:


                                  x
                                   t =  - f (Vt )xt
                                   t = Vt - ( + zt )
                                  V
                                                           
                                    z
                                    t = ( + f (Vt ))zt -
                                                           xt

where nt = f (Vt )  b((Vt )) -  .
   We solve this system numerically using a "reverse shooting" approach. That is, we
   42                                  CHARLES I. JONES



start from a candidate steady state, move a tiny amount away in the direction of the
eigenvector of the linearized system, and solve the full nonlinear dynamics backwards
to characterize the optimal path. This is especially useful in tracing out the spiral
dynamics around the unstable middle steady state. For example, if we begin with x0 >
xhigh , the reverse dynamics move to the right and eventually spiral into the middle
steady state (the "upper arm" of the spiral). Alternatively, if we begin with x0 = 10, 000,
i.e. close to the "low" steady state, and solve backwards, this takes us along the "lower
arm" of the spiral back to the unstable middle steady state. Figure 8 in the main text
shows the numerical solution of these dynamics.
   The advantage of the Hamiltonian approach numerically is that it traces out the
spirals "automatically," so to speak. The HJB value function approach seeks instead to
find the optimal allocation. In this application, both play important roles in under-
standing the transition dynamics. And of course solving the transition dynamics using
two different approaches verifies that the solution is correct.
