                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          GROWTH, AUTOMATION AND THE LONG RUN SHARE OF LABOR

                              Debraj Ray  Dilip Mookherjee

                                     Working Paper 26658
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26658


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




Mookherjee thanks the Department of Economics at NYU for hosting his visit in Fall 2017 when
this project was started. Ray acknowledges funding from the National Science Foundation under
grant SES-1851758. We are grateful to Pascual Restrepo for useful conversations, and Erik
Madsen for a proof of Lemma A2 in the Supplementary Appendix. Author names are in random
order. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Debraj Ray  Dilip Mookherjee. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Growth, Automation and the Long Run Share of Labor
Debraj Ray  Dilip Mookherjee
NBER Working Paper No. 26658
January 2020
JEL No. D33,E25,J24,J31,O33

                                         ABSTRACT

We provide an argument for long-term automation and decline in the labor income share, driven
by capital accumulation rather than technical progress or rising markups. We emphasize a
fundamental asymmetry across physical and human capital. An individual can indefinitely
replicate her claims on the former, but -- after a point -- her human endowment cannot be
cloned and rescaled in the same way. Then ongoing capital accumulation gives rise to progressive
automation, and the share of labor income converges to zero. The displacement of human labor is
gradual, and real wages could rise indefinitely. The results extend to endogenous technical
change.


Debraj Ray
Department of Economics
New York University
19 West Fourth Street
New York, NY 10003
and University of Warwick
and also NBER
debraj.ray@nyu.edu

Dilip Mookherjee
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
dilipm@bu.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26658
 Growth, Automation and the Long Run Share of Labor
                                  Debraj Ray r Dilip Mookherjee

                                             December 2019

Abstract. We provide an argument for long-term automation and decline in the labor
income share, driven by capital accumulation rather than technical progress or rising
markups. We emphasize a fundamental asymmetry across physical and human capital.
An individual can indefinitely replicate her claims on the former, but -- after a point --
her human endowment cannot be cloned and rescaled in the same way. Then ongoing
capital accumulation gives rise to progressive automation, and the share of labor income
converges to zero. The displacement of human labor is gradual, and real wages could
rise indefinitely. The results extend to endogenous technical change.


                                          1. I NTRODUCTION

The growing evidence worldwide for a declining labor share in national income (Karabar-
bounis and Neiman 2014, Piketty 2014) -- thereby dismantling a central "Kaldor fact"
-- has generated active debate and research.1 Explanations in terms of capital-labor sub-
stitution along some aggregate CES production function are problematic: substitution
elasticities need to exceed one, which is rejected by panel studies of industry level pro-
duction functions (Chirinko and Mallick 2014). Other arguments include globalization,
whereby labor in developed countries are devastated by cheap imports (Autor, Dorn and
Hansen 2016), selection into more profitable and therefore higher-markup firms (Autor
et al 2017), factors such as the rise of the gig economy or greater product differentiation,
   
      Mookherjee: Boston University; Ray: New York University and University of Warwick. Mookherjee
thanks the Department of Economics at NYU for hosting his visit in Fall 2017 when this project was
started. Ray acknowledges funding from the National Science Foundation under grant SES-1851758. We
are grateful to Pascual Restrepo for useful conversations, and Erik Madsen for a proof of Observation A.2
in the Supplementary Appendix. Author names are in random order.
    1
      Piketty's "r > g " theory has been criticized, given its compatibility with a variety of standard growth
models exhibiting no decline in labor share (Acemoglu and Robinson 2015, Mankiw 2015, Ray 2015).
2

leading to a decline in firm competition and the bargaining power of labor (Neary 2003,
Guti´
    errez and Philippon 2017, Azar and Vives 2018, and Eggertsson, Robbins, and Wold
2018), and certainly the possibility of technical progress that favors automation (Santens
2016, Acemoglu and Restrepo 2019, Aghion, Jones and Jones 2019).

These explanations have useful roles to play in explaining or at least describing the phe-
nomenon of a falling labor share, but do not seem to tell the full story. For instance,
globalization cannot explain why we see a similar decline in labor share or a greater
awareness of "jobless growth" in countries such as China and India. Factors such as
greater industrial concentration or a decline in bargaining power are possibly endoge-
nous outcomes of rising automation and technical progress. Even technical progress
seems an insufficient explanation -- Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014) show that a
substantial fraction of the decline in labor share worldwide is explained by declining
capital good prices, even after controlling for capital-augmenting technical progress,
markup rates and the skill composition of the labor force.

Our paper, while partly motivated by these observations, serves a more primitive pur-
pose. We argue that the benchmark growth model, with balanced growth at its core,
needs re-examination. That is, growth accompanied by the possibility of progressive
automation must be a central feature of any model which recognizes a basic asymme-
try -- to be developed below -- between physical and human capital accumulation.
Certainly, that baseline model can be augmented by endogenous technical progress (we
will do so), or by other features such as industrial concentration or increasing product
differentiation. But the failure of the central Kaldor "fact" is directly predicted by any
benchmark model which builds in the following five features:

(I) Growth. Physical capital per-capita is (on average) consistently accumulated over
time. Standard conditions on underlying parameters such as time preferences relative to
technology suffice to generate this outcome.

(II) Asymmetry. There is a fundamental asymmetry between an individual's accumula-
tion of human capital, and her accumulation of claims to physical capital. Specifically,
                                                                                                      3

the latter is duplicable in a way that the former isn't. Physical capital (and claims on
it) can be replicated to an unbounded degree. But the same is not true of human capital
-- after a point, it has to do with the acquisition of skills that enable entry into possibly
related but distinct occupations or sectors, not a sustained scaling-up within the same
occupation. In short, an individual cannot turn an endowment of, say, one bank manager
into two, three, four . . . bank managers,2 In contrast, an endowment of one machine can
be grown into two, three, four . . . machines, so claims on capital can be replicated and
expanded "in natural units" in a way that a labor endowment cannot.3

This presumed asymmetry stands in contrast to a long tradition (Uzawa 1961, Becker
and Tomes 1979, Loury 1981, Lucas 1988, Mankiw, Romer and Weil 1992), in which
human and physical capital are modeled as symmetric engines of accumulation. Under
this view, both are driven by some aggregative dynamic process which can scale up
individual endowments in "efficiency units" to arbitrarily large degrees. The following
pair of equations from Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992, p. 416) exemplify this point:

                                    (t) = sk y (t) + (n + g +  )k (t)
                                   k
                                    (t) = sh y (t) + (n + g +  )h(t),
                                   h

where the variables are self-explanatory. Such symmetry may be a convenient way to
obtain steady states or balanced growth. But the recent facts belie this presumption.4

(III) Machines and Robots. Physical capital complements human labor in some respects
(we call such capital machines) and substitutes for it in others (we call such capital
robots). Of course, most capital goods have a bit of machine and a bit of robot in them.
   2
    We are not referring here to technical progress which raises effective productivity of humans within
a particular sector. That is different from an individual accumulating an ever-larger labor endowment in
natural units for the same job.
   3
     Like human capital, physical capital can move over a large number of different sectors, and could
have sector-specific characteristics. The point is that it can also scale up within a sector.
   4
     Mookherjee and Ray (2002, 2003, 2010) also argue that by lumping different occupational choices
into homogeneous efficiency units, much of this literature misses the endogenous movements in relative
prices that lie at the heart of persistent inequality.
4

We assume that in every sector, there is scope for replacing humans by robots, if the price
is right. Certainly, there are sectors where humans are protected, and sectors where they
are vulnerable, but in every sector humans can be challenged by robots, and will be
replaced if the ratio of human wages to robot capital is large enough. As Scott Santens
writes in the Boston Globe, 2016: "nothing humans do as a job is uniquely safe anymore.
From hamburgers to healthcare, machines can be created to successfully perform such
tasks with no need or less need for humans, and at lower costs than humans. . . " Observe
that this is a different view from one that argues that technical progress will render
humans obsolete. That may or may not be true, a question we pursue later in the paper.

(IV) Singularity. Turning to robot production, it is obvious that the price of robot ser-
vices will be sandwiched between those of machine capital and the wages of technicians,
engineers and researchers active in the robot-producing sector. A crucial question that
bears on automation is whether robot prices will be tied more closely to human wages
or to the price of capital in the robot producing sector as capital continues to accumu-
late. We argue that a "singularity condition" determines the answer to this question. It
is connected to the eventual automation of the robot sector itself.5 If that condition --
placed on the robot sector alone, involving the elasticity of substitution within that sec-
tor relative to the effectiveness of humans vis-a-vis robots -- is satisfied,6 the price of
robots must eventually become tied to that of machine capital (Proposition 1).

(V) Preference Neutrality. The structure of household demand has no built-in bias in
favor of -- or against -- sectors in which human labor have a comparative disadvantage

    5
     The idea of such a singularity appears to have been first envisaged by von Neumann in his work on
self-reproducing automata; see von Neumann and Burns (1966). The idea reappears in recent economic
literature: for instance, Aghion, Jones and Jones (2019) discuss singularities in the production of ideas, in
a setting with exogenous rates of automation.
   6
     The singularity condition compares the elasticity of substitution between capital and (human or robot)
labor with the efficiency of robots relative to humans in providing labor. It is automatically met if the
former elasticity equals or exceeds 1, but is also consistent with sub-unitary elasticities of substitution.
Note that while the singularity condition has economy-wide ramifications, it is a condition on the robot
sector alone -- we place no restriction on substitution elasticities in any other sector.
                                                                                           5

relative to robots. We will assume nothing about underlying preferences when there is
a finite number of final goods sectors, and presume that preferences are asymptotically
homothetic (for large incomes) when there are infinitely many such sectors. So the
growth in per capita incomes does not (at any given set of relative prices) tilt demand
in any particular direction, though certainly demands are responsive to prices. We also
discuss what happens when such neutrality fails.

These five ingredients together imply that a growing economy has no long-run steady
state that includes human labor; specifically, the long-run income share of human labor
must converge to zero. This occurs via progressive automation -- every "consequential
sector" that grows along with national income must ultimately fall prey to automation.
We emphasize that this result is intrinsic to a very basic growth model and has nothing
to do with technical progress, markups, product differentiation, etc. See Theorems 1, 2,
and 4, which cover different cases under which the same result holds, and Theorem 3
that guarantees sufficient conditions for continued growth in the economy.

It also bears emphasis that ours is a result about the share of labor in national income. A
declining labor share is perfectly compatible with increasing absolute wages -- indeed,
even unboundedly increasing wages; see for instance part (iii) of Theorem 2. After
all, provisionally accepting our assertion regarding widespread automation, it has to be
the case that human wages must rise so as to generate incentives for the more human-
friendly sectors to be automated in the first place. Moreover, our results are about the
functional share of labor. With more structure on the distribution of preferences, this
functional share can be translated into a statement about personal income distribution
-- and the model is potentially equipped to do this -- but that is not our focus here.

There are three escape routes from this scenario. The first has to do with the failure
of the singularity condition, in which case rising human wages do not automatically
generate automation. The second has to do with a particular structure of preferences. If
preferences are non-homothetic, but not just that, they are non-homothetic in a particular
direction -- one that lines up with ever greater "human-friendliness" in production (we
need an infinite number of sectors to formalize this idea) then it is possible to envisage a
6

future where human labor perpetually retains a positive share of income. With growth,
humans would progressively move to these friendly sectors, and by the assumed non-
homotheticity of preferences, there would be adequate demand for such products.

The third escape hatch has to do with systematic asymmetries in the opportunities for
technical progress -- biases that favor the use of human labor. We would then have to
assume those asymmetries, and their relative impact would be an empirical question.
The recent contribution by Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) is a leading example of this
approach, and we compare our approach to technical progress with theirs in Section 5.
In this section, we extend the model to permit directed technical progress in machine,
human and robot productivities which responds to the profit opportunities created by
changing prices. In our setting, technical progress operates on the intensive margin in
each sector, raising the productivity of different inputs and possibly generating spillovers
for the productivity of that input in other sectors. It may well be that technical progress
inherently favors one sort of input or sector over another. Whether and where such biases
exist is an empirical matter. We maintain the neutrality of technological opportunities as
an appropriate theoretical benchmark, and show that our long run distributional impli-
cations continue to be robust in such a setting even with endogenous technical progress.

In summary, we argue that a falling labor share is a basic implication of a correctly
specified baseline growth model that recognizes the fundamental asymmetry between
the accumulation of physical and human capital. That implication is consistent with
declining, constant or increasing absolute wages. The underlying logic applies in a
fully competitive setting without technical progress, and survives in the presence of
technical progress. It can be extended to incorporate monopolistic competition and ris-
ing markups, which represent possibly supplementary causes of declining labor shares.
These latter effects may improve calibration or estimation. But the core logic lies deeper.
                                                                                                              7

                                                2. M ODEL

2.1. Production. There is a collection I (initially finite) of final goods for consumption,
indexed by i. In addition, there are three sectors for the production of robot services,
education, and machine capital. The index j serves as generic notation for any of this
full collection of sectors. In any sector j , capital can have two roles. It is, first, a
complementary input to labor. Think of such capital as "machine capital" kj , used as
input along with labor        j:



(1)                                           yj = fj (kj , j )


where fj is increasing, smooth, strictly quasi-concave, and linearly homogeneous with
fj (k, 0) = fj (0, ) = 0, displaying unbounded steepness in each input at zero.

The second aspect of capital is its potential to displace human labor; think of such cap-
ital as "robot services." That is, view             as labor input, representing tasks traditionally
performed by humans (h), but which can be automated by the use of robot services (r).
Specifically we presume that each unit of h is worth one unit of "abstract labor"                            in
sector j , while each unit of r is equivalent to j units of . Without technical progress,
j is fixed once and for all in any given sector, and so               j   = j rj + hj . No sector can be
freely automated, but nor can it fully protect humans: j  (0, ) for all j .

The assumption of linear substitutability of robots for humans simplifies the analysis,
but it is not essential. Our results extend with no change to specifications with imperfect
substitutability where one factor ceases to be used if its relative price is sufficiently high.
Note, moreover, that humans may continue to work in automated sectors in our model
(and generally will do so), provided they are willing to work at a wage which renders
employers indifferent between them and robots.7


   7
      This will happen, of course, if workers have specific skills which tie them to particular sectors, and
are limited in their ability (at least in the short run) to move to other sectors. But it must be more generally
true of equilibrium outcomes with finitely many or countably many sectors.
8

We employ the convention throughout that final goods, robot services, and education are
produced within the period, while machine capital is produced for the "next" period.


2.2. Prices. Within any date, machine capital services serve as numeraire: the rental
price of k will be set at 1. The collection (w, wr , we , wk ) is the wage system, where
w = {wi } are wages in final goods sectors. With free labor mobility, these wages would
all be the same. The output prices are (p, pr , pe , pk ) for final goods, robot services,
education, and capital goods. By constant returns to scale and the assumption of a price-
taking competitive economy, all prices will be pinned down by unit costs of production:8

(2)                                            pj = cj (1, j ),
                                                      -1
where 1 is the return to machine capital, j  min{wj , j  pr } is the effective price of
the labor input in sector j , and cj is the unit cost function, dual to the production function
fj . In a dynamic competitive equilibrium, these prices will generally vary with time.


2.3. Factor Demands and Automation. In each sector j , the demand for machine cap-
ital is given by the familiar marginal product criterion:
                                               fj (kj , j )
                                          pj                = 1.
                                                  kj
where we recall that the rental rate serves as numeraire. Likewise, labor demand (human
or non-human) must satisfy
                                               fj (kj , j )
                                          pj                = j
                                                   j
        -1
If wj > j  pr = j , sector j is "fully automated," with rj =                       j   and hj = 0. If
         -1
j = wj < j  pr , sector j is "non-automated," with hj =                  j   and rj = 0. Finally, for a
                                                                          -1
"partially automated" (or simply "automated") sector j , we have j = wj = j  pr , and
so hj + j rj =       j,   with firms indifferent across all such combinations of hj and rj .
    8
      It is easy to check that our results extend to a context of monopolistic competition with CES pref-
erences, as that generates a constant markup of price over cost in all sectors. Of course, profits would
appear in that setting, so national income would be the sum of returns to capital, to workers and profits.
Our distributional results would continue to apply to the share of wages in national income.
                                                                                                               9

2.4. Factor Endowments. At each date, the available machine capital and robot ser-
vices move freely across sectors. (An extension of the model to accommodate sector-
specific machine capital and robots services is tedious but straightfoward.) Over time,
the machine capital stock grows -- or shrinks -- depending on the rate of deprecia-
tion and the production function for capital. We assume that capital depreciates at rate
  [0, 1] and take this rate to be independent of sector.9 Then at every date t,

(3)                                K (t + 1) = (1 -  )K (t) + yk (t).

Robot services fully depreciate within the period, but this involves no loss of generality.
The view that robots are durable can easily be accommodated, by embedding robot
services in machines. Those machines can be viewed as capital input to the robot-
producing sectors, where they produce services again and again under the auspices of the
robot production function fr (think of labor also being needed there for maintenance).
Technically, all we do is move all the durability to the machine capital sector.

The stock of human labor is given in physical units. By constant returns to scale, it makes
no difference if human labor grows exogenously; we will only need to re-normalize all
variables by the rate of growth of labor. That said, we want to accommodate sector-
specific skill acquisition. We allow humans to differ in the sector-specific skills they are
born with. So we take as given some initial allocation of the population across sectors.
There could be a place-holding "null sector" where individuals without any acquired
skill can be initially placed, or can "drop out" to at zero educational cost. At the be-
ginning of every period, an individual can move from one sector to another. To move
from sector j to j a person needs ejj units of education at the price pe , the latter in turn
endogenously determined by the unit cost of education.10 We allow for the possibility

   9
      If depreciation rates are sector-dependent, then the net rate of return on capital is not defined by the
equality of value of marginal products across sectors, and our normalization that the value of the marginal
product of capital in every sector is set equal to 1 is no longer valid. Nothing substantive changes, however.
   10
      If initial skills are not sector-specific, then everyone is in the null sector to start with, and education
requirements can be written only as a function of the "destination sector" j . We can also accommodate
"utility costs" of education that are nonlinear in wages, to mimic imperfect or missing capital markets.
10

of depreciation of human capital; that is, it is possible for ejj to be strictly positive for
some or all j . We place no restrictions on the amount of education needed to switch
occupations, so the model captures both completely inflexible sector-specificity (no in-
dividuals can move at all) at one extreme to complete flexibility (where no education is
needed to switch sectors) at the other extreme, and everything in between.

2.5. Preferences. A continuum of infinitely lived individuals, indexed by m, each has
a continuous one-period utility function um (x) defined on final goods consumption x,
a discount factor m  (0, 1), and one unit of human labor. At the start of any date,
an individual has financial wealth (representing her claims on capital) and some sector-
specific skill. She makes an education decision that moves her to a possibly new sector.
Once within a sector, each individual supplies one unit of labor to that sector with no
disutility,11 and is paid the sectoral wage. Then, given her wealth and income, she
decides how much to spend today on different goods and how much to save, resulting in
changes in financial wealth (the rate of return on which is endogenously determined).

For any expenditure z on final goods and price vector p, the demand vector for goods
maximizes um (x), subject to px  z . That generates a demand function xm (p, z ). De-
note by vm (z, p) the corresponding indirect utility function. We assume that um satisfies
whatever it needs to satisfy so that this indirect utility function is increasing, differen-
tiable and strictly concave for every p, with unbounded steepness at zero. Given some
dated price-wage system for all goods, capital, and occupations, our agent maximizes
                                           
                                                t
(4)                                             m vm (z (t), p(t)),
                                          t=0

subject to Fm (0) given, by choosing occupation jm (t), education em (t), current expen-
diture zm (t), and financial wealth Fm (t + 1) for every t  0. Two feasibility conditions
apply at every date. First,
                                                                           Fm (t + 1)
(5)                   Fm (t) + wjm (t) (t) = zm (t) + pe (t)em (t) +                  ,
                                                                              (t)
     11
       The assumption of zero disutility of working is inessential, since all that matters is the existence of
an upper bound on the amount of labor that can be supplied by any individual.
                                                                                          11

where  (t) is the endogenously determined "return factor" on financial wealth at date t:

                                       1 + (1 -  )pk (t + 1)
(6)                            (t) =                         .
                                              pk (t)

To understand (6), note that Fm (t) corresponds to a claim on Km (t) units of machine
capital net of depreciation, plus the rental on that capital before depreciation: Fm (t) =
[1 + (1 -  )pk (t)]Km (t). In the same vein, one unit of machine capital bought at date t
at price pk (t) yields [1 + (1 -  )pk (t + 1)] tomorrow. So the ratio of the latter term to
the former must equal the return factor on financial wealth, which is (6).

The second feasibility condition describes the evolution of human capital. If our indi-
vidual chooses a sequence of occupations {jm (t)}, then for all t,


(7)                               em (t) = ejm (t-1)jm (t) .


We can think of initial sectoral location "jm (-1)" as a real allocation or as some original
null state from which she makes a move into the labor market.

By making education an intra-period choice we have suppressed issues of imperfect cap-
ital markets -- the costs do not have to be paid upfront. We can easily introduce capital
market imperfections with no changes to the results. Indeed, there may be a "least-cost
education path" going from sector j to sector j which could entail "passing through"
some low-paying additional sector(s) -- "apprenticeships" -- and such situations would
effectively require upfront payments. We could also allow or disallow for borrowing
on future income to sustain consumption smoothing. It really does not matter, but for
concreteness we take Fm (t)  Bm for all t, where -Bm  0 represents a borrowing
limit, and we impose lim inf t Fm (t)  0 to guarantee ultimate repayment of all debts.

We presume throughout that the above maximization problem is always well-defined. A
quick way to ensure this is to assume that all utility functions are bounded. Of course
there are well-known weaker conditions that can imposed, for instance, when utility
functions have a well-defined asymptotic elasticity.
12

2.6. Equilibrium. Given an initial allocation of individuals to sectors, {jm (-1)}, and
an initial allocation {km (0)} of the capital stock K (0) to all individuals, an equilibrium
is a sequence of wages {w(t), wr (t), we (t), wk (t)}, prices {p(t), pr (t), pe (t), pk (t)} and
quantities {Fm (t), zm (t), em (t), jm (t), kj (t), rj (t), hj (t), yj (t)} for every person and ev-
ery sector such that:

A. All individuals maximize lifetime utility as described in (4)­(7), with Fm (0) =
pk (0)km (0) for all m, and firms maximize per-period profits at every date.

B. The final goods markets clear: at every date, and for every final good i:

(8)                                    xi (zm (t), p(t))dm = yi (t).
                                   m

C. The robot market clears; for each t:

(9)                        yr (t) =         ri (t) + rr (t) + re (t) + rk (t).
                                        i

D. The human labor market clears; for each t and each sector j , labor demand equals
supply:

(10)                           hj (t) = Measure(m : jm (t) = j ).

E. The capital market clears; for each t, K (t) evolves as in (3), with:

(11)                       K (t) =          ki (t) + kr (t) + ke (t) + kk (t),
                                       i

and the available capital stock (net of depreciation) plus rental income on it is willingly
absorbed by all individuals at each t -- refer to the discussion around (6):

(12)                       [1 + (1 -  )pk (t)]K (t) =             Fm (t)dm.
                                                              m

F. The education market clears; that is, for every t:

(13)            ye (t) =       em (t)dm, where {em (t)} satisfies equation (7).
                           m
                                                                                                              13

Per-capita national income (gross) is given by the expenditure on all final goods, plus
investment in new capital goods and education:12

(14)                     Y (t) =        pi (t)yi (t) + pe (t)ye (t) + pk (t)yk (t).
                                    i


                          3. L ONG RUN G ROWTH AND AUTOMATION

3.1. An Illustrative Example. Consider the following special case of our model: There
                                                                                                    1/2 1/2
is a single final good sector, indexed by 1, with production function y1 = k1                           1 ,   a
                                                                     1/2 1/2
capital goods sector with production function yk =                  kk k ,         and a robot sector that has
a CES production function with elasticity 1/2:
                                                                    -1
                                             1 -1 1            -1
                                        yr = kr  +             r         .
                                             2     2
There is common robot productivity given by  = 1 = k = r , no education sector,
and free mobility of labor across all three sectors with  the common corresponding
price of effective labor. Then  is just the (common) wage w if there is no automa-
tion, and it is  -1 pr if there is is (partial or full) automation. Let's record the unit cost
                                                                                          
functions. For the final good and machine sectors, these are c1 (1, ) = ck (1, ) = ,
                                                         2
and for the robot sector, it is cr (1, ) = 1    2
                                                   1 +  . All individuals have the same
one-period utility function u(x) = ln(x) along with discount factor   (0, 1).

To track equilibrium paths, notice that at any date, robot prices must be given by
                                                         1                         2
(15)                         pr (t) = cr (1, r (t)) =      1+                (t)       .
                                                         2
Case 1:   1/2. Then we claim that automation cannot occur. For if it did at any date
t, then it must be the case that (t) =  -1 pr (t). Substituting this into (15), we see that
                                        1                      2     1
                           pr (t) =       1+       -1 pr (t)        >  -1 pr (t),
                                        2                            2
which contradicts our premise that   1/2. So there is never any automation in any
equilibrium. For  large enough, an equilibrium involves unbounded accumulation of
capital, an ever-growing wage rate, and a constant share of labor income -- 50% in
  12
       We could work with net national income by subtracting capital depreciation. Nothing changes.
14

this example -- in the long run. This last observation follows from the fact that the
production functions for final goods and capital are Cobb-Douglas, and the fact that the
robot sector shuts down in equilibrium, though prices for robots are well-defined and
rise in tandem with human wages.

Case 2:  > 1/2. Then, if the economy exhibits sustained growth of per-capita income
-- as it indeed will if individuals are patient enough -- then all sectors that grow must be
fully automated in the long run. For suppose this assertion is false. Then the percentage
of human labor used in at least one of these growing sectors is bounded away from
zero along a subsequence { } of dates. But because the total amount of human labor is
bounded, so must be the overall labor input in that sector. Then sustained growth implies
that sectoral machine capital grows without bound, so human wages climb to infinity. If
there is no full automation, then ( ) = w( ), and using (15),
                                     1                   2       1                      2
                         pr ( ) =      1+          ( )       =     1+            w( )       ,
                                     2                           2
so that along the same subsequence,
                                                             2
                     -1 pr ( )    1            1                       1
                               =                      +1                 < 1 as t  ,
                     w( )        2             w( )                   2

but that would imply ( ) =  -1 pr ( ) < w( ) for large  , a contradiction.

We note five additional points. First, automation pins down robot prices relative to the
rental rate of capital. This is akin to a "non-substitution theorem" and would be quite
generally true even with heterogeneous robots and multidimensional machine capital. In
this specific case, automation of the robot sector ensures that pr = pr , where -- by (15)

-- pr solves the equation

                                               1                         2
(16)                                    pr =     1+           -1 pr          ,
                                               2
and it can be checked that a solution to (16) is well-defined and unique, given  > 1/2.13

     13
                                                                     2                                 2
       Define a function f (p) by f (p) = (1/2p) 1 +          -1 p       = (1/2)        p-1 +       -1 . Note that
f (p) is strictly decreasing and continuous, and that f (p)   as p  0. Moreover, if  > 1/2, f (p) < 1
for p large. It follows that there is a unique value p                
                                                      r such that f (pr ) = 1.
                                                                                           15

Second, the pinning-down of robot prices in (16) guarantees that with sustained growth,
every sector that expands indefinitely must also become automated, no matter what its
specific value of  is. (In our example  is the same for all sectors, but this is irrelevant.)
For if this assertion were false for some growing sector, machine capital must grow
without bound, and so therefore must human wages, showing that pr (t)/w(t) = pr /w (t)

must decline to zero, thereby precipitating automation, a contradiction.

Third, and relatedly, Case 2 is predicated on there being long-run growth to begin with.
If per-capita income is bounded, then automation may not happen.

Fourth, full automation cannot be immediate, and indeed, it cannot occur at any finite
time. The wage rate must equal  -1 pr in any automated sector and all humans must be

hired at any date -- otherwise they would contest the robots by undercutting them.

And finally, despite the full employment of labor, the share of labor in national income
must decline to zero. By the previous point, that decline is "gradual" but with sustained
growth, it is inexorable. Also, if we were to extend this example to have many sectors,
with different values of  , the wage rate could progressively rise over time even as the
share declines. Relative immiserization of the labor share is entirely consistent with
absolute improvement of labor income.

However, the example is more obscure about the deeper conditions that separate Case 1
from Case 2. We now investigate this issue in more detail.


3.2. The Von-Neumann Singularity Condition. Consider the robot sector. Temporar-
ily ignoring our choice of numeraire, fix the price of effective labor at  = 1 and take
the capital rental rate -- call it  -- to zero; that is, look at

                                         lim cr (, 1).
                                          0

In words, imagine what happens to the unit cost of production as the capital input be-
comes nearly free. In the CES class with
                                                                    
                                                                    -1
                                           -1                -1
                          fr (k, ) = ak         + (1 - a)                ,
16

with a  (0, 1) and the elasticity of substitution   0, simple computation tells us that
                                                                  1/(1- )
                            cr (, 1) = a  1- + (1 - a)                      .

So our limit of interest equals zero when   1, which includes the Cobb-Douglas case
("enough" substitution is available). But the limit is positive when  < 1. For instance,
if the production function is "almost" Leontief, labor costs will enter unit cost no matter
how cheap the machine input is. It turns out that this limit unit cost is related to the
automation of the robot sector itself, a singularity envisaged by John von Neumann.14

P ROPOSITION 1. Suppose that the following condition holds on the robot sector:

(17)                                     r > lim cr (, 1).
                                                 0

Then there is a unique positive solution pr to the equation

                                                     -1
(18)                                     pr = cr (1, r  pr ),

and in any equilibrium, pr (t)  pr for all t; i.e., the price of robots is bounded relative

to the rental rate on capital. If at any date, the robot sector is automated, then pr = pr.



To understand the proposition, we begin by parsing (17). If it holds, then in any equi-
librium -- noting that pr equals unit cost -- we would have r > pr for  small, or
-1
r  pr < 1. That is, the effective price of robot services would fall below the labor price
(fixed at 1) when  is small, suggesting that robot production must be automated in such
situations. That is why we call (17) a singularity condition, as it points towards automa-
tion of the robot sector, at least when capital is cheap relative to labor. In the CES case,
observe that (17) must hold no matter how low the value of r (or how inefficient robot
services are relative to labor), provided the elasticity of substitution is 1 or more. When
that elasticity falls below 1, then (17) does restrict the value of r . Specifically,
                                                                        /1-
(19)                     Either   1, or   (0, 1) and r > a                      .

     14
       See von Neumann (1966), Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata: "The accelerating progress of
technology, and changes in the mode of human life, give the appearance of approaching some essential
singularity in the history of the race beyond which human affairs, as we know them, can not continue."
                                                                                                      17




       Singularity condition guarantees this cut.



                                                                                -1
                                                                       cr (1,   r pr)
          cr (1,   -1
                   r pr)




       450                                                pr   450                               pr
                                                    p*
                                                     r

                    ( A ) Singularity Holds                            ( B ) Singularity Fails


       F IGURE 1. The Singularity Condition (17) and the Bound on Robot Price

The result of Proposition 1 shows that under the singularity condition, the price of robots
must join hands with the price of capital rather than the price of human labor, at least
when human labor is relatively expensive. It is always true that
                                                                    -1
(20)                                        pr = cr (1, r )  cr (1, r  pr ),
                                            -1        -1
the inequality holding because j = min{wr , r  p r }  r  pr . Under the singularity
                                                  -1
condition, a little calculation shows that cr (1, r  pr ), viewed as a function of pr , must
ultimately dip below the 450 line; see Panel A of Figure 1. So pr as described by (18)

is well-defined and finite. (See Panel B to appreciate that pr will not be finite if the sin-

gularity condition fails.) Therefore (20) is equivalent to the assertion of the Proposition
that pr (t)  pr in any equilibrium and at every date. Moreover, if there is automation,

then (20) holds with equality and pr (t) = pr . In this way, the singularity condition im-

plies that the price of robot services must be tied to the price of capital rather than labor,
even though both inputs can be used to produce those services.


3.3. Automation and the Declining Labor Share Under Long Run Growth. We be-
gin with the case of finitely many final goods. But the dropping of finiteness will have
conceptual (and not just technical) implications, as we shall explain in a later section.
18

T HEOREM 1. Suppose there are a finite number of consumer goods, and the robot sector
satisfies the von Neumann singularity condition (17). Consider any equilibrium with
long-run growth in per-capita income (i.e., Y (t) grows to infinity as t  ).

(i) There exists at least one sector j and a subsequence along which yj (t) grows to
infinity. Any such sector along any such subsequence must become automated by some
finite date, and the share of sectoral labor performed by robots must converge to one.

(ii) Wages are bounded, and the share of human labor income must converge to zero.

Proof. Part (i). As Y (t)  , so must per capita consumption (a standard argument).
Next, under the singularity condition, the price of every good j is bounded above:
                                             -1              -1 
(21)                 pj = cj (1, j )  cj (1, j  pr )  cj (1, j pr ).

So there is at least one sector j and a subsequence along which yj (t)  . We claim
that any such j must eventually be automated along any subsequence with unbounded
output growth. If false, there is a further subsequence indexed by  along which j is
                                 -1
non-automated, i.e., wj ( )  j      pr ( ) and rj ( ) = 0 for all  . Now yj ( )  , but
hj ( ) is bounded by the total labor endowment of the economy. Therefore, if k  ^j ( ) and
^ j ( ) denote capital and human labor per unit of output at date  , then k
h                                                                         ^j ( ) is bounded
away from zero, while h  ^ j ( )  0 as   . So invoking (2) for this sector, we see that

(22)                                                    ^j ( ) + wj ( )h
              pj ( ) = cj (1, j ( )) = cj (1, wj ( )) = k              ^ j ( ),

is bounded away from zero. Using the end-point condition on fj , it follows that
                                    
(23)              wj ( ) = pj ( )     fj (kj ( ), hj ( ))   as   .
                                    h
On the other hand, if sector j is not automated along the subsequence { }, we have
        -1         -1 
wj ( )  j  pr ( )  j pr , which contradicts (23).

Next, we claim that the share of robot labor to total labor in sector j must converge to
one along this subsequence. Otherwise there exists some > 0 such that for all  ,
                                                  hj ( )
                                j ( )                         ,
                                            j rj ( ) + hj ( )
                                                                                                          19

Then the total effective labor in that sector is bounded:
                                                                          hj ( )   1
                                 j ( )   = j rj ( ) + hj ( )                        ,

where "1" is the total human labor endowment. Now we can write a version of (22):

(24)                                                   ^j ( ) + j ( ) ^j ( ),
                              pj ( ) = cj (1, j ( )) = k

and then observe -- analogous to the way we derived (23) -- that
                                           
(25)                     j ( ) = pj ( )     fj (kj ( ), j ( ))   as   .
                                           
                             -1
But (25) contradicts j ( ) = j  pr ( ), because Proposition 1 tells us that pr ( ) is
bounded above by pr < . This concludes the proof of (i).



Part (ii). We drop the index t for notational ease. Recall (14) to write out income:

(26)                                     Y =       pi y i + pe y e + pk y k .
                                               i

This can be expressed as the sum of (machine) capital and human income. Formally,

             Y =           pi yi + pe ye + pk yk =              [kj + pr rj + wj hj ]
                     i                                   j =r

                =          [kj + wj hj ] + pr [yr - rr ] =                [kj + wj hj ] + [kr + wr hr ]
                    j =r                                           j =r

(27)            =          [kj + wj hj ] = K +            wj hj .
                     j                               j

Defining   minj j > 0, Proposition 1 implies that for every sector j with hj > 0,
                                         -1      -1 
                                     wj  j  p r  j pr   -1 pr


So     j   wj hj is bounded, and the result follows from (27) and Y  .

The singularity condition generates a upper bound (in capital rental units) on the unit cost
of producing robots. That in turn creates an upper bound to human wages in every sector,
owing to the automation threat. So wage income is bounded, implying that the share of
humans in national income must go to zero as income grows unboundedly in the long run
(Part (i)). Part (i) states that in every sector that is "consequential" in the long run must
20

eventually become automated, with human labor asymptotically insignificant relative to
robots. Otherwise, the capital-labor ratio in that sector must grow to infinity, resulting
in ever-growing human wages -- an outcome prevented by the threat of automation.

By the same argument, the share of human labor in value added within any consequen-
tial sector must also converge to zero. A standard CES model without "micro-level"
automation will not generate this result, unless the elasticity of substitution between
capital and labor exceeds one (which runs counter to the empirical evidence based on
the CES specification). Our theory therefore predicts a falling labor share, without any
technical progress or assumptions on the elasticity of substitution between machine cap-
ital and labor within any sector (with the exception of the singularity condition in the
robot sector). Capital does substitute for labor, but through an automation process which
is not at all captured in a reduced-form CES specification. So Theorem 1 can be stated
in substantial generality, making no assumptions about the structure of preferences, la-
bor specificity, or the determinants of human capital investments (education costs, or
household borrowing constraints), barring those required to assure ongoing growth.

The asymmetry between human and physical capital is fundamental to our argument.
The notion that human capital in the same activity or sector can be indefinitely multiplied
is one that we explicitly exclude. Therefore per-capita growth must imply progressive
capital deepening. With the singularity condition in hand, the production cost of robots
can be divorced from human wages altogether, thereby bounding those wages.

That said, our analysis is restrictive in the following sense: we've limited the scope for
humans to respond to automation in sectors they have been traditionally been working
in, by investing in skills needed to enter sectors that are yet to be automated. If every
sector eventually gets automated at some date, there are no sectors left for humans to
escape to. That is why we now drop the assumption of finitely many sectors.


3.4. An Unbounded Number of Sectors. We now consider an infinite number of final
goods sectors. That dispenses with the presumption of a uniform upper limit to the
effectiveness of humans relative to robots across all sectors, i.e., a limit to the extent
                                                                                        21

to which humans are protected from automation anywhere in the economy. We allow
humans to "escape towards" low-automation sectors by accumulating human capital in
a directed way. The wages in such sectors might be rising progressively, without bound,
and in this way humans can retain a positive fraction of national income in the long run.

But the intersectoral migration of humans requires market acquiescence on the demand
side. The ability of low-automation sectors to absorb humans depends on the com-
position of demand as the economy grows. We show that the extent of migration is
inadequate to prevent the slide in human labor share, if household preferences are ho-
mothetic. In fact, as explained below, this inadequacy persists if homotheticity were
relaxed to apply only to preferences of "arbitrarily affluent" households.

That said, the conclusion regarding bounded human wages in Theorem 1 no longer
applies. Under conditions to be described, humans enjoy unboundedly large wages in
the long run, even as the share of those wages in national income declines to zero.

Turn now to the details. Without loss of generality arrange the goods so that i 
i+1 for all i. We impose no assumption on limi i , allowing this limit to be 0. All
other assumptions on the production side of the economy remain unchanged. As for
preferences, each one-period utility indicator um is now defined on infinite-dimensional
vectors of final goods. For technical reasons, we suppose that there are only finitely
many distinct utility functions and discount factors. We assume that for every m, um
is homothetic, and that a demand function xm (p, z ) is well-defined for every strictly
positive price vector p. By homotheticity, that demand function can be factorized as:


(28)                              xm (p, z ) = dm (p)z


for some function dm . We place mild restrictions on this demand function:

[Well-Behaved Preferences] If a bounded sequence of strictly positive price vectors
{pn } converges to p      0, then for each m, dm (pn )  dm (p). On the other hand, if
pn                                                    n
 i  0 for some set I of sectors, then lim inf n dim (p ) > 0 for at least one index i  I .
22

Dixit-Stiglitz preference aggregators with elasticity of substitution no less than 1 satisfy
this condition. So do the additional restrictions on demand invoked (only) in the last part
of the next Theorem, the proof of which is relegated to the Supplementary Appendix.

T HEOREM 2. Consider an infinite number of consumer goods. Suppose that the sin-
gularity condition (17) holds, and that preferences are homothetic and well-behaved.
Consider any equilibrium with long-run growth in per-capita income, as defined in The-
orem 1. Then:

(i) Part (i) of Theorem 1 continues to be true.

(ii) The share of human labor in national income converges to zero as t  .

(iii) If, moreover, the following additional assumptions hold, the wage earned by every
human goes to infinity as t  :

[Positive Demand] For each price p             0, dmi (p) > 0 for infinitely many goods i.

[Protection] There is a sequence of sectors progressively friendly to humans: i  0.

[Bounded Education Costs] If Ejj denotes education costs along the least-cost path
from j to j ,15 then supj,j ,j |Ejj - Ejj | < .


The model now allows for sectors in which the comparative effectiveness of robots vis-
a-vis humans is arbitrarily low. At the same time, every consequential sector is under
pressure to eventually become automated. If both these statements are true, it must
be that at any date, no matter how distant, there will exist sectors that are yet to be
automated. And yet as time goes by, more sectors become automated, and in these the
share of human wages will shrink to zero. Since the human share is positive in yet-to-
be-automated sectors, the aggregate share of human wages in national income can be
positive in the long run only if expenditure shares on these sectors are bounded away
from zero. This is a race between two limits, but the "positive share" camp cannot win
     15
       As discussed above, there may be a "least-cost education path" which passes through some low-
paying sector(s). Ejj is obtained by simply adding educational requirements for every step of this path.
                                                                                                         23

as long as preferences are homothetic and well-behaved. Their share must shrink to
zero. Intuitively, in the long run, market demand cannot generate sufficient entry into
the ever-shrinking set of "niche" sectors where humans are yet to be displaced.

At the same time, part (iii) of the theorem permits the absolute return to human labor to
grow without bound, at the same time that their return relative to that of capital converges
to zero. Part (iii) is not applicable generally -- it rests on the assumption that education
costs are bounded across all pairs of occupations -- but it is nevertheless of interest to
see that absolute doom can be warded off even as relative doom is inevitable.

Hometheticity is sufficient for Theorem 2 but not necessary. For instance, a perusal of
its proof will reveal that it would survive under "asymptotic homotheticity;" i.e., if (28)
were assumed to be approximately true only for large values of income. It would also
remain true even in the absence of any homotheticity restriction on preferences, as long
as with rising income, those preferences favor subsets of goods with the ratio of robot to
human productivity bounded away from zero. There appears to be only one way to break
the stranglehold imposed by the theorem: if preferences are non-homothetic and move
progressively in favor of goods where humans have the largest productivity advantage
over robots: examples of this can be constructed.16



                       4. W HAT G UARANTEES L ONG RUN G ROWTH ?

Theorems 1 and 2 are predicated on the assumption of long-run growth, which isn't
a testable restriction on the primitives of the model. A theorem of the following kind
might be preferable: "There exists a threshold for the discount factor (large enough) such
that if some discount factors in the economy exceed this threshold, then the economy
exhibits long-run growth." We believe such a theorem to be true, but under the current

   16
     Comin, Danieli and Mestieri (2019) describe non-homotheticities in demand which raise the share of
services and lower that of agriculture, and are associated with rising wage polarization. They do not inves-
tigate the implications for the decline in overall labor income share. Karabarbounis and Neiman (2014)
argue that this decline is mainly intrasectoral, and not driven by changing intersectoral composition.
24

generality of our model we do not know (yet) how to prove it. We provide two special
cases where such a result can be established:

(i) Self-Reproducing Machines: The capital goods producing sector only uses machines
to produce capital:
                                               fk (k, ) = ak,

for some a > 0.

(ii) Single Consumer Good: Re-interpret the model as one where each final good pro-
duced is actually an intermediate good (while machines, robots and education are "ba-
sic" goods), and these intermediate goods combine to produce a single consumer good
via a concave CRS production function Y ({fj (kj , j rj + hj )}).

Consider (i) first. It is obvious that along any equilibrium path, the price of capital is just
the rental rate times 1/a; so given our normalization, pk (t) = 1/a for all t. Therefore,
invoking (6), the rate of return on financial capital is given by
                                           1 + (1 -  )(1/a)
(29)                        (t) =  =                        = a + (1 -  ).
                                                  1/a
for all dates t. In the case of a single consumer good, a similar result can be established:17

O BSERVATION 1. Suppose (ii) applies, and (17) holds. Then the marginal product of
                                                                1
machine capital is bounded below by a                 cy ({cj (1,j-1 
                                                                    pr })
                                                                          .

Proof. Use the single consumer good as numeraire. Consider any date t competitive
equilibrium, in which the marginal product of capital must be equal in all sectors: R 
                                     -1
Fk = fjk for all j . Then pr  cr (R, r  pr )  Rpr <  by (17). Hence

                                 -1              -1                 -1 
                      pj  cj (R, j  pr )  cj (R, j  Rpr ) = Rcj (1, j pr )



If cy denotes the unit cost function of Y :
                                                              -1 
                                 1 = cy ({pj })  Rcy ({cj (1, j pr })

     17
       We are grateful to Pascual Restrepo for pointing out this result.
                                                                                       25

which implies
                                                1
                            Ra                    -1      >0
                                      cy ({cj (1, j pr })
.

Hence, in both cases, the economy is an aK economy, in which long run growth in
per capita income must occur if a positive measure of individuals exhibit sufficient time
preference relative to a.

T HEOREM 3. Assume (17), that either Case (i) or (ii) applies, and that for a positive
measure of individuals,

(30)                             m [a + (1 -  )] > 1,

where a is either given in Case (i) or by Observation 1 in Case (ii). Then the economy
exhibits long-run growth, and Theorems 1 and 2 must apply.


                              5. T ECHNICAL P ROGRESS

We extend the theory to incorporate directed technical progress. "Directedness" means
that technical progress is geared to input scarcity. The key assumption we make is
that the opportunities for such progress are symmetric over all inputs, and across all
sectors. This is not to deny the possibility that the nature of science and technology
might generate biases in certain directions. But studying the effect of such exogenous
biases would not need a theory. If they were to favor unbridled automation, our results
would be a foregone conclusion. If they favored the augmentation of human quality over
robots, that would raise the share of humans in national income instead.

The two possibilities combined point to a long run "balanced-growth" view of technical
progress, a view developed by Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018, 2019), with antecedents
in a literature that includes Hicks (1932), Salter (1966), Galor and Maov (2000), and
Acemoglu (1998, 2002), among many others. Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) gener-
ate balanced growth by assuming that newly developed tasks lie in the human domain,
enjoying temporary protection from the robot invasion. But the robots are also hard
26

at work, automating existing tasks and perennially chasing the moving human frontier
created by new tasks. Balance is achieved by equilibrium across these two forces. This
is a potentially fruitful approach, but one that is -- perhaps unavoidably -- laden with
questions. Why can't new tasks that favor robots also appear on the frontier of technical
progress? Or (the flip side): why cannot humans recover their edge in old tasks? What
if there is technical progress in machines?

In this section, we take a more neutral view. We consider a fixed number of sectors and
tasks, and technical progress occurs on the intensive rather than extensive margin. There
is no a priori restriction on sectors in which humans and robots can be active. In contrast,
Acemoglu and Restrepo study the extensive margin, where the task space is extended in
the asymmetric way already described. In particular, within each sector/occupation, we
allow for technical progress in (non-robot) machine capital, on par with the possibility
of technical progress in human labor, and in robot capital. As we will see, technical
progress in non-robot capital will play an important role in our analysis.18

The sole asymmetry we retain -- one we've already developed -- is the difference be-
tween the scaling-up of physical and human capital. It will turn out that this asymmetry
is augmented in the presence of symmetric (though directed) technical progress. To us,
this is the natural theoretical benchmark. If there are stronger opportunities for technical
progress that heighten the productivity of machine capital or robots relative to humans,
our results will a fortiori be reinforced. And in the opposite case they will be moderated.

We presume that productivity growth in any factor in any given sector spills over to the
same factor in other sectors.19 There is empirical evidence of such spillovers (see, e.g.,
Bernstein and Nadiri 1988 and Johnson 2018). Such spillovers will ensure that the rate
of productivity growth of any factor cannot diverge across sectors in the long run.20

     18
       Acemoglu and Restrepo abstract from non-robot machine capital in their model.
     19
       Acemoglu and Restrepo (2019) assume a single sector, avoiding the complications from multiple
sectors and inter-sectoral spillovers. But we do not consider this item to be a fundamental source of
difference in the results.
     20
       In the complete absence of spillovers, Theorem 4 may not hold; details available on request.
                                                                                                       27

5.1. Framework. We consider the baseline model with finitely many sectors. To allow
for changes in the productivity of every input, we attach coefficients to physical capital
and human labor in addition to the already-noted robot productivity  . So:

                                     yj = fj (j kj , µj hj + j rj ),

where the same assumptions are made on fj as before, and (j , µj , j )                   0 are produc-
tivities that can be changed by deliberate technical progress.

We assume that the singularity condition holds on the robot-sector cost function, evalu-
ated at the starting robot productivity r (0) at date 0:

(31)                                     r (0) > lim cr (, 1).
                                                    0

The later robot productivities will all be endogenous and so we impose no restrictions
involving these, but it is easy to see that (31) could be further weakened. All our results
hold for any competitive equilibrium for which (31) holds at some date t along the
equilibrium path.


5.2. Endogenous Technical Progress. We presume that each factor-sector pair is ser-
viced by a short-lived, sector-specific inventor whose activities and returns are external
to the economy in question.21 She can generate an increase in the sectoral productivity
of that factor. In particular, assume that the productivity j (t) of a typical factor in sector
j at t can be increased at some rate j (t) through R&D investment. A fixed proportion
 > 0 of this growth spills over to the same factor in other sectors, subject to a maximum

   21
       We can fully integrate the inventor into the economy by providing her with a production technology
that again depends on machine capital and human/robot labor. We avoid that recursive extension here.
However, one difference that will arise is that unlike all other sectors, `firms' in the R&D sector will
not be perfectly competitive, and will earn profits which will typically constitute a positive fraction of
national income. The extent to which humans can be replaced by robots in the R&D sector then is an
additional determinant of the share of humans in national income. This will be driven by the logic of cost
minimization in the production of R&D, in a manner similar to that in other sectors. Hence it is possible
to extend the model in this direction as well, without any qualitative change.
28

rate ¯ of productivity growth in any sector. So for any sector j :


(32)        j (t + 1) - j (t) = max j (t)j (t) +                     j (t)j (t),   ¯j (t) .
                                                              j =j


The associated R&D cost of the inventor is (), where  (0) = 0,  () > 0 and
 () > 0 for all . View R&D investment as a game played across sectors and factors
by inventors. Then for any i, j (t) can be positive only if the first term on the right-hand
side of (32) binds. So our inventor is either inactive, or fully owns (and so can license)
the proprietary advance j (t)j (t) to firms operating in sector j in period t + 1. The
license fee is levied per (natural) unit of the factor employed by the firm at t + 1. On the
other hand, the spillovers are in the public domain, utilized freely by all firms.

Each inventor takes prices as given, as in competitive innovation models of Grossman
and Hart (1979) and Makowski (1980). The maximum license fee Lj (t + 1) that can be
charged by a date-t inventor is

(33)                                Lj (t + 1) = qj (t + 1)j (t)

where qj (t) is the relevant factor price at t. This is because the one efficiency unit of the
               qj (t+1)
factor costs    j (t)
                          for someone without access to the technical advance, while it costs
    qj (t+1)
(1+j (t))j (t)
                for   someone who has access to it. The difference in unit cost is precisely
 qj (t+1)j (t)
j (t)(1+j (t))
               , so   this can be sucked out as a license fee per efficiency unit. Multiplying
by the number of efficiency units j (t)(1 + j (t)) made possible by the advance, we
obtain expression (33). Intuitively, the "effective factor price" for licensees must rise by
exactly the same proportion as the proprietary productivity advance.

It follows that if xj (t) is the scale of employment of that factor in sector j at date t,
the total return earned by the inventor equals Lj (t + 1)xj (t + 1) = j (t)Ej (t + 1),
where Ej (t + 1)  qj (t + 1)xj (t + 1) is the total bill for that factor in sector j .
Therefore, given the R&D choices {j (t)}j =j by inventors in other sectors, and given
that our inventor is specific to the sector at hand, she will invest until  (j (t)) =
Ej (t +1) -- provided  -1 (Ej (t +1))j (t)+            j =j   j (t)j (t) < ¯ -- and max{0, ¯-
                                                                                                  29

 j1
  (t)     j =i   j (t)j (t)} otherwise. So the Nash equilibrium rate of productivity in-
crease must satisfy:


        j (t + 1) - j (t)                            1
(34)                      = max  -1 (Ej (t + 1)) +             j (t)j (t),                   ¯
              j (t)                                 j (t) j =j



5.3. Equilibrium. With this setup, an equilibrium looks just like the competitive equi-
librium in Section 2.6. That is because licensees give up all their surplus to the inventor,
so that they effectively use the old technology until the new innovations enter the public
domain. With the rental rate on capital once again chosen as numeraire, an equilibrium
is a sequence of wages {w(t), wr (t), we (t), wk (t)}, prices {p(t), pr (t), pe (t), pk (t)} and
associated quantities {Fm (t), zm (t), em (t), jm (t), kj (t), rj (t), hj (t), yj (t)} for every per-
son and every sector, along with productivity coefficients {j (t), µj (t), j (t)} for every
input, sector, and date, such that:

(a) Given the sequence of productivities, the remaining sequence of outcomes constitutes
a competitive equilibrium; and

(b) At every date, and for every sector and factor, given the equilibrium prices and
quantities, productivity changes are the outcome of a Nash equilibrium as described
earlier in this section.



5.4. Automation and the Vanishing Labor Share with Technical Progress. To state
the main result of this section, we invoke two additional conditions. First, we assume
that consumer expenditure shares on each final good are bounded away from zero:

[E] For any individual type m and good i, inf (p,z)       0   pi xmi (p, z )/z > 0.

As there are a finite number of goods, this is fairly innocuous. Next, we make an addi-
tional assumption on the production technology:

[F] There is some final good i for which lim 0 ci (1,  ) > 0.
30

It is easy to verify that Condition F holds as long as there is at least one final good sector
with constant elasticity of substitution strictly smaller than 1.22

T HEOREM 4. Assume the singularity condition (31), and Conditions E and F. Then in
any equilibrium which exhibits unbounded accumulation of machine capital, the wage
earned by human labor in every sector is bounded, and the income share of human labor
in the economy as a whole must converge to zero as t  .


Theorem 4 resurrects the dismal prediction on human labor shares. It continues to
highlight the effects of our maintained asymmetry across the accumulation of human
and physical (or financial) endowments. The theorem makes, again, an assumption on
growth. But this time the assumption is stronger, asking that capital be accumulated
in equilibrium. It is possible to provide sufficient conditions for this, along the lines
of Theorem 3. Now, technical progress induces a downward drift on prices (relative
to incomes), which is an "automatic" -- albeit endogenous -- source of real income
growth. For machine capital to be willingly accumulated despite this drift, the degree
of patience must clear a higher threshold (which depends on the maximal rate ¯ of tech-
nical progress), so that per-capita growth at this maximal rate is not enough to deter
households from saving and investing at a positive rate.

We also note that we have not modeled the use of inputs in the R&D sector, so the the-
orem as stated does not include human wages in R&D. We could model this, of course,

     22
       We believe that both conditions E and F are technical. Condition E is possibly needed for the result,
but is mild. As for Condition F, we don't know if it can be dropped free of charge. We do know that
it can be replaced by other conditions. For instance, for any sector j , define the intensive-form function
gj (e)  fj (e, 1). Then the following condition substitutes for F: [F ] There is some sector j such that the
infimum elasticity of the intensive form is positive:

                                                  gj (e)e
                                              inf         > 0.
                                              e>0 gj (e)


Conditions F and F are not nested. A CES production function with elasticity of substitution smaller than
1 satisfies F but not F . A Cobb-Douglas production function satisfies F but not F.
                                                                                            31

by including R&D as one of the sectors indexed by j , and by allowing for automation in
that sector as well. We refrain from that obvious extension here.

We outline the main steps to prove Theorem 4, relegating technical details to the Sup-
plementary Appendix.

L EMMA 1. (a) For each factor and sector j , there is M <  such that factor produc-
tivity in j grows at rate ¯ if the factor bill qj xj for that factor exceeds M .

(b) If the spillover rate  is positive, the relative productivity j (t)/j (t) of any factor
between any pair of sectors j and j is bounded.


Part (a) is straightforward, following from (34). If the factor bill Ej (t + 1)) is large
enough, the right-hand-side of (34) will equal the maximal rate ¯ of technical progress.
This reflects the force of the intensive margin in motivating technical progress in sector
j . Part (b) ensures that the benefits of technical progress in any sector spills over to other
sectors, thereby preventing inter-sectoral divergence of factor productivity.

L EMMA 2. Assume (31). For any j , there is Bj <  such that in any equilibrium,
                                         pr (t)
(35)                             j (t)           Bj for all t.
                                         r (t)



The singularity condition (31) places a bound on robot prices pr (t)/r (t) in efficiency
units, relative to the capital rental rate 1/r (t) in the robot sector. Spillovers across
sectors then imply that the same is true in every other sector in the long run, as a conse-
quence of part (b) of Lemma 1. That gives us the bound in (35).

Next, the unbounded accumulation of aggregate capital in natural units is likely to be
spread across sectors, so there will exist sectors in which the use of capital in natural
units will grow unboundedly. This can be verified to be true under Conditions E and F:

L EMMA 3. If E and F hold, in any equilibrium with K (t)  , it must be the case that
ki (t)   for some sector i.
32

The statement of the lemma is deceptively simple. Condition E ensures that household
expenditure shares of different sectors cannot fluctuate "too much" across dates, so the
expenditure on each good must grow unboundedly in the long run. So the value of output
in any final good sector cannot fluctuate excessively, and must also grow. Condition F
implies a bounded ratio of output value to machine capital for at least some sectors, and
in these, the amount of machine capital allocated must grow without bound. The rate of
technical progress in machines must eventually be maximal in these sector, and it spills
over to every other sector. In brief, the rate of technical progress in machine capital
cannot fall behind the rate of technical progress in human labor in the long run.

These three steps are combined as follows. The asymmetric growth in endowments in
natural units between machine capital and human labor generates a bias (at least weakly)
in technical progress in favor of capital. That compounds the distributional shift in favor
of physical capital, and so our preceding results concerning the long run income share of
human labor continue to hold in the presence of directed technical progress. Specifically,
in any sector j that employs human labor at any date t, humans must be cost-effective
relative to robots:
                                 wj (t)  pr (t)      Bj
(36)                                                        ,
                                 µj (t)  j (t)   j (t)j (t)
where the second inequality follows from Lemma 2. This implies that the wage earned
by humans is bounded in every sector in which humans are employed, since (36) implies
that
                                               µj (t) Bj
                                     wj (t)                .
                                               j (t) j (t)
       µj (t)
Now,   j (t)
                is bounded, because machine capital productivity grows at least as fast as
human productivity in every sector in the long run -- an implication of Lemma 3 --
while j (t) is non-decreasing in t. So human wages are bounded, just as they were in
the absence of technical progress, implying that the share of human labor income in
national income must converge to 0 in the long run, as Kt  .

Once again, these arguments rest on the underlying asymmetry between the growth of
physical capital and human labor in natural units. Unbounded capital accumulation
                                                                                           33

relative to human labor implies a corresponding asymmetry in factor bills, and thereby
in technical progress on the intensive margin. That induces a parallel asymmetry in
rates of technical progress, precisely unveiled by our insistence that the opportunities
for technical progress are symmetric.




                              6. C ONCLUDING R EMARKS

We study long-term automation and decline in the labor share, driven by capital accu-
mulation rather than biased technical progress or rising markups. Our argument relies
on a fundamental asymmetry across physical and human capital in modern economies.
While physical capital can be scaled up for the same activity and accumulates in nat-
ural units, human capital accumulates principally via education and training that alters
choice into higher-skilled occupations, but -- from the vantage point of a household or
individual -- cannot scale up the quantity of labor for a given occupation to an unlimited
degree. Under a singularity condition on the technology of the robot-producing sector,
we show that the share of capital in national income approaches 100%. We argue that
this lack of balancedness should be a primitive property of a benchmark growth model.

The singularity condition is central to our findings. So the condition itself merits greater
scrutiny. There is greater recognition that the "production of robots by means of robots"
is not merely a hypothetical possibility. The Technology section of the New York Times
(November 5, 2017) reports:

  "They are a dream of researchers but perhaps a nightmare for highly skilled com-
  puter programmers: artificially intelligent machines that can build other artificially
  intelligent machines . . . Jeff Dean, one of Google's leading engineers, spotlighted
  a Google project called AutoML. ML is short for machine learning, referring to
  computer algorithms that can learn to perform particular tasks on their own by an-
  alyzing data. AutoML, in turn, is a machine-learning algorithm that learns to build
  other machine-learning algorithms. With it, Google may soon find a way to create
34

     A.I. technology that can partly take the humans out of building the A.I. systems
     that many believe are the future of the technology industry."

The singularity condition is placed on the robot sector alone, but it has economy-wide
ramifications. If this condition fails, humans can never be displaced in the production of
robots, and are always guaranteed a positive share of national income. For either some
sectors of the economy are automated, in which case the robot sector becomes active,
and humans must obtain a positive share of value added in the robot sector. Or there
is no automation anywhere, in which case humans are not displaced in any sector, and
the standard theory applies. Therefore, in the absence of singularity, there is a route by
which the benefits of physical capital accumulation could persistently flow to humans.

Our paper also takes note of two other escape routes from the dismal conclusion of
an ever-falling labor share: non-homothetic demand, or technical progress intrinsically
biased in favor of humans.

Our emphasis throughout has been on the functional distribution of income. Whether a
household remains on par with the economy will depend on whether they can become
capital owners, or move into sectors where humans are more efficient relative to robots.
We believe the former route to hold more hope than the latter. So -- for a stable personal
distribution -- we reiterate the extreme importance of universal financial education. To
share the gains from growth in the long run, humans must learn to own the means of
production by owing and accumulating non-human capital, even as the relative power
of their natural endowment -- labor -- is eroded over time. Finally, the simplicity and
tractability of the model may allow it to be useful in analyzing effects of fiscal policies
such as capital taxes, education subsidies, universal basic income or other interventions
to address the distributional consequences of automation.


                                       R EFERENCES

D. Acemoglu and J. Robinson (2015), "The Rise and Decline of General Laws of Capi-
talism," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 29(1), 3-28.
                                                                                      35

D. Acemoglu and P. Restrepo (2018), "The Race Between Man and Machine: Implica-
tions of Technology for Growth, Factor Shares and Employment," American Economic
Review, 108(6): 1488-1542.

-------------------------- (2019), "Automation and New Tasks: How Technology
Displaces and Reinstates Labor," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(2): 3-30.

P. Aghion, B. Jones, and C. Jones (2019), "Artificial Intelligence and Economic Growth,"
in Ajay Agrawal, Joshua Gans and Avi Goldfarb (eds), The Economics of Artificial In-
telligence: An Agenda, National Bureau of Economic Research.

K.J. Arrow (1951), "Alternative Proof of the Substitution Theorem for Leontief mod-
els in the General Case". In Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation, ed. T.C.
Koopmans. New York: John Wiley.

D. Autor, D. Dorn, L.F. Katz, C. Patterson and J. van Reenen (2017), "Concentrating
on the Fall of the Labor Share," American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings,
107(5), 180-185.

J. Azar and X. Vives (2018), "Oligopoly, Macroeconomic Performance, and Competi-
tion Policy," mimeo., IISE Business School, Barcelona.

A. Banerjee and A. Newman (1993), "Occupational Choice and the Process of Devel-
opment." Journal of Political Economy 101, 274­298.

J.I. Bernstein and M.I. Nadiri (1988), "Interindustry R&D Spillovers, Rates of Return,
and Production In High-Tech Industries," American Economic Review - AEA Papers and
Proceedings, 78, No. 2, pp. 429-434, May 1988.

R. Chirinko and D. Mallick (2014), "The Substitution Elasticity, Factor Shares, Long
Run Growth and the Low Frequency Panel Model," Working Paper, University of Illinois
at Chicago.

D. Comin, A. Danieli and M. Mestieri (2019), "Income-Driven Labor Market Polariza-
tion," Working Paper.
36

G. Eggertsson, J. Robbins, and E.G. Wold (2018), "Kaldor and Piketty's Facts: The Rise
of Monopoly Power in the United States," mimeo.

O. Galor and J. Zeira (1993), "Income Distribution and Macroeconomics." Review of
Economic Studies 60, 35­52.

S. Grossman and O. Hart (1979), "A Theory of Competitive Equilibrium in Stock Market
Economies," Econometrica 47, 293­330.

G. Guti´
       errez and T. Philippon (2017), ""Declining Competition and Investment in the
U.S," mimeo., NYU Stern.

W. Johnson (2018), "Economic Growth and the Evolution of Comparative Advantage
in an Occupation-Based Network of Industries," PhD dissertation, Department of Eco-
nomics, Boston University.

L. Karabarbounis and B. Neiman (2014), "The Global Decline of the Labor Share,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 61-103.

L. Ljungqvist (1993), "Economic Underdevelopment: The Case of Missing Market for
Human Capital," Journal of Development Economics 40, 219­239.

L. Makowski (1980), "Perfect Competition, the Profit Criterion, and the Organization of
Economic Activity," Journal of Economic Theory 22, 222­42.

G. Mankiw (2015), "Yes r > g . So What?" American Economic Review (Papers and
Proceedings) 105, 43­47.

D. Mookherjee and D. Ray (2002), "Is Equality Stable?," American Economic Review
92 (Papers and Proceedings), 253­259.

D. Mookherjee and D. Ray (2003), "Persistent Inequality," Review of Economic Studies
70, 369­394.

D. Mookherjee and D. Ray (2010), "Inequality and Markets: Some Implications of Oc-
cupational Diversity," American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 2, 38­76.
                                                                                    37

J. P. Neary (2003), "Globalization and Market Structure," Journal of the European Eco-
nomic Association 1, 245­271.

D. Ray (2015), "Nit-Piketty: A Comment on Thomas Piketty's Capital in the Twenty
First Century," CESifo Forum 16 (1), 19­25.

P. A. Samuelson (1951) "Abstract of a Theorem concerning Substitutability in Open
Leontief Models". in Activity Analysis of Production and Allocation, ed. T.C. Koop-
mans. New York: John Wiley.

S. Santens (2016), "Robots Will Take Your Job," The Boston Globe, February 24.

H. Uzawa (1961-2), "On a Two-Sector Model of Economic Growth," Review of Eco-
nomic Studies 29, 40­47.

J. von Neumann (and A. Burns) (1966), Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, Univer-
sity of Illinois Press.
