                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       POLITICAL ACTIVISM AND THE PROVISION OF DYNAMIC INCENTIVES

                                         Antoine Camous
                                         Russell Cooper

                                       Working Paper 26654
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26654


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




Thanks to Andrea Mattozzi, Guido Tabellini, Fritz Sager and seminar participants at University of
Mannheim, European University Institute and Harvard CES. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Antoine Camous and Russell Cooper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Political Activism and the Provision of Dynamic Incentives
Antoine Camous and Russell Cooper
NBER Working Paper No. 26654
January 2020, Revised April 2020
JEL No. D72,D74,E62,H31

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper studies the determination of income taxes in a dynamic setting with human capital accumulation.
The goal is to understand the factors that support an outcome without complete redistribution, given
a majority of relatively poor agents. In the analysis, the internal dynamics of income are not sufficient
to prevent complete redistribution under majority rule without commitment. However, a political influence
game limits the support for expropriatory taxation and preserves incentives. In some cases, the outcome
of the game corresponds with the optimal allocation under commitment.


Antoine Camous
University of Mannheim
Department of Economics
L7 3-5 68131
Mannheim,
Germany
camous@uni-mannheim.de

Russell Cooper
Department of Economics
European University Institute
Villa La Fonte
Via delle Fontanelle 18
I-50014 San Domenico di Fiesole (FI)
ITALY
and NBER
russellcoop@gmail.com
           Political Activism and the Provision of Dynamic Incentives:
                       Growing the Pie in the Battle for Redistribution

                                             Antoine Camous, Russell Cooper

                                                           April 8, 2020



                                                              Abstract

          This paper studies the determination of income taxes in a dynamic setting with human capital accumulation.
       The goal is to understand the factors that support an outcome without complete redistribution, given a majority
       of relatively poor agents. In the analysis, the internal dynamics of income are not sufficient to prevent complete
       redistribution under majority rule without commitment. However, a political influence game limits the support
       for expropriatory taxation and preserves incentives. In some cases, the outcome of the game corresponds with
       the optimal allocation under commitment.

    Keywords: activism, electoral competition, commitment, redistribution, human capital.


    JEL classification: D72, D74, E62, H31.




1     Introduction
Income distributions are asymmetric, with a majority of agents earning below average income. However, in contrast
to predictions of simple models of electoral competition, labor income taxes are progressive but far from confiscatory.
Accordingly, this paper asks: what factors constrain the relatively poor from expropriating the income and wealth
of the relatively rich?
    In a seminal contribution, B´
                                enabou and Ok (2001) provides two key conditions, based upon the promise of
upward mobility (POUM), that alter the incentives of the relatively poor to tax the rich. First, a change in the tax
structure must be permanent, or at least difficult to undo. Second, there must be sufficient mobility in the income
distribution over time: the poor of today recognize that they may be the wealthy of tomorrow. Hence, they are
not in favor of high tax rates on the rich today since these same rates are likely to apply to them in the future.1
     Thanks   to Andrea Mattozzi, Guido Tabellini, Fritz Sager and seminar participants at University of Mannheim, European University
Institute and Harvard CES.
    Department of Economics, University of Mannheim, camous@uni-mannheim.de
    Department of Economics, European University Institute, russellcoop@gmail.com
   1 A third necessary condition for POUM to hold is that individuals are not too risk averse so that poor agents find it attractive to

be rich in the future.



                                                                   1
If, to the contrary, there is either insufficient mobility or sufficient flexibility in the tax system, then the relatively
poor will favor the immediate and complete taxation of the rich.
    The analysis of B´
                     enabou and Ok (2001) imposes an exogenous dynamic on the income distribution and thus
misses adverse incentive effects stemming from redistribution. In contrast, our analysis considers an explicit human
capital decision that is forward looking and thus dependent on future taxation. This choice may be interpreted as
formal education or more broadly as the accumulation of experience and the generation of ideas. The interaction of
individual education decisions with the underlying distribution of ability implies that the dynamics of the income
distribution do not satisfy the POUM conditions.2
    Along with the consideration of incentives, timing matters: are taxes set prior to the human capital decision?
If we maintain commitment to ex ante tax choices, as in B´
                                                         enabou and Ok (2001), then simple majority voting
implements a social optimal level of taxes, not full redistribution. However, in the absence of commitment, taxes
are set after the education choice: majority voting implements full redistribution, which in turns eliminates private
incentives to invest in human capital.
    Thus in our environment with endogenous mobility, no commitment and majority voting over taxes, the POUM
hypothesis does not hold: the relatively poor will vote for complete redistribution. This first result motivates our
analysis of alternative political institutions that might restrain full redistribution.
    This study deviates from standard electoral competition in two ways: probabilistic voting and activism. As
in Lindbeck and Weibull (1987), probabilistic voting introduces stochastic elements into individual political pref-
erences, interpreted as evaluations of politicians beyond their economic platforms. This framework allows other
factors to influence voters' perceptions of a candidate, including the persuasive efforts of activism.
    Our notion of activism relates to the analysis of "political competition among pressure groups" conceptualized
by Becker (1983): Political influence is not simply fixed by the political process but can be expanded by expenditures
of time and money on campaign contributions, political advertising and in other ways that exert political pressure.3
Hence, activism embodies the idea that individuals, acting through groups, take joint actions to influence political
opinions. This may take a variety of forms, ranging from direct persuasion within social circles to influencing public
opinion through media and online campaigns. Overall, activism by large income groups "distorts" the political
ideal of one person, one vote.
    We embed these political institutions in a dynamic model to study the interaction between human capital
accumulation, electoral competition and activism. In our analysis, activism, viewed as a continuous process,
shapes individual policy preferences prior to the education decision, and these effects persist over the lifetime of
an individual.4 Through the persuasion of voters, activism impacts electoral outcomes, and in turn influences
   2 In B´enabou and Ok (2001), an essential condition for POUM to hold is that the income transition function displays negative
skewness in the future: for the relatively poor median voter today to vote against redistribution tomorrow, it must be that she becomes
richer than average tomorrow. Even with uncertainty, this is an unattractive description of income distributions. In our environment,
the evolution of the income distribution is endogenous, but positive skewness is preserved.
   3 Similarly, building on the pioneering work by Olson (1965) on collective action and the paradox of coordination, Maisel, Berry,

Edwards, and Schlozman (2010) argue that formal and institutionalized interest groups are only a part of the set of organizations that
represent collective interests in politics: influence activities are undertaken by a multitude of organizations with diverse memberships,
structures and purposes, generating a heavenly chorus of interests.
   4 The central idea is that voter's policy preferences are shaped by social context and continuous information rather than specific

electoral communication, as argued by Beck, Dalton, Greene, and Huckfeldt (2002). Using a panel dataset around elections in OECD
countries, Pennec and Pons (2019) find that changes in vote choice during electoral seasons are mostly driven by changes in beliefs about
candidates and policy salience, while policy preferences remain stable over time. The social origin of policy preferences is illustrated
by Alesina and Fuchs-Sch¨  undeln (2007): they contrast East and West German policy preferences and find that 45 years of heavy state



                                                                   2
education choices and candidates' redistributive platforms: our results point to the social gains from a political
system with activism under a lack of commitment.
    Indeed, when income groups organize as activists to influence the political preferences of voters, the equilibrium
outcome no longer coincides with full redistribution. As the analysis makes clear, there are conflicts across influence
groups: rich income activists support the low tax candidate while poor income agents promote the high tax one.
But all influence groups internalize the benefits of preserving dynamic incentives. This provides a basis for relatively
rich households to contribute more in favor of low taxes and, at the same time, motivates the relatively poor to
advocate less in favor of high taxes.5 Overall, activism induces the relatively poor to vote for lower tax rates.
    Candidates, in deciding on their policy platforms, internalize how activism will tilt voters preferences toward (or
away from) their proposed redistribution rate. In equilibrium, activism eliminates the incentive for candidates to
form a coalition around full redistribution. When the impact of activism is sufficiently strong on voter's preferences,
the disciplining effect on candidates is powerful enough that the ex ante social optimum allocation with commitment
is supported in equilibrium.
    There are three important elements of our findings. First, our environment does not impose any asymmetry
across income groups in terms of participation or activism technology.6 The outcome of less than full redistribution
reflects the fact that all groups benefit from the dynamic incentives created by lower taxes. Activism provides a
mechanism for the expression of these preferences.7 Second, the level of activism that arises is the outcome of
strategic interaction between interest groups and politicians. Each group activism choice is a function of competing
policy platforms and also a best response to all other groups influence decision. Third, as explained in detail,
the beneficial effects of activism arise even though along the equilibrium path, the level of activism is zero by all
groups. Thus, it is the credible threat of activism that creates the incentive for candidates to lower taxes below full
redistribution.8 A deviation from the equilibrium level of taxation towards more redistribution would incentivize
activism and lead to a lower probability of winning the election.
    Section 2 discusses related literature. Section 3 presents the economic environment. Section 4 derives a policy
benchmark under commitment and discusses limits to political decentralization. Section 5 studies how political
activism shapes economic outcomes under electoral competition. All derivations and proofs are detailed in an
Appendix.



2     Literature
This section contains a review of the related literature with a focus on the political economy of redistribution,
dynamic incentives under a lack of commitment and activism. Specific papers that relate to the model and findings
are discussed in the analysis.
intervention and indoctrination instill in people the view that the state is essential for individual well-being., i.e., preferences are long
lasting and individual social experience shapes economic beliefs - for instance toward redistribution.
    5 Importantly, the poor need to participate in the activism game to mitigate the low tax preferences of the rich.
    6 Prominent studies rely on exogenous asymmetries to avoid outcomes with full redistribution: B´   enabou (2000) assumes exogenous
differences in voting participation or Persson and Tabellini (2002) assume exogenous differential mass of swing voters across the
population. Section 5.4 studies how asymmetries in activism technology influence our results.
    7 To be clear, without human capital accumulation, our model is static and activism has no social value: full redistribution is the

equilibrium outcome.
    8 In an extension, we consider the possibility that candidates are interested in the policy implemented. This generates an outcome

with activism in equilibrium. See Section 5.4.


                                                                     3
    There is a large literature relating political institutions and redistribution, see Persson and Tabellini (2002)
and Alesina and Giuliano (2011) for reviews. In the classic analysis by Meltzer and Richard (1981), democratic
enfranchisement leads to higher tax rates, higher redistribution and lower inequality. Alesina and Ferrara (2005)
presents empirical evidences that income level explains individual preferences for redistribution. The puzzle remains:
why don't we observe higher level of redistribution? The literature has considered four broad explanations.
    First, democracy is imperfect. De jure or de facto elements break the ideal of one person, one vote and provide
higher relative influence to richer agents. Examples include one dollar, one vote as in Karabarbounis (2011),
implications of legislative bargaining as in Mattozzi and Snowberg (2018) or differential voting participation as in
B´
 enabou (2000). Second, individuals might internalize either the benefits of low taxes from social mobility, as in
B´
 enabou and Ok (2001), or various externalities from inequality and redistribution. Third, following Piketty (1995),
some authors emphasize that voters are confronted with imperfect information on the origin of income inequality.
This generates multiple systems of beliefs consistent with different levels of redistribution, as for instance in Alesina
and Angeletos (2005), B´                            enabou (2008).9 Finally, fully redistributive tax schedules
                       enabou and Tirole (2006) or B´
are costly to implement under asymmetric information, because incentives must be provided for agents to report
their income truthfully. Bierbrauer and Boyer (2013) and Bierbrauer and Boyer (2015) study the efficiency of
political competition under this informational friction.
    Our analysis introduces activism: a non-cooperative game across interest groups that compete to influence
political opinion and redistributive outcomes. Becker (1983) presents a related theory, where competition among
pressure groups to curry favor from politicians leads to beneficial economic outcomes. Political environments with
strategic group choice also include the ethical voter's models by Coate and Conlin (2004) or Feddersen and Sandroni
(2006), where voter's turnout is endogenous: individuals weigh voting participation cost against the benefits to their
affiliated group. Bierbrauer, Tsyvinski, and Werquin (2017) develop this idea in a static game of redistribution.
The participation margin induces left-leaning parties not to propose high tax rates, to demobilize rich agents from
voting.10 Similarly, our analysis emphasizes the implications of competition among interest groups, but our focus
lies on the dynamic benefits in an environment with a lack of commitment.
    Several studies consider the implications of a lack of commitment on the political economy of dynamic taxation.11
These include for instance Acemoglu, Golosov, and Tsyvinski (2010), where elections operate as a disciplining device
on politicians to implement tax schedules similar to the one that would prevail under commitment. Our analysis
rests on an original mechanism - the power of persuasion - to eliminate the socially undesirable outcome of excessive
redistribution. In our model, democracy is imperfect in the sense that activism induces an equilibrium outcome
aligned with the economic interests of the rich at the time of the vote. But the effect of group activism on voter's
preferences leads to the electoral defeat of highly redistributive platforms and provides dynamic economic benefits
to everyone.
   9 Alesina, Stantcheva, and Teso (2018) document how beliefs about intergenerational mobility affect preferences for redistribution

using cross-country surveys.
  10 Levine and Mattozzi (2018) develop this framework to study social norm enforcement of voter turnout with costly peer punishment.
  11 Farhi, Sleet, Werning, and Yeltekin (2012) or Scheuer and Wolitzky (2016) study nonlinear capital taxation under exogenous and

partial commitment and various political protocols. To be clear, in the absence of commitment, full redistribution is the equilibrium
outcome in their environment.




                                                                 4
3     Environment
Consider a two period t = 1, 2 economy populated by a continuum of agents. Agents at t = 1 differ in ability
  log N (m,  2 ), with cumulative distribution function noted F (). They decide on education which influences
next period's income.12 At t = 2, agents are subject to productive idiosyncratic shocks. Taxes and transfers are
applied to period 2 gross income, then agents consume net income. The economic channels of fiscal policy are
multiple: it redistributes income across the population, provides insurance against idiosyncratic shocks and distorts
dynamic choices.
    The specific functional forms adopted here are chosen to highlight transparently the interplay between political
institutions, growth and redistribution. Appendix D recasts our game without these functional assumptions and
establishes sufficient conditions that support our central result.


3.1       Individual dynamic choice
An agent with ability  at t = 1 invests in education e to maximize lifetime utility:


                                                  max log(c) + Ez, log(c ) ,                                                       (1)
                                                    e


subject to:


                               c=-e                                         budget constraint t = 1                                (2)
                               = z e                                        gross income t = 2                                     (3)
                                      1- ¯ 
                              c =                                           net income t = 2                                       (4)


An agent with ability  is referred to as a type  agent.
    Equation (2) is the period 1 budget constraint: gross income is either consumed or spent on education. The wage
is normalized at unity so that labor income is equated to initial ability . Equation (3) is the dynamic evolution of
human capital and hence income. Both current ability  and education choice e determine future income  up to
                                             w2  2
an idiosyncratic shock z  log N -            2 ,w .     The parameters  > 0 and   0 measure respectively depreciation
                                                 13
of human capital and return to education.
    Fiscal policy in period 2 is summarized by (4). The isoelastic tax function is common in the literature on
progressive labor taxes: the higher the redistribution rate   [0, 1], the lower the dispersion of net income.14 From
an ex ante perspective, the redistribution is a form of insurance against variations in z .
   ¯ is a break-even income level which sorts the population in net beneficiaries and contributors. The expectation
   
operator in (1) reflects uncertainty over the magnitude of taxes and transfers  . The institutional structure that
determines the period 2 tax rate will be a key element in the analysis.
  12 Throughout   wages are set to unity so that human capital and income are the same.
  13 By  design, individual education is not directly influenced by the human capital decisions of others. This allows to isolate the
interaction of agents through fiscal policy.
  14 B´
      enabou (2000), B´  enabou (2002) and Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2017), among others, adopt a similar tax function.
Under this specification, agents report their true income to the tax authority. Ex post incentives to misreport income are not included
in this analysis, allowing us to focus on the ex ante adverse incentive effects of taxation on human capital accumulation.



                                                                  5
   The optimal education choice satisfies:


                                                            e(, ¯) = (¯
                                                                       ),                                                          (5)

                                                                                  (1-¯)
where                                                     ) 
      ¯ is the expected average redistribution rate, and (¯                     1+ (1-¯)    is an education rate common to all
agents. In the limit case of extreme redistribution, i.e.  = ¯ = 1, there is no private return to education, so that
in period 2 agents have zero income and thus zero consumption. This highlights the incentive effects of the labor
tax.


Evolution of the income distribution. Gross income at t = 2 is log-normally distributed, with mean m and
standard deviation  given by:

                                                                                     w2
                                                m = ( +  )m +  log             ) -
                                                                              (¯        ,                                          (6)
                                                                                     2
                                                  2
                                                      = ( +  )2  2 + w2 .                                                          (7)


Fiscal intervention. Through taxes and transfers, determined by  , the fiscal intervention is purely redistribu-
tive. The critical income level ¯ sorts agents in net contributors  > ¯ and net beneficiaries   ¯ . It reads:

                                                                         2
                                                           ¯) = m +    
                                                       log(              (2 -  ).                                                  (8)
                                                                       2

Note the dual influence of redistribution on   ¯ . First, average log-income m is a function of education and the
expected tax rate ¯, as explicit in (6). Second, ¯ is directly decreasing in  : the share of the population that pays
more taxes than it receives transfers is increasing in the magnitude of the redistributive program.
  This expression makes clear that     ¯ also reflects the tax base for redistributive policies. Hence, through (8) the
model contains a fiscal externality. If all agents in the economy increase their education level, then  ¯ will increase,
as well as the consumption of all agents. Though no single agent takes this into account in making its education
choice, both ex ante bliss tax policies and group choices will internalize this effect, as developed below.


3.2    Value functions and bliss policies.
To highlight the influence of redistribution on individual preferences and welfare, we contrast individual bliss policies
at two points in time: before agents form an education choice at t = 1, and after, at t = 2, when idiosyncratic
uncertainty remains.15


At t = 1, before agents choose education. Let V1 (,  ) be the value function of an agent of type  evaluating
a rate of fiscal redistribution  :

                                                                                                w2          ¯) .
                    V1 (,  ) = log  - ( ) +  (1 -  )  log() +  log                    ( ) -          +  log(                       (9)
                                                                                                2
                                                                             =Ez log( )|

 15 This   timing allows the exogenous component of mobility to shape individual preferences. It is maintained throughout the analysis.


                                                                   6
There are two ways in which  influences V1 (,  ). First, the individual education decision e(,  ) = ( ) is sensitive
to  , as explicit in (5). Second, the fiscal tax base, captured by the government break-even income level    ¯ (8),
responds to the tax rate as well.
                                                                                                                   dV1 (·)
     The favorite redistribution rate   () of a type  agent is the tax rate   [0, 1] that solves                    d        = 0. From
the first-order condition, it is implicitly given by:

                                                                                                 d ( )
                         ( +  ) m - log() +  ( +  )2  2 + w2 (1 -  ) +                                 = 0.                       (10)
                                                                                                ( ) d
                                                                =   2




     The first two terms in this expression capture the relative support for redistribution. At least all agents with
income below (log) median level m benefits (on average) from redistributive policies. Also, an increase in individual
risk w2 generates higher desire for insurance via redistribution across the population. The third term is the elasticity
of the education rate ( ) to redistribution  . It is negative and captures the willingness to preserve individual
dynamic incentives against distortionary redistribution. It is straightforward to show that   () < 1 is unique and
decreasing in : higher income agents prefer lower rates of redistribution.16


At t = 2, after individual choices. Let V2 (,  | ) be the value function of a type  agent after t = 1 consumption
and education choices, before a realization of idiosyncratic risk z .17

                                                                                   w2           ¯) .
                              V2 (,  | ) =  (1 -  )  log() +  log( ) -                   +  log(                                  (11)
                                                                                   2
                                                                 =Ez log( )|


At that stage, education levels are no longer sensitive to tax policies  : the education rate
                                                                                          is a sufficient statistic
to describe individual education e =  and the aggregate tax base. But, the break even income level  ¯ is sensitive
to  insofar that it sorts agents between contributors and beneficiaries of the tax program, given average log income
m.
                                                                                      dV2 (·)
     The favorite redistribution rate  d () is either an interior solution to          d        = 0:


                                   ( +  ) m - log() +  ( +  )2  2 + w2 (1 -  ) = 0,                                               (12)
                                                                         =   2




or the corner solution  d () = 1 for lower income agents.18 Further, as education is realized, there is no term
capturing dynamic incentives effect of redistribution, in contrast to (10). This expression reflects otherwise the
relative preferences for redistribution, decreasing with income, and desire of insurance against idiosyncratic shocks.
     Figure 1 represents bliss policies before and after education, respectively   () and  d (). Favorite redistribution
rates are decreasing in income . When agents internalize the effect of taxes on incentives, they favor lower rates
  16 For formal derivations, see Appendix A. This expression reflects in part our assumptions on preferences and distributions. But

the generic trade-offs embedded in the interactions between dynamic choices and redistributive policies generalize to less restrictive
preference and technology specifications, as shown in Appendix D.
  17 Given that the ranking of income before the realization of idiosyncratic uncertainty is maintained over time, we continue to order

agents by initial income  and CDF F ().
  18 Note that bliss policies  d ( ) are only a function of income, not education : the size of the tax base is irrelevant and only

redistributive conflicts determine bliss policies.



                                                                  7
than they would after education is made:   ()   d () for all . Finally, after education, a majority supports
complete redistribution.19


                                                  Figure 1: Individual Bliss Policies

                                           1

                                         0.9

                                         0.8

                                         0.7

                                         0.6

                                         0.5

                                         0.4

                                         0.3

                                         0.2

                                         0.1

                                           0
                                           -2.5   -2    -1.5      -1   -0.5   0   0.5   1   1.5   2   2.5


             This figure represents bliss policies before and after education, as a function of (log) income. Favorite rates
             are decreasing in income and agents support higher levels of redistribution once education is made. The
             yellow dashed line shows the underlying distribution of log-income. [Illustrative calibration:  = 0.96,
              =  = 0.3, all other parameters set to 1.]




4         Outcomes under Commitment:  
Policy maker with commitment. Before formally defining political protocols, we characterize a key normative
benchmark. Assume the policy choice is made by a benevolent policy maker at t = 1 with commitment. That is,
taxes are chosen prior to the education choice and ex post are not subject to change.20
    Formally, a benevolent policy maker with commitment chooses a tax rate   to maximize expected utility over
the population:


                                                             max          V1 (,  )dF ().                                           (13)
                                                                       


    Using (10),    (0, 1) is the solution to:

                                                                                         d ( )
                                          ( +  )2  2 + w2 (1 -  ) +                            = 0.                                (14)
                                                                                        ( ) d
                                                    =    2




    The terms in this expression highlight how   = 1 balances (average) preferences for redistribution / insurance
and incentives. The first term captures the insurance over ability  and human capital risk z . The optimal rate of
redistribution is increasing in income inequality  2 and idiosyncratic risk w2 .21
  19 The   presence of positive skewness, as in the data of most if not all countries, is maintained throughout our analysis.
  20 In  contrast taxes set without commitment are chosen in period 2, after the education decision.
  21 If redistribution over initial income  were allowed, this would decrease initial income inequality and decrease the optimal rate of

redistribution. But the commitment tension at the heart of the mechanism would be maintained.



                                                                              8
    The second term captures the negative effect of higher taxes on human capital accumulation. The magnitude
of this effect is parameterized by the return to education  . But the overall effect of  on   is ambiguous, since it
contributes both to higher return to education but also to income dispersion.


Political decentralization. This allocation can be decentralized through simple electoral competition with
majority voting.22 Interestingly, this does not depend on the timing of the vote relative to the realization of ability,
. But it is critical that the vote is taken prior to education decisions.
    First, suppose majority voting were to take place before the realization of ability. In this case, all agents are
identical and their preferred tax policy would coincide with   defined in (14). There is no conflict behind the veil
of ignorance. Second, suppose the vote on the tax rate takes place after the realization of ability. Now there are
well defined rich and poor agents. But key to the outcome is whether the vote takes place before or after education
choices.

Proposition 1. The allocation under   can be decentralized under electoral competition with majority voting if
voting takes place before the education choice. If, instead, voting takes place after education, then full redistribution
is the outcome of electoral competition.

    In the first case majority voting does yield the efficient outcome   , without full redistribution. The channel
though differs from that identified in the POUM argument. In our environment with human capital accumulation,
the median voter, in determining a preferred tax, internalizes the effects of taxes on the education choice of all
others, and accordingly the size of the tax base m for fiscal interventions, as explicit in (9). The critical element
for this result is the timing: taxes are set prior to education choices.
    In contrast, if majority voting were to happen after education, individual agents would no longer internalize
the effect of policies on education, as discussed in Section (3.2). This yields an outcome of full redistribution, as it
coincides with the bliss policy of a majority of the population, see Figure 1. In these circumstances, the anticipation
of full redistribution eliminates private incentives to invest in human capital.


5     Probabilistic voting and activism
A key result from the previous section is that majority voting can support the efficient tax rate   iif the vote is
taken prior to the education choice. To the extent that education decisions are made before the determination of
taxes, the challenge is to identify conditions such that incentives for human capital accumulation are preserved.
    Our focus is on the political system. In our setting, candidates propose tax rates to maximize vote share. We
augment the environment with a political protocol that combines pre-election politics and probabilistic voting.
Probabilistic voting follows Lindbeck and Weibull (1987): agents evaluate candidates based upon their preferred
tax rates and another dimension that reflects political preferences. Political activism has an impact on the voting
outcome through this second dimension.
    Specifically, at the activism stage, agents with similar income levels organize as influence groups and decide
cooperatively on non-pecuniary contributions to influence voters political preferences. Influence groups are self-
  22 Simple electoral competition follows standard exposition in Persson and Tabellini (2002): two office seeking candidates propose

competing policy platforms. An equilibrium policy survives pairwise evaluation to all possible policy alternative.


                                                                 9
interested and large, in the sense that their actions can influence the voting outcome. Activism takes place prior to
the education choice and after the candidates have chosen their tax platforms. This reflects the idea that activism
is an ongoing process in contrast to electoral campaigns and elections that take place at discrete points in time.
Of course, candidates appreciate that their choice of policy platforms can elicit a response through the level and
direction of political activism.
   In equilibrium, activism matters and can push the outcome away from complete redistribution despite lack of
commitment. With this reduction in the probability of high taxes, agents retain an incentive to invest in human
capital. As the influence of activism on voters' preferences grow, the outcome of the game converges to the ex
ante efficient outcome   . Interestingly, there is no activism along the equilibrium path. The credible prospect of
activism is enough to discipline candidates.
   These findings rest on two key properties of the model, established above. First, the POUM argument fails in
our environment so that, absent commitment, tax rates are set at unity by all candidates. Second, with a positive
return to education  > 0, the optimal tax rate is less than unity for all types:   () < 1 for all . In effect, all
agents want to have taxes less than unity to preserve dynamic incentives but, without commitment, cannot achieve
this outcome under simple electoral competition. Anticipating the activism response of interest groups, a candidate
has an incentive to choose a tax platform lower than unit and increase the probability of winning the election. This
argument is shown for our specific model in the analysis that follows and is presented in a more general setting in
the Appendix D.


5.1    Timing of the game
The timing highlights both that human capital is determined prior to the vote on taxes and how activism influences
the election outcome. Formally, the sequence of events is:

   i. Choice of platforms: two office seeking candidates from competing parties L and H propose redistributive
      platforms l  h .

  ii. Pre-election politics: activism.

  iii. Individual choice at t = 1: agents, given their type , chooses consumption and education e.

  iv. Political preferences: individuals are subject to idiosyncratic and aggregate political preference shocks.

  v. Vote: given policy platforms and political preferences, agents participate in a majority election and the winning
      candidate takes office.

  vi. Realizations of individual income shock z , tax and transfer and t = 2 consumption.

   This timing calls for some comments. First, individual income uncertainty realizes after the vote, to give a
chance, as in POUM, for insurance and upward mobility to influence the vote against the most redistributive
policy platforms. Second, the vote takes place after the education choice, precisely to investigate whether highly
redistributive platforms would emerge without commitment. Finally, activism takes place at a pre-election stage,
allowing it to shape individual political preferences and in turn candidates policy platforms.


                                                         10
   In order to isolate the effects of activism from the other elements of the political protocol, the first step is to
characterize the political equilibrium of this game without activism. As we demonstrate, the outcome coincides
with ex post simple majority rule: complete redistribution. Thus the results of Proposition 1 extend to a setting
with probabilistic voting without activism.


5.2     No Activism
Absent pre-election politics, policy platforms (l , h ) are decided by office seeking candidates anticipating the
outcome of the probabilistic vote. The following exposition derives from the sequential nature of the game.


Voting outcome. Given policy platforms (l , h ) and education rate , individuals trade off political and economic
preferences and cast their vote sincerely. They evaluate policy platforms l  h according to the value function
V2 (,  | ) along with the realizations of idiosyncratic  and aggregate  political preference shocks for candidate
L. A type  agent with education e =  votes for party H if and only if:


                                               V2 (, h | ) > V2 (, l | ) +  + .                                              (15)


As in Persson and Tabellini (2002), these shocks are distributed as:

                                                1 1                                    1 1
                                      U -        ,                     U -              ,  .                                 (16)
                                               2 2                                    2 2

They differ only because the average of the idiosyncratic shock  across the population is zero, while  is common
across agents.23
   Given a realization of aggregate preference  , let (,  ) be the swing voter for agents with income : type 
agents vote for party H if and only if   (,  ). From (15),


                                      (,  ) = V2 (, h | ) - V2 (, l | ) -  = V2 () - ,                                       (17)


where V2 () is the economic gain (or loss) to agents with initial income  of h over l :

                                                                                  2
                                                                                
                              V2 () =  (h - l ) ( +  ) m - log() +                (2 - h - l ) .                             (18)
                                                                                2

This expression makes clear that (,  ) and V2 () do not depend on the actual education rate , as individual
preferences are only driven by distributional conflicts at this stage. The vote share for party H within group  and
across the population are:

                                (, )
                                                             1
                   ,h ( ) =             dj =  (,  ) +                              h ( ) =       ,h ( )dF ().                (19)
                               - 21
                                  
                                                            2                                 

 23 Though these shocks determine political preferences for candidate L, they impact the voting outcome symmetrically. As shown in

Appendix C, the results not sensitive to the mean zero assumption, or to the strict majority requirement introduced below.




                                                                 11
   In a majority system, the probability ph that the candidate from party H wins the election is:


                                                     ph = P h ( )  1/2 .                                                       (20)


Combining previous expressions:24

                                                                       2
                                                1                            1
                                         ph =     +  (h - l )   (2 - h - l )  .                                                (21)
                                                2             2              2

   This expression highlights the tendency of the population to lean toward the most redistributive platform h .
When elections take place after the education choice, then a pure redistributive conflict drives economic preferences
of agents. As illustrated in Figure 1, the positive skewness of the income distribution provides a majority mass of
the population benefiting from high redistribution rates.


Choice of platforms.          A candidate from party H seeking to maximize its probability of winning chooses to
campaign on a redistributive program h that solves:


                                                         max ph (l , h ),                                                      (22)
                                                        h [0,1]


where ph (l , h ) is given by (21). The first order condition is:

                                                 dph (·)   2
                                                         =  (1 - h ) = 0.                                                      (23)
                                                  dh

h = 1 is a dominant strategy. The candidate from party L maximizes pl (l , h ) = 1 - ph (l , h ), and again l = 1
is a dominant strategy.

Proposition 2. The outcome of the game without pre-election politics is full redistribution  p = 1.

   Intuitively, the election takes place after education choices have been formed. Hence despite redistributive
conflicts, the median income agents with average political preferences support unconditionally a platform of full
redistribution. In this case, dynamic incentives cannot be preserved and the economy collapses. Probabilisitic
voting does not alter the outcome under ex post simple majority voting characterized in Proposition 1.25 This no
longer holds once we introduce activism as an avenue to influence political preferences and electoral outcomes.


5.3     Electoral Competition with Activism
We now consider the equilibrium of the game when agents can actively support candidates and platforms.26 By
activism, we mean non-pecuniary contributions aimed to influence political preferences of voters. Which income
groups promote the campaign of the high tax candidate? How does activism influence the probability of high taxes
  24 Naturally 0  p  1. We abstract from assumptions on parameters and restrictions on choices that are not relevant to characterize
                    h
equilibrium outcomes.
  25 Persson and Tabellini (2002) and B´enabou (2000) rely on exogenous asymmetry across income groups to generate outcomes of
electoral competition that do not coincide with full redistribution, see discussion in Section 5.4. Our analysis moves beyond this
exogenous source of asymmetry.
  26 The equilibrium concept is now two stage Nash equilibrium: first candidates choice of platforms and then activism effort.




                                                                  12
and equilibrium policy platforms? Eventually, does activism contribute to mitigate the high propensity of majority
systems to lean toward redistributive policies?
    We analyze activism intensity chosen by income groups and its impact on the voting outcome. The analysis
takes as given group membership and focuses on the intensive margin of group specific contributions.27 Groups are
large and thus internalize the effects of their actions on the voting outcome.


Activism impact on the voting outcome. After the announcement of policy platforms (l , h ), at the pre-
election stage, each income group  decides on (non-pecuniary) activism contributions Ah        l
                                                                                        0 and A  0 to
promote candidates and their economic platforms. Contributions influence political preferences of voters.
    At the time of the vote, these choices are all given. The vote reflects the economic valuations of policy platforms
along with political preferences. Note Ai =                
                                                              Ai
                                                                d the aggregated influence of activism for each candidate
i  {l, h}. Given Al , Ah , aggregate preference shock  , education rate                     and policy platforms (l , h ), an agent
with initial income  and preference shock  votes for party H if and only if:


                                         V2 (, h | ) > V2 (, l | ) +  +  +  (Al - Ah ),                                               (24)


where  > 0 measures how activism influences political preferences. The probability ph that party H wins the
election and h is implemented reads:

                                                 1
                                          ph =     +         V2 ()dF () +  (Ah - Al ).                                                (25)
                                                 2        


Superficially, the term  (Al - Ah ) seems only to shift the distribution of the aggregate political preference shock.
This misses an important dimension of the analysis: the choice of platforms is made anticipating the levels of
activism. In this way, the prospect of political influence impacts the electoral platforms of candidates.


Activism choice. Every income group is active. The objective of each group is to influence political preferences
of voters, with the goal of promoting their economic interests. In our setting, activism takes the form of effort,
whose cost appears as a utility loss.
    Given all other group activism decisions {Al    h
                                               - , A- } and competing platforms  = (l , h ), income group 
decides on total contributions Al   h
                                 , A :


                                                                         1
                                             max f ()V1 (,  ) -            (Al 2    h 2
                                                                              ) + (A ) .                                              (26)
                                           Al  h
                                             ,A 0
                                                                         2

    Here V1 (,  ) is the expected value of a type  household prior to the choice of education and to the election
  27 For expositional convenience, it is easier to work with a continuum of agents where each ability type is a distinct group. This allows

to highlight differential activism incentives across the income distribution. The same results would go through if agents would form
two groups campaigning exclusively for one candidate.




                                                                    13
outcome for given political platforms.28 It is similar to (9) but captures uncertainty over the tax rate   (l , h ):

                                                                                                     w2        ¯)
                    V1 (,  ) = E       log  - (¯
                                                ) +  (1 -  ) log() +  log( (¯
                                                                             )) -                       +  log(          ,            (27)
                                                                                                     2

   Activism internalizes the effect of contributions on the education rate (¯
                                                                             ) and the outcome of the vote, captured
by the probability ph that party H defeats party L, see (25). Income break even level      ¯ is a function of both ¯
and  , as explicit in (8). The group cost in (26) is assumed to be quadratic. One interpretation is there is a cost
of organization associated with activism that depends on the contributions of all members of the group.29
    The first order condition for Ai
                                     0, i  (l, h), is


                                                                   dV1 ()
                                                            f ()          = Ai
                                                                             .                                                        (28)
                                                                    dAi 


The sensitivity of group  welfare to activism is:30

                                                                          2
                         dV1 (·)                                         2                    (¯
                                                                                               )
                             i
                                 = ±   ( h
                                           - l
                                               ) (  +  ) m 1 - log(  ) +    (2 - h - l ) +  ¯     .                                   (29)
                          dA                                             2                    (¯
                                                                                                )

The first two terms reflects the relative position of group  in the income distribution and the preferences for
redistribution, as in (10).
    The last term reflects the effects of group contributions on the probability of high taxes and, through the
                                                                 ).31 This term is central to understand the
expected tax rate, on the common accumulation of human capital (¯
outcome of the activism game: regardless of an agent's position in the income distribution, this effect pushes in
the direction of low taxes since all agents prefer a large tax base.
    This last term is also the locus of strategic interactions, i.e. conflicts across the groups. Again, the decision
to support a low or high tax candidate as well as the magnitude of group contributions depend on the probability
ph , which hinges on overall activism across the population, as explicit in (25). As long as l < h , all groups are
active, and promote only one candidate: low income agents support only the champion of high taxes, while high
income agents only the candidate from party L. Importantly, the split of the population is endogenous. All groups
with initial income  < ^ contribute exclusively for h , where the cut-off income level ^ is given by:

                                                                     2
                                                ^) = m +   1                     (¯
                                                                                  )
                                            log(               (2 - h - l ) +  ¯    .                                                 (30)
                                                           + 2                   (¯
                                                                                  )

   Figure 2 report activism per capita ai     i                                 i
                                           = A /f ( ) and total group activism A for some policy platforms l < h .
Individual activism is increasing in the income difference |^ - |. Aggregate group effort is not monotonic, because
of the relative size f () of each income group. Finally, an increase in activism technology  has two effects: it
  28 The program (26) omits uncertainty regarding future political taste shocks. This does not change the analysis beyond overburdening

notations.
                                                                             i,j
                                                                             a
  29 If   the individual cost to agent j with income  of contributing ai,j
                                                                        is    2
                                                                                   ai              i
                                                                                     f ( ), where a is the average group contribution, then
                          2
                       Ai
                               (ai
                                  f ( ))
                                        2
total group costs is 2 =          2
                                        : individual cost is linear, but increases with group size and average contribution. Appendix D
discusses our main result under general technology and preferences.
  30 In this expression, ± = 1
                               i=h - 1i=l .
  31 Formally,  ¯ = ph h + (1 - ph )l .



                                                                     14
increases returns to activism but modifies the cut-off ^, i.e. it changes the composition of the population that
promotes one candidate or the other. Aggregating group contributions (28), one gets:

                                                                              2
                                                                                                 (¯
                                                                                                  )
                                           Ah - Al =  (h - l )                 (2 - h - l ) +  ¯    .                                              (31)
                                                                             2                   (¯
                                                                                                  )



                                                         Figure 2: Activism Contribution




         -2.5   -2    -1.5     -1   -0.5   0   0.5   1   1.5   2    2.5               -2.5   -2   -1.5   -1   -0.5   0   0.5   1   1.5   2   2.5



                             (a) Activism per capita                                                 (b) Total group activism
     This figure represents activism per capita (left panel) and total group contributions (right panel) given two policy
     platforms l = 1/4 and h = 3/4. Lighter lines correspond to higher values of  . Dashed yellow line reflects the
     distribution of (log) income. [Illustrative calibration:  = 0.96,  =  = 0.3, all other parameters set to 1]



Lemma 1. Given (l , h ), there is a unique Nash equilibrium of the activism subgame. The induced probability
that the high tax candidate wins the election is given by:

                                                                                  2
                                               1                                              (¯
                                                                                               )
                               ph (l , h ) =     +  (h - l ) (1 +  2 )   (2 - h - l ) +  2  ¯    .                                                 (32)
                                               2                       2                      (¯
                                                                                               )

   The probability of high taxes takes into account the aggregation of group activism (31) and reflects the resolution
of conflicts over redistribution. Importantly, this expression highlights the interactions of activism and human
capital accumulation in reducing the probability of high tax rates. In the absence of a return to education, i.e.
                1
 = 0, ph        2    as in (21). Only when  > 0 and  > 0 does the last term in (32) reduce the probability of high
taxes.


Choice of platforms. How does activism influence political competition and equilibrium incentives? At the
initial stage of the game, each candidate decides on its economic policy platform anticipating the effect of activism
on voters' political preferences and the outcome of the vote. Formally, candidate from party H sets h given l to
maximize (32):


                                                                    max ph (l , h ).                                                               (33)
                                                                   h [0,1]



                                                                             15
The first order condition leads to:

                                   2                            (¯
                                                                 )               dE (¯
                                                                                     )
                      (1 +  2 ) (1 - h ) +  2  ¯                   + (h - l ) 2        ph (l , h ) = 0,             (34)
                                                                (¯
                                                                 )                d ¯

                 (¯
                  )
where E (¯
         ) = ¯   (¯
                  )   < 0 is the elasticity of the education rate to the expected redistribution rate.
   The platform choice internalizes the effect of the tax rate on the outcome of the activism subgame. Again, it
highlights the interplay between activism and dynamic incentives. In the absence of dynamic choice, i.e. when
 = 0, activism and associated conflicts are irrelevant since h = 1 is a dominant strategy, as in (23). In contrast,
when  > 0, then activism induces strategic interactions across candidates. Figure (3) represents the best response
functions of each candidate for different level of activism technology  .

                                                Figure 3: Candidates Best Response
                                        1



                                       0.9



                                       0.8



                                       0.7



                                       0.6



                                       0.5



                                       0.4
                                          0.4       0.5   0.6       0.7   0.8    0.9    1


           This figure represents the best response function of candidates at the platform choice stage, without
           activism (l = 0) and with varying degrees of activism (h > m > 0). [Illustrative calibration:  = 0.96,
            =  = 0.3, all other parameters set to 1]



Lemma 2. There is a unique and symmetric Nash equilibrium  p = l = h that satisfies:

                                                      1   2           (¯
                                                                       )
                                                 1+     2
                                                           (1 -  ) +     = 0.                                       (35)
                                                                      (¯
                                                                       )

   Activism does not imply that parties have an incentive to differentiate from each other in equilibrium, but as
long as there are positive returns to education  > 0, the equilibrium no longer coincides with full redistribution.

Proposition 3. The equilibrium rate of redistribution  p differs from  = 1 if and only if  > 0 and  > 0.
Further, it is decreasing in activism intensity  , and in the limit case where  = +, the political game with
activism implements the socially desirable level of redistribution   .

   Along the equilibrium path of this game, there is no political activism since l = h =  p . Still activist groups
stand ready to influence voters political preferences if a candidate were to deviate from the equilibrium platform.
Also, the equilibrium platform reflects the relative power of influence groups. If, for instance, the candidate from
party L deviates from  p and runs on l <  p , then relatively poor agents would engage into activism to convince
voters away from this platform. And vice versa. This is the disciplining effect of activism on candidates.

                                                                   16
   The intensity of the activism technology  influences the equilibrium rate of redistribution  p via the conflictual
behavior across groups: for higher  , the disciplining effect of activism is stronger. Again, the response of education
to taxes, parameterized by  is necessary for this channel.
   Overall, activism is a complementary institution to majority voting to implement socially desirable policies in
a dynamic environment with lack of commitment. It matters because agents, regardless of their position in the
income distribution, appreciate the social benefit of human capital accumulation. So, as long as there is a response
of education to activism's effect on expected taxes,  > 0, the bias towards redistribution under simple majority
voting is, at least partially, redressed.


5.4     Extensions
This section studies two key extensions. What is the effect of asymmetry in activism technology on equilibrium
outcomes? And, how do office-seeking candidates also interested to the policy outcome interact?


Asymmetric influence. The equilibrium outcome with activism characterized in Proposition 3 does not rely
on exogenous asymmetry across groups to move away from full redistribution. In contrast, Persson and Tabellini
(2002) consider asymmetry in the mass of swing voters across the population as a necessary condition to avoid full
redistribution: when high income agents are more attractive targets to candidates, this reduces the likelihood of
high taxes.32
   In this section, we show that the introduction of asymmetry in activism technology might further reduce the
likelihood of high taxes. Formally, we consider a situation where income groups differ in their technology to
influence political preferences. The cost of contributing is decreasing in  , with                  
                                                                                                        d = 1. Given policy
platforms  = (l , h ) and other groups' contributions {Al    h
                                                        - , A- }, the activism choice of income group  is the
solution to:

                                                                    1
                                          max f ()V1 (,  ) -          (Al 2    h 2
                                                                         ) + (A ) .                                            (36)
                                        Al  h
                                          ,A 0
                                                                   2

Let  = cov( , log() be the covariance between income level and influence technology. The first order condition
for Ai
       0 then reads:


                                                             dV1 (,  )
                                                     f ()              = Ai
                                                                          .                                                    (37)
                                                               dAi


Group contribution is increasing in influence technology  . As E  log() = m1 +  , the probability ph (l , h )
of party H win is then implicitly defined by:

                                                                       2
                                 1                       1                        (¯
                                                                                   )
                 ph (l , h ) =     + ( )2  (h - l ) (1 +  2
                                                            )   (2 - h - l ) +  ¯    - ( +  ) .                                (38)
                                 2                            2                   (¯
                                                                                   )
                                               1
 32 Formally,  in our set up assume   U - 2       , 1 : if cov( , log()) < 0, then the outcome of the political game without
                                                  2
                  p
activism yields  < 1. See Appendix C.1 for explicit derivations. The same results hold if we allow differential voting participation
across income groups, as in B´enabou (2000).




                                                                17
A Nash equilibrium of the game across office seeking candidates  p = l = h is then the solution to:

                                                   1  2           (¯
                                                                   )
                                         1+            (1 -  ) +     - ( +  ) = 0.                                        (39)
                                                    2             (¯
                                                                   )

                          d p
   In that context,        d    < 0: the larger the influence of high income groups, the lower the equilibrium rate
of redistribution. Accordingly, a positive covariance between income level and activism technology can either
compensate a low aggregate activism technology  and bring the equilibrium level of redistribution toward the
optimal level or can tilt the policy rate towards partisan level of redistributions that are too low.


Citizen-office-seeking candidates. So far, candidates were simply interested in being elected. We now allow
candidates to obtain utility from office but also to be interested in the policy outcome. Specifically, they suffer
a loss that depends on the distance between their proposed tax and their bliss policy.33 This has two effects on
the equilibrium outcome. First, the proposed taxes by the two candidates are no longer equal. Second, there is
activism in equilibrium.
   Formally, the candidate from party H seeks to maximize the probability of getting elected, but would also like
                 
his bliss policy h to be implemented in equilibrium. Given l , this candidate solves the following program:

                                                                                                    2
                                                                                            - h
                                                   max µph + (1 - µ)E                                   ,                 (40)
                                                     h                                       2

where ph is given by (32). 0 < µ < 1 is a preference weight for being elected relative to the loss incurred as the
actual policy rate deviates from the candidate's bliss policy. The candidate from party L solves a similar program
with bliss policy l .


                                          Figure 4: Citizen-Candidates Best Response
                                           1

                                         0.95

                                          0.9

                                         0.85

                                          0.8

                                         0.75

                                          0.7

                                         0.65

                                          0.6

                                         0.55

                                          0.5
                                             0.5    0.55   0.6   0.65   0.7   0.75   0.8   0.85   0.9   0.95   1


            This figure represents the best response function of candidates at the platform choice stage, with µ = 1/2,
            l = 0, h  = 1. [Illustrative calibration:  = 0.96,  =  = 0.3, all other parameters set to 1]




   Figure 4 illustrates candidates' best responses and the equilibrium outcome: lp < h
                                                                                     p
                                                                                       since candidates offer
policy platforms that are now influenced by their individual preferences l < h
                                                                             
                                                                               . As explained in Section 5.3 and
 33 Discussions   with Annika Bacher led to the development of this case.


                                                                              18
explicit in (31), different policy platforms are associated in equilibrium with conflictual activism.



6      Conclusion
Empirically, labor taxes are progressive but do not expropriate all the earning of the rich to compensate the poor.
Instead, redistribution is limited. This paper studies the economic and political factors that limit redistribution in
a democracy.
     In the environment, the arguments put forth by B´
                                                     enabou and Ok (2001) do not hold: absent commitment and
despite the potential for upward mobility in the income distribution, the outcome under majority voting would be
complete redistribution. In our model, this implies no capital accumulation and thus a massive reduction in the
"economic pie".
     The analysis provides another mechanism: the power of persuasion. Coalitions of agents jointly decide on the
level of activism which can influence the political preferences of agents and thus voting outcomes. Majority voting
remains but the progress of political persuasion facilitates a redistribution of political power. Though there is
no commitment, the outcome with activism is closer to the efficient allocation: redistribution is incomplete and
incentives are retained for the accumulation of human capital.



References
Acemoglu, D., M. Golosov, and A. Tsyvinski (2010): "Dynamic Mirrlees Taxation under Political Economy
    Constraints," The Review of Economic Studies, 77(3), 841­881.

Alesina, A., and G.-M. Angeletos (2005): "Fairness and Redistribution," American Economic Review, 95(4),
    960­980.

Alesina, A., and E. L. Ferrara (2005): "Preferences for Redistribution in the Land of Opportunities," Journal
    of Public Economics, 89, 897­931.

                             ¨ ndeln (2007): "Goodbye Lenin (or Not?): The Effect of Communism on
Alesina, A., and N. Fuchs-Schu
    People's Preferences," American Economic Review, 97(4), 1507­1528.

Alesina, A., and P. Giuliano (2011): "Chapter 4 - Preferences for Redistribution," vol. 1 of Handbook of Social
    Economics, pp. 93 ­ 131. North-Holland.

Alesina, A., S. Stantcheva, and E. Teso (2018): "Intergenerational Mobility and Preferences for Redistribu-
    tion," American Economic Review, 108(2), 521­54.

Beck, P. A., R. J. Dalton, S. Greene, and R. Huckfeldt (2002): "The Social Calculus of Voting: Interper-
    sonal, Media, and Organizational Influences on Presidential Choices," The American Political Science Review,
    96(1), 57­73.

Becker, G. S. (1983): "A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political Influence," The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 98(3), 371­400.

                                                          19
Bierbrauer, F., A. Tsyvinski, and N. D. Werquin (2017): "Taxes and Turnout," Working Paper 24123,
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bierbrauer, F. J., and P. C. Boyer (2013): "Political competition and Mirrleesian income taxation: A first
  pass," Journal of Public Economics, 103, 1 ­ 14.

         (2015): "Efficiency, Welfare, and Political Competition," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 131(1),
  461­518.

 ´nabou, R. (2000): "Unequal Societies: Income Distribution and the Social Contract," American Economic
Be
  Review, 90(1), 96­129.

         (2002): "Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous-Agent Economy: What Levels of Redistribution
  Maximize Growth and Efficiency?," Econometrica, 70(2), 481­517.

        (2008): "Ideology," Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2-3), 321­352.

 ´nabou, R., and E. A. Ok (2001): "Social Mobility and the Demand for Redistribution: The Poum Hypothesis,"
Be
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 447­487.

 ´nabou, R., and J. Tirole (2006): "Belief in a Just World and Redistributive Politics," The Quarterly Journal
Be
  of Economics, 121(2), 699­746.

Coate, S., and M. Conlin (2004): "A Group Rule-Utilitarian Approach to Voter Turnout: Theory and Evidence,"
  American Economic Review, 94(5), 1476­1504.

Farhi, E., C. Sleet, I. Werning, and S. Yeltekin (2012): "Nonlinear Capital Taxation without Commitment,"
  Review of Economic Studies, 79(4), 1469­1493.

Feddersen, T., and A. Sandroni (2006): "A Theory of Participation in Elections," American Economic Review,
  96(4), 1271­1282.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2017): "Optimal Tax Progressivity: An Analytical
  Framework," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 132(4), 1693­1754.

Karabarbounis, L. (2011): "One Dollar, One Vote," The Economic Journal, 121(553), 621­651.

Levine, D. K., and A. Mattozzi (2018): "Voter Turnout with Peer Punishment," Levine's bibliography, UCLA
  Department of Economics.

Lindbeck, A., and J. W. Weibull (1987): "Balanced-budget redistribution as the outcome of political compe-
  tition," Public Choice, 52(3), 273­297.

Maisel, L. S., J. M. Berry, G. C. Edwards, and K. L. Schlozman (2010): Who Sings in the Heavenly
  Chorus? The Shape of the Organized Interest System. Oxford University Press.

Mattozzi, A., and E. Snowberg (2018): "The right type of legislator: A theory of taxation and representation,"
  Journal of Public Economics, 159(C), 54­65.

                                                     20
Meltzer, A. H., and S. F. Richard (1981): "A Rational Theory of the Size of Government," Journal of Political
  Economy, 89(5), 914­927.

Olson, M. (1965): The Logic of Collective Action: Public Goods and the Theory of Groups., vol. 1. Harvard
  University Press, 1 edn.

Pennec, C. L., and V. Pons (2019): "Vote Choice Formation and Minimal Effects of TV Debates: Evidence
  from 61 Elections in 9 OECD Countries," Working Paper 26572, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Persson, T., and G. Tabellini (2002): Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy, vol. 1. The MIT Press,
  1 edn.

Piketty, T. (1995): "Social Mobility and Redistributive Politics," The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110(3),
  551­584.

Scheuer, F., and A. Wolitzky (2016): "Capital taxation under political constraints," American Economic
  Review, 106(8), 2304­28.




                                                     21
Mathematical Appendix

A     Section 3 - Environment
Individual choice. Consider household optimization (1), substitute the constraints into the objective function:

                                                                                        w2        ¯ ) dG( ),
                   max log( - e) +              (1 -  )  log() +  log(e) -                 +  log(                 (41)
                     e                                                                  2

where G(·) captures uncertainty over rate  . The first order condition reads:

                                                          1     (1 - ¯)
                                                      -      +          = 0,                                       (42)
                                                          -e      e

where ¯ = E ( ). Reorganize and get (5).


Evolution of the income distribution. Start from (3), take the log and use (5):


                                   log( ) = log(z ) + ( +  ) log() +  log                     (¯
                                                                                               )                   (43)


The mean and variance of this expression yield (6) and (7).


Break-even income level. Given  , income net of taxes and transfers satisfies (4), take the integral and then
the log:

                                                           ¯ ) + log                   1-
                                   log      c dF () =  log(                                 dF ().                 (44)
                                                                                 

                                                2
                                                     2 /2
If X  log N (µ,  2 ), then E (X n ) = enµ+n                 . Since E (c ) = E ( ), it gives:

                                            2                             2
                                  m +
                                         
                                           =  log(¯ ) + (1 -  )m + (1 -  )  2 .                                    (45)
                                         2                            2

Reorganize and get (8).


Value functions and bliss policies. Lifetime utility to an agent with initial income  at t = 1 reads:

                     V1 (,  ) = v1 (, e,  , ¯)
                                                                                              w2            ¯) ,
                              = log( - e) +  (1 -  )  log() +  log(e) -                              +  log(       (46)
                                                                                              2
                                                                          =Ez log( )|




                                                                     22
where e = ( ) as in (5) and ¯ is given by (8). The first order condition w.r.t.  :

                                  dV1 (·)   v1 (·) de   v1 (·)   v1 (·) d log ¯
                                          =           +        +      ¯         = 0.                                    (47)
                                   d        e d                   log  d
                                               =0


The first term is 0 from the envelope condition, the other terms are:

                                                                              2
                                       v1 (·)       ¯ ) -  log() +  log(e) - w ,
                                              = log(                                                                    (48)
                                                                             2
                                          ¯               2           2
                                    d log( )    dm             (·) 
                                              =      -      =      -    .                                               (49)
                                        d        d       2     (·)   2

Reorganize and get (10):

                                                                                             d ( )
                       ( +  ) m - log() +  ( +  )2  2 + w2 (1 -  ) +                               = 0.                 (50)
                                                                                            ( ) d
                                                             =   2




This expression implicitly defines   (). The first two terms form a decreasing linear function of  , whose intercept
is decreasing in . The third term, the elasticity of the saving rate to the redistribution rate  , is decreasing in  .
Formally:

                     d     d ( )                             1          1
                                 =-                     +                                             < 0,              (51)
                    d     ( ) d     1 -  1 +  (1 -  )]2   (1 -  )2 1 +  (1 -  )

which goes to - when  goes to 1. Altogether there is a unique solution   () < 1 to (50), decreasing in .
   The value function to an agent with initial income  after t = 1 consumption and education choice reads:

                             V2 (,  | ) = v2 (, e,  , ¯| )
                                                                                                                        (52)
                                                                                  w2        ¯)
                                       =  (1 -  )  log() +  log(e) -                 +  log(
                                                                                  2

The difference with (46) is that the education choice is no longer sensitive to the redistribution rate  and e = .
The sensitivity of individual value functions to  satisfies:

                         dV2 (·)   v2 (·)   v2 (·) d log ¯
                                 =        +      ¯ d
                          d                  log 
                                                                                                                        (53)
                               =  ( +  ) m - log() +  ( +  )2 ( +  )2  2 + w2 (1 -  )
                                                                                    =   2



                                                                 dV2 (·)
Bliss policy  d ()  [0, 1] is either an interior solution to      d        = 0 or  d () = 1. Given the linear nature of (53),
there is a unique bliss policy, ordered by initial income .




                                                             23
B     Section 4 - Outcome under Commitment
Sensitivity of optimal redistribution rate. To derive comparative statics for   , first get

                                              d ( )             1
                                                    =-                   .                                       (54)
                                             ( ) d     1 -  1 +  (1 -  )

Then rewrite (14) as

                                                                           
                                        ( +  )2  2 + w2 (1 -  )2 -                  =0                           (55)
                                                                       1 +  (1 -  )

The total derivative of this expression:

                                                                                      1 + 2 (1 -  )
                  ( +  )2 (1 -  )2 d 2 + (1 -  )2 dw2 + 2( +  )(1 -  )2 -                            2   d
                                                                                      1 +  (1 -  )
                                                                                                                 (56)
                                                                        2                 1 + 
                                                                 = 2 (1 -  ) +                       2   d
                                                                                      1 +  (1 -  )

                  d               d                             d 
Get immediately   d 2   > 0 and   dw2   > 0 while the sign of    d   is ambiguous.


Proof Proposition 1. Individual value functions are single peaked and bliss policies ordered by income level.
Pairwise evaluation of policy alternative leads to a convergence of electoral platforms toward the bliss policy of the
median agent, with (log) income m = log(m ). If the vote takes place before the education choice, then from (10),
  (m ) coincides with   defined by (14). If the vote takes place after education, then from (12) the outcome of
the vote is full redistribution  d (m ) = 1.



C     Section 5 - Probabilistic Voting and Activism

C.1     No Activism.
Comparison of platforms (18). Start from (11):

                                                                                 w2        ¯) ,
                            V2 (,  | ) =  (1 -  )  log() +  log( ) -                +  log(                      (57)
                                                                                 2

with log(¯ ) given by (8). Rearrange and get:

                                                                                              2
                                                                         w2              
                 V2 (,  | ) =  (1 -  )( +  ) log() +  log( ) -              +  ( +  )m +   (2 -  ) .             (58)
                                                                         2               2

The difference of this expression with h and l :

                                                                             2
                                                                            
                        V2 () =  (h - l )( +  ) m - log() +                   (2 - h )h - (2 - l )l .            (59)
                                                                            2




                                                                24
Verify (2 - h )h - (2 - l )l = (h - l )(2 - h - l ) and get (18). Finally, note

                                                                             2
                                                                           
                                          V2 ()dF () =  (h - l )             (2 - h - l ).                    (60)
                                                                           2

Probability ph of high rate of redistribution h . Consider the following distributions: j
                                                                                          U -                2
                                                                                                              1
                                                                                                                  +
    1                 1       1
m, 2  
       + m and   U - 2  + M, 2  + M . Note  = E ( ). Given  and competing platforms (l , h ), agent j
with income  votes for party H if and only if j
                                                (,  ) = V2 ( ) -  . Hence, the share of agents with income
 that vote for party H is:

                                                   (, )
                                                                                      1
                                  ,h ( ) =                      dj =  (,  ) +           -m .                  (61)
                                                - 21
                                                          +m                         2
                                                     



The share of votes across groups is then h ( ) =               
                                                                  ,h ( )dF () :

                                                                      1
                                      h ( ) =             +             - m dF (),                            (62)
                                                                     2
                                                                             1
                                               =        V2 ()dF () - ( + m) + .                               (63)
                                                                             2

The probability that party H wins the election is ph = P h ( )   , where   [0, 1] is a majority requirement
for party H to win the election. The event h ( )   is equivalent to the event

                                    ¯=          1                                 1 1
                                                           V2 ()dF () - m +           - .                     (64)
                                                                                   2

Get then ph as


                     ph = P   ¯) = 1 +                        V2 ()dF () - (m + M ) +
                                                                                              1
                                                                                                - .           (65)
                                   2                                                          2

            1
Set  = ,  = 2 , m = M = 0 and using (60) get (21).


Asymmetric political preferences. Persson and Tabellini (2002) study probabilistic voting allowing for a
correlation between income and political preferences. To see how this mechanism works without activism, normalize
average political preferences heterogeneity  = E ( ) = 1 and assume that cov  , log() = a: if a > 0 then high
income agents are more responsive to economic factors. The probability ph (l , h ) is then

                                                                                     2
                                             1                         
                             ph (h , l ) =     +  (h - l ) - ( +  )a +   (2 - h - l ) ,                       (66)
                                             2                         2

and a Nash equilibrium of economic platforms competition differs from full redistribution if and only if a > 0:

                                                                      ( +  )a
                                                   h = l = 1 -                < 1.                            (67)
                                                                        2




                                                                     25
Overall, when high income agents are more sensitive to economic policy rather than political factors, they are
attractive targets to candidates, which tilts equilibrium economic platform toward lower rate of redistribution.


C.2    Activism
Activism choice. To get (29), rewrite (27) as:


                                             V1 (,  ) = v1 ,  , e, ph , log(¯ ), log(¯)                                               (68)
                                                                             h        l


                             dV1 (·)       dV1 (·) dph
where e = (¯
            ). Further,       dAi
                                       =    dph dAi    .   Consider the first term:
                                                     



                                 dV1 (·)   v1 (·) de   v1 (·)                       v1 (·) d log(¯)
                                                                                                  i
                                         =           +        +                          ¯ ) dph .                                    (69)
                                  dph      e dph       ph                            log(     i
                                                                            i=l,h
                                                  =0


Term by term:

                             v1 (·)                                 ¯ ) - l log(¯) ,
                                    = - (h - l )Ez log( )| +  h log( h           l                                                    (70)
                             ph

and
                                                                                      2
                                     ¯ ) - l log(¯ ) = (h - l ) m +                  
                               h log( h           l                                    (2 - h - l ) .                                 (71)
                                                                                     2

                                                                            w2
Using (6) and Ez log( )| = ( +  ) log() +  log                       ) -
                                                                    (¯      2 ,   rearrange and get:

                                                                                          2
                             v1 (·)                                
                                    =  (h - l ) ( +  ) m - log() +   (2 - h - l ) .                                                   (72)
                             ph                                    2

              v1 (·)                   d log(¯)       d¯      (¯
                                                               )
Then, since    log(¯)   = pi i and        dph
                                              i
                                                  =  dph       )
                                                              (¯   for i  (l, h),
                    i



                                    v1 (·) d log(¯)                                                         (¯
                                                                                                             )
                                                  i
                                    log( ¯ ) dph =  (h - l ) ph h + (1 - ph )l                               )
                                                                                                            (¯
                                                                                                               .                      (73)
                             i=l,h        i
                                                                                          =¯
                                                                                           

                dph
Overall, with   dAi
                      = ± , with ± = + for x = h and ± = - for x = l, one gets (29):
                  


                                                                                      2
                      dV1 (·)                                                     (¯
                                                                                   )
                              = ± (h - l ) ( +  ) m - log() +   (2 - h - l ) +  ¯     .                                               (74)
                       dAi                                    2                   (¯
                                                                                    )

Lemma 1. Given policy platforms (l , h ), an equilibrium of the activism subgame is a set of income group
contributions {Al   h                             l   h              i
                 , A }, aggregate contributions (A , A ) defined as A =                           
                                                                                                     Ai
                                                                                                       d , probability of high taxes ph and
expected tax rate ¯ = E ( ).
   To establish existence, start from (28) characterizing optimal contribution of income groups. Sum this expression
over income group and get the aggregate effects of activism on political preferences (31).



                                                                      26
      Using this expression with (25), get (32) which uniquely defines the probability ph , since the right-hand side
of this expression is decreasing in ¯, hence in ph . From this probability, one can recover aggregate and individual
activism contributions. The probability ph is unique, because the sensitivity of the education rate to the expected
                         (·)        ¯     1
redistribution rate ¯    (·)   = - 1- ¯ 1+ (1-¯) < 0 depends negatively on ph (l , h ), since ¯ = ph h + (1 - ph )l .
      The argument for uniqueness goes as follow. Given (h , l ), the outcome of the contribution game yield a
unique ph (25). Is there another pair (Ah , Al ) and underlying group contributions that yield the same outcome?
No, because the marginal return to contribution is a function of Ah - Al , but the marginal cost depends on individual
contribution only, see (28).


Endogenous choice of platforms. To derive (34), denote by H (h , l , ¯) the right hand side of (32) and let
            (¯
             )
E (¯
   ) = ¯    (¯
             )   be the elasticity of education rate to the expected tax rate. Totally differentiating (32) w.r.t. ph and
h :

                                              H (·) d¯       H (·) H (·) d¯
                                         1-            dph =      +         dh .                                        (75)
                                               ¯ dph         h      ¯ dh

Term by term:

                                         H (·)                 2
                                               =  (1 +  2 ) (1 - h ) +  2  E (¯
                                                                              ) ,                                       (76)
                                          h
                                         H (·)                   dE (¯
                                                                     )
                                               =  (h - l ) 2           ,                                                (77)
                                            ¯                     d ¯
                                         dE (¯
                                             )         1 +  -  2
                                               =-                        2.                                             (78)
                                          d ¯     (1 -  )2 1 +  (1 -  )
                                                                                                                        (79)


Rearranging terms, get (34).


Proposition 3. If  = 0 or  = 0, then the unique solution to (35) is  = 1. Otherwise, using (54), rewrite (35)
as:

                                                1  2                   
                                           1+       (1 -  ) =                   .                                       (80)
                                                 2            1 -  1 +  (1 -  )

The left hand side is decreasing in  , while the right hand side is increasing in  , with limit when  = 1 is ,
which gives that the unique solution satisfies 0 <  p < 1. An increase in  decreases the left hand side, which yield
d p
d     < 0. In the limit  = , (35) coincides with (14), hence  p =   .


C.3       Citizen-office-seeking candidate
The program of the candidate from party H

                                                                  2                    2
                                                           (h - h )             (l - h )
                                    max µph + (1 - µ) ph            + (1 - ph )                                         (81)
                                     h                         2                    2



                                                              27
                                                         2                           2
                                dph           dph (h - h )                dph (l - h )
                            µ       + (1 - µ)              + ph (h - h )-              =0                                         (82)
                                dh            dh      2                   dh      2

Similarly, the first order condition characterizing l (h ):

                            dph           dph (h - l )2                       dph (l - l )2
                       -µ       + (1 - µ)               + (1 - ph )(l - l ) -               =0                                    (83)
                            dl            dl      2                           dl      2

To derive these expressions, denote ph = G(l , h , ¯) and get:

                                              G(·) d¯       G(·) G(·) d¯
                                         1-           dph =     +        di                                                       (84)
                                               ¯ dph        i     ¯ di

Then derive

                          G(·)                  dE (¯
                                                    )                                      d ¯
                                 =  (h - l ) 2                                                 = h - l                            (85)
                             ¯                   d ¯                                       dph
                          d¯                                                               d¯
                               = ph                                                            = (1 - ph )                        (86)
                          dh                                                               dl

and

                                      G(·)              2
                                           =  (1 +  2 ) (1 - h ) +  2  E (¯
                                                                          )                                                       (87)
                                      h
                                      G(·)                2
                                           = - (1 +  2 ) (1 - l ) +  2  E (¯)                                                     (88)
                                      l

Finally

                                         1                               dE ( )         1 +  (1 -  2 )
                   E ( ) = -                                                    =-                                2               (89)
                                1 -  1 +  (1 -  )                         d        (1 -  )2 1 +  (1 -  )


D      General game
We consider a general formulation of preferences and technology and discuss minimal assumptions that support our
main result: activism reduces the equilibrium tax rate. We maintain the demographic assumptions and the timing
introduced in Section 5.1, and consider a version of the model with two types l < h .34 We show that under two
primitive properties, full redistribution cannot be a Nash equilibrium of the political game with activism. These
properties are satisfied for the specific model presented in the exposition:

    i. POUM does not work. Absent activism and commitment, a pure redistributive conflict drives the tax choice,
      and because a majority of agent benefits from the expropriation of the rich, full redistribution (1, 1) is the
      Nash equilibrium.

   ii. But all agents under commitment would refrain from such outcome because of the valuable dynamic incentives:
        () < 1 for all .
  34 The argument can easily be extended to a continuum of types since we consider the incentives of individuals / groups at the bounds

of the distribution.



                                                                  28
    The stochastic outcome of electoral competition is captured by the probability of high taxes, ph = P h (·) >
1/2 = Ph (l , h , A), where A = A(Al , Ah ) aggregates the level of activism of each income group for the low tax
candidate; this function is increasing in each argument and A(0, 0) = 0. Given an aggregate level of activism A,
the education choice of an agent with type  is:


                                           V1 (, l , h , A) = maxe E U c(e, , , A), e .                                                (90)


This program implies e = (, , A). Here consumption c(e, , , A) =  (,         ¯ ,  ) depends on productivity  =

g (, e), the tax base ¯ and the magnitude of redistribution  . Note that taking the expectation of  = g , e(·)

over  yields ¯ = G(, A). Clearly a positive level of activism yields a higher tax base as it puts more weight on low
                                                                                                                                  dc
taxes and everyone chooses more education: GA (, A) > 0. This increases consumption for all agents, i.e.                          d¯   > 0.
    The expectations operator in (90) incorporates ph = Ph (l , h , A), so there are two distinct influences of activism
A. The first is directly on the probability of high taxes and thus on the amount of redistribution ex post. The
second is on the education choices of all agents. This includes the fiscal externality through G(, A). The choice of
activism for type  A , given A- , comes from:


                                      A(, l , h ) = argmaxa f () V1 , l , h , A             - k (a),                                   (91)


where A = A A , A- is the vector of activism choice and k (·) is an activism cost function, symmetric: k (a) =
k (-a). The FOC for the choice of activism is then:

    dV1 , l , h , A)   dph                                                                                    dc
                     =     U c(e, h , , A), e - U c(e, l , , A), e                + E U1 c(e, , , A), e          = k (a)/f ()          (92)
         da            da                                                                                     da

The first term is redistribution. The second term captures the effect of group  activism a on consumption through
the aggregate tax base   ¯ , with

                                            dc   dc d¯ dA(·)   dc       dA(·)
                                               = ¯           = ¯ GA (·)       >0                                                       (93)
                                            da  d dA da       d          da

The effect on the education choice drops from the envelope condition.
    We now proceed to show that (l , h ) = (1, 1) cannot be an equilibrium of this game. We consider platforms
(l , h ) = (1 - , 1) and show that the anticipation of activism would indeed induce a candidate to deviate from an
outcome with full redistribution.35 We review the incentives of each group in turn.
    A(h , 1 - , 1) > 0 requires that the LHS of (92) be positive for  = h . The first term in (92) is positive as ph is
decreasing in A and the high ability types lose unambiguously from redistribution, i.e., c(e, , , A) is decreasing in
 for h type. The second term, using (93), is positive. Again, activism puts more weight on the low tax outcome
and thus provides incentives for all to invest more in education. For any  > 0, all agents benefit from a higher tax
base. This reflects the property noted earlier that the bliss tax rate is less than 1 for all ,   () < 1.
    If we only consider activism by one group, the argument effectively ends here: activism increases the probability
   35 Since candidates are office seeking and play Nash over splitting the probability of win, the equilibrium in pure strategy is that they

offer the same platform.




                                                                    29
of l = 1 -  win over h = 1 which triggers an adjustment of candidates platform. Could activism by lower income
groupe l offset this effect? Their activism choice follows (92) as well.
   If the l group can only use activism to support higher taxes, then they will choose Al = 0. To see why, note
that their preferred tax rate at the time of activism is less than 1:   (l ) < 1. At a tax rate of 1, the l group would
benefit from full redistribution, but without incentives, there is nothing to redistribute: they would not oppose
an  reduction in l from 1. Thus A(l , 1, 1 - )  0. So the overall response of activism to a deviation from full
redistribution is positive A = A(Al , Ah )  0.
   Now consider the optimal choice of tax platform by the candidate from party L. The objective is to maximize
1 - Ph (l , h , A), given h . Its best response function l (h )  [0, 1] is implied by:

                               (1 - Ph (·)) d(1 - Ph (·)) dA(·) dAl   dA(·) dAh
                                           +                        +           =0                                (94)
                                  l             dA         dAl dl      dAh dl

   Note that if h = l then A = 0, since no group has incentive to exert activism when there is no choice to
influence. Also, since the Nash equilibrium is (1, 1) in the absence of activism, we can see it cannot be a Nash
equilibrium under activism if the sum of the second and third terms in (94) is negative at (1 - , 1). As argued,
                                                        dA
h unambiguously exert activism for l = 1 - , i.e.       dl   < 0 for (1 - , 1), while the l group will not counter this
influence as they benefit from the marginal improvement in incentives over redistribution.




                                                             30
