                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




WHAT CAUSED RACIAL DISPARITIES IN PARTICULATE EXPOSURE TO FALL?NEW
EVIDENCE FROM THE CLEAN AIR ACT AND SATELLITE-BASED MEASURES OF AIR
                              QUALITY

                                           Janet Currie
                                          John Voorheis
                                           Reed Walker

                                       Working Paper 26659
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26659


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




This paper is released to inform interested parties of research and to encourage discussion. The
views expressed are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the U.S. Census Bureau. All
results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is disclosed, release
authorization numbers CBDRB-FY19-CMS-7029, CBDRB-FY19-CMS-7227, CBDRB-FY19-
CMS-7328 and CBDRB-FY19-CMS-7735. We would like to thank Abhay Aneja, Spencer
Banzhaf, David Card, Conrad Miller, Jessie Shapiro, Joe Shapiro, Randall Walsh and seminar
participants at the Chicago Federal Reserve, the Environmental Defense Fund, Gothenberg
University, LISER, Rotterdam University, Stanford University, Tufts, UC Berkeley, the
University of Chicago, the University of Hawaii, and the University of Illinois for helpful
comments. Ellen Lin and Matthew Tarduno provided exceptionally helpful research assistance.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Janet Currie, John Voorheis, and Reed Walker. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
What Caused Racial Disparities in Particulate Exposure to Fall? New Evidence from the Clean
Air Act and Satellite-Based Measures of Air Quality
Janet Currie, John Voorheis, and Reed Walker
NBER Working Paper No. 26659
January 2020
JEL No. H4,I14,J18,Q5,Q53

                                         ABSTRACT

Racial differences in exposure to ambient air pollution have declined significantly in the United
States over the past 20 years. This project links restricted-access Census Bureau microdata to
newly available, spatially continuous high resolution measures of ambient particulate pollution
(PM2.5) to examine the underlying causes and consequences of differences in black-white
pollution exposures. We begin by decomposing differences in pollution exposure into
components explained by observable population characteristics (e.g., income) versus those that
remain unexplained. We then use quantile regression methods to show that a significant portion
of the "unexplained" convergence in black-white pollution exposure can be attributed to
differential impacts of the Clean Air Act (CAA) in non-Hispanic African American and non-
Hispanic white communities. Areas with larger black populations saw greater CAA-related
declines in PM2.5 exposure. We show that the CAA has been the single largest contributor to
racial convergence in PM2.5 pollution exposure in the U.S. since 2000, accounting for over 60
percent of the reduction.

Janet Currie                                           Reed Walker
Department of Economics                                Haas School of Business
Center for Health and Wellbeing                        Department of Economics
185A Julis Romo Rabinowitz Building                    University of California Berkeley
Princeton University                                   2220 Piedmont Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08544                                    Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                               and NBER
jcurrie@princeton.edu                                  rwalker@berkeley.edu

John Voorheis
U.S. Bureau of the Census
Center for Administrative Records Research
and Applications (CARRA)
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
john.l.voorheis@census.gov
1        Introduction

Landmark studies in the 1980s (see for example US General Accounting Office (1983); Chavis and Lee

(1987)) demonstrated that low income and/or racial minorities in the U.S. are disproportionately exposed

to environmental burdens. This issue had become so politically important by the 1990s that President

Clinton issued Executive Order 12898 in 1994, which ordered the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

(EPA) to explicitly study this "environmental justice" issue.1 However, despite its large volume, the existing

evidence about racial disparities in pollution exposure is largely piecemeal and indirect.

        The evidence is piecemeal because pollution monitoring networks are sparse. For example, fewer than 20

percent of U.S. counties contain a regulatory grade device capable of monitoring small particulates (Fowlie,

Rubin, and Walker, 2019).2 The evidence remains somewhat indirect because researchers have been forced

to use proxies for potential exposure such as distance to a polluting facility.3 Distance to a facility is a crude

substitute for ambient air pollution exposure, both for reasons related to air transport and because mobile

sources of pollution are also important contributors to local air quality. Hence, while we know that there

are racial differences in the proximity to toxic facilities and hazardous waste sites, it is less clear how these

differences translate to differences in measured exposures. Moreover, we know very little about why racial

gaps in pollution exposure may have changed over time.

        This paper addresses these gaps in our knowledge using newly available national data on ambient partic-

ulate matter (PM2.5) exposure from 2000 to 2015. Advances in remote sensing technology combined with

machine learning prediction tools have allowed researchers to combine data from satellite imagery, pollution

monitors, land use characteristics, chemical air transport models to generate fine-grained (1km grid) mea-

sures of ambient air pollution levels for the entire United States (Di, Kloog, Koutrakis, Lyapustin, Wang,

and Schwartz, 2016; Van Donkelaar, Martin, Brauer, Hsu, Kahn, Levy, Lyapustin, Sayer, and Winker, 2016).

We merge these granular pollution data to individual survey responses from restricted use versions of the
    1
      Banzhaf, Ma, and Timmins (2019) have an excellent recent review of the economics literature on this subject.
    2
      Similarly, Hsiang, Oliva, and Walker (2019) point out that out of 3144 counties, only 1289 have monitors for any "criteria"
air pollutant (i.e. pollutants regulated under the Clean Air Act) at any point between 1990-2015.
    3
      For example, several case studies on residential proximity to polluting industrial facilities find that racial and ethnicity
minority groups and/or lower socioeconomic status groups experienced closer average proximity to industrial facilities compared
with other groups, and that this pattern persists over time (e.g., Abel and White (2011) who study Seattle, 1990 to 2007; Hipp
and Lakon (2010) who study southern California, 1990 to 2000; Pais, Crowder, and Downey (2013) who examine a national
cohort from 1990 to 2007). There are challenges to drawing causal inferences from this literature ranging from from ecological
fallacy (Depro, Timmins, and O'Neil, 2015; Hsiang, Oliva, and Walker, 2019) to problems associated with assuming that people
in geographic areas that do not contain hazards are not exposed to pollutants, even when the hazards in question may lie close
to geographic boundaries (Banzhaf, Ma, and Timmins, 2019; Mohai and Saha, 2006; Mohai, Pellow, and Roberts, 2009).



                                                                1
2000 Census and the 2001-2015 American Community Survey (ACS) at the Census Block level.

      The paper proceeds in four parts. We first use these data to document gaps in ambient exposure to PM2.5

between non-Hispanic African Americans and non-Hispanic whites and to show how these gaps changed over

time from 2000 to 2015.4 Next, we explore whether these cross-sectional gaps in pollution exposure can be

explained by differences in individual and/or neighborhood characteristics, as reported in the 2000 Census

or ACS. Third, we explore the extent to which changes in relative mobility versus relative improvements

in neighborhood air quality have contributed to the changes in gaps in pollution exposure over this time

period. Lastly, we use quantile regression methods proposed by Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009) to explore

the extent to which the spatially targeted nature of the Clean Air Act, and the associated introduction of

the PM2.5 National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS), has affected different parts of the national

pollution distribution and, in turn, the observed black-white pollution gap in the United States.

      The analysis confirms that African Americans tend to live in the most polluted areas nationally. How-

ever, this black-white gap in mean pollution exposure has closed substantially since the turn of the century.

The mean gap in pollution exposure has converged from 1.5µg/m3 in 2000 to only 0.5µg/m3 in 2015. This

convergence alone could potentially explain 7% of the improvement in relative life expectancy between

blacks/whites over this time period.5 We then explore the underlying cross-sectional correlates of the ob-

served pollution gaps by leveraging the individual microdata in the Census and ACS. We begin by comparing

the unconditional mean gap in pollution exposure between African Americans and non-Hispanic whites to

the conditional mean pollution gap after controlling for individual characteristics (e.g., income, education,

household structure). We also examine whether individual characteristics are able to explain gaps in expo-

sure at other quantiles of the pollution distribution, in the spirit of DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996).

We find that virtually none of the racial difference in exposure can be explained by differences in individ-

ual or household-level characteristics such as income, suggesting that only a small portion of the observed

convergence in pollution levels can be explained by relative changes in these characteristics over time.

      Mechanically, there are two remaining ways this narrowing of the pollution gap could have occurred:

Areas that were disproportionately African American may have become cleaner faster than other areas;

or relative population shares could have shifted in ways that benefited African Americans relative to the

non-Hispanic white population. We use a simple decomposition to show that relative mobility differences
  4
     Note that we will use "black" and "African American" interchangeably with "non-Hispanic African American" throughout
the text (likewise for "white" and "non-Hispanic white")
   5
     See Section 2 below for a more complete description of this calculation.


                                                           2
or changes in black-white population shares are not able to explain the observed convergence in pollution

exposure. While the white population has been gradually shifting to more urban and hence more polluted

areas, this phenomenon explains very little of the observed black-white convergence in pollution exposure

when compared to the significant air quality improvements in the average black neighborhood over this time

period.

       The convergence in the racial gap in pollution exposure between 2000 and 2015 can be entirely accounted

for by the fact that areas that were disproportionately African American showed the greatest improvement

in air quality over this time period. Why is this the case? We show that much of this improvement is

driven by the introduction of the PM2.5 National Ambient Air Quality Standards, which disproportionately

improved air quality in newly regulated areas -- areas with higher concentrations of African Americans. More

specifically, we use unconditional quantile regression (Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 2009) in a difference-in-

differences setting to show how the introduction of the PM2.5 NAAQS affected different quantiles of the

national pollution distribution. We then combine these quantile regression estimates with the black and

white population shares in the respective pollution quantiles to calculate that over 60 percent of the observed

convergence in mean PM2.5 differences between blacks and whites over this time period can be traced back

to the spatially targeted nature of the CAA regulations.

       A small but growing literature in economics and other social sciences has begun using remote sensing

data to measure the distribution of environmental hazards (see e.g., Fowlie, Rubin, and Walker (2019) for

a recent overview and application). A subset of this literature studies environmental inequality by merging

remote-sensing data to Census tract or Census block group demographic data. For example, Clark, Millet,

and Marshall (2014, 2017) examine racial differences in exposure to NO2 using 2006 Census Block-Group

NO2 measurements linked to the 2000 Decennial Census data, and Voorheis et al. (2017) examine differences

in exposure to NO2 and PM2.5 using satellite data combined with tract-level aggregates from the American

Community Survey.6
   6
    Relatively few U.S. studies have explored temporal trends in racial gaps in ambient air pollution or transportation-related
air pollution. Brajer and Hall (2005), studied ozone and coarse particulate matter in southern California from 1990 to 1999,
and found that on average, as air pollution decreased over time, Asians and Hispanics experienced larger reductions in ozone
concentrations but smaller reductions in coarse particulate matter concentrations, compared with other groups. Kravitz-Wirtz,
Crowder, Hajat, and Sass (2016), studied nitrogen dioxide and particulate matter exposures in the United States for a cohort
of 9,000 families from 1990 to 2009, and found that though exposures decreased over time, they remained higher for blacks
and Hispanics than for whites. Ard (2015) look at racial trends in exposures to toxic releases from 1995 to 2004, using data
on releases of 415 chemicals from 17,604 facilities reporting in the Toxic Release Inventory. They find that potential exposure
to toxics declined for all, but that African Americans are still more exposed than Whites or Hispanics, even conditional on
income and education. Voorheis et al. (2017) uses administrative records and satellite data to compare within-person changes
in pollution exposure between blacks and whites.


                                                              3
   This is the first paper, to our knowledge, that links nationally representative, individual-level survey

data to a national surface grid of PM2.5 pollution measurements to explore cross-sectional differences and

trends in environmental inequality between racial groups. Moreover, we are not aware of any papers that

have explored the causal determinants of narrowing pollution gaps between racial groups over time. Our

data not only has useful features from a measurement perspective, allowing for higher quality measurement

of the distribution of pollution exposure than has been possible before, but it also allows us to answer

questions that cannot be addressed with public-use Census data. For example, the restricted versions of the

Decennial Census and ACS data, which provide block-level geographic information, allow us to distinguish

between differences in pollution exposure that can be explained by differences in individual characteristics

(e.g., income) or differences in neighborhood characteristics (e.g., racial mix). While these findings are

descriptive, we are able to explore, for the first time, how much variation in pollution exposure might

plausibly be explained by individual endowments, and how much may instead be explained by aggregate,

neighborhood-level characteristics. Lastly, the spatially continuous PM2.5 measurements allow us to create

these statistics and perform these decompositions for the entire continental U.S., as opposed to focusing on

a single city or on communities that are proximate to a toxic plant or a pollution monitor.

   The second contribution of this paper is to explore the distributional impacts of environmental policy

and the Clean Air Act more specifically. In doing so we are able to examine the degree to which these

distributional impacts may account for the aggregate changes in environmental inequality, and the concomi-

tant effects on health therein. While a substantial literature examines the average effects of the Clean Air

Act on pollution exposure and the harms that it causes (e.g., Chay and Greenstone (2003); Isen, Rossin-

Slater, and Walker (2017)), we know of no other work that explores the impact of the Clean Air Act on

different empirical moments of the nationwide pollution distribution. For example, we are able to address

the question of how much the CAA NAAQS have compressed the national pollution distribution, and to

ask which quantiles show the largest effects? The advent of unconditional quantile regression and related

methods (Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 2009), combined with the new availability of spatially continuous

PM2.5 measurements and detailed demographic data, make such analysis possible.

   In summary, our study uses high-resolution PM2.5 data and restricted-access Census Bureau data to

measure gaps in racial exposure to pollution for a nationally representative sample of the U.S. population.

Our main innovation is to explore the reasons why the racial gap has declined by asking what part of the

decline can be attributed to convergence in the individual and household-level characteristics of African

                                                     4
American and other households; how much can be explained by the relative mobility of different racial

groups (e.g., blacks moving away from polluted areas); how much can be explained by more rapid clean-

up of historically black neighborhoods; and how much of the more rapid clean-up of historically black

neighborhoods that we observe is due to the spatially targeted nature of the CAA.

        The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the linked Census and satellite derived

pollution data and provides initial descriptive statistics on environmental inequality between racial groups.

Section 3 explores whether these mean and quantile differences can be explained by differences in individual

characteristics and changes to those characteristics over time. Section 4 tests for how the spatially targeted

nature of the Clean Air Act affects the national distribution of PM2.5 exposure, and how these quantile

changes map into the observed black-white gap in pollution exposure. Section 5 concludes.



2        Data and Descriptive Statistics on Racial Gaps in Pollution Exposure

Environmental science has seen a recent explosion of research in atmospheric science combining spatially-

continuous satellite measurements of pollution correlates (e.g., aerosol optical depth) with other observable

pollution correlates such as emissions inventories, chemical transport models, land use characteristics, and

weather patterns (see e.g., Di, Kloog, Koutrakis, Lyapustin, Wang, and Schwartz (2016); Van Donkelaar,

Martin, Brauer, Hsu, Kahn, Levy, Lyapustin, Sayer, and Winker (2016)). The basic idea is to build a

predictive model of a pollutant of interest (e.g., PM2.5) by correlating in-situ EPA monitor data with

the observable predictors of air pollution measures using modern model selection techniques (e.g., cross-

validated neural nets). Researchers then use these models to predict air pollution "out of sample" for the

large segments of the United States without existing pollution monitors but with satellite measurements.

We use data from Di, Kloog, Koutrakis, Lyapustin, Wang, and Schwartz (2016), who produce daily PM2.5

concentrations at a 0.01 degree by 0.01 degree resolution (1km by 1km at the equator) for the contiguous

U.S. from 2000-2015.7 We spatially intersect this gridded, raster data with Census block boundary files,

which we use to merge the pollution data to the individual survey responses from the 2000 Census and

2001-2015 ACS.8

        It is important to note that these pollution data are estimates of ground-level pollution concentrations.
    7
     We have replicated most of the results in this project using similar data from Van Donkelaar, Martin, Brauer, Hsu, Kahn,
Levy, Lyapustin, Sayer, and Winker (2016), and the qualitative conclusions are very similar.
   8
     Because Census block boundaries changed after the 2010 Census, we use the 2000 Census vintage block boundaries for the
2000 Census and ACS data through 2010, and then use the 2010 vintage boundaries afterwards.


                                                             5
These estimates perform well -- on average, they match the "ground truth" as measured by EPA monitors,

with very high, in-sample measures of fit. However, there is some evidence that these satellite-derived

measures may deviate from the ground truth at the tails of the pollution exposure distribution (Fowlie,

Rubin, and Walker (2019)). Two of the most commonly used measures, in particular ­ Di, Kloog, Koutrakis,

Lyapustin, Wang, and Schwartz (2016) and Van Donkelaar, Martin, Brauer, Hsu, Kahn, Levy, Lyapustin,

Sayer, and Winker (2016) ­ are biased downward for high PM2.5 levels. It seems likely in our setting that

these prediction errors will attenuate measured disparities since African Americans are disproportionately

located in the most highly polluted places. We will proceed with our analyses treating the satellite data as

if it were the truth, keeping in mind the caveat that our results may be a lower bound on true racial gaps

in exposure.

      We merge the pollution data with individual-level data from the 2000 Census long form (1 in 6 U.S.

households) and from the 2001-2015 American Community Surveys using household Census block locations.

Our primary comparisons focus on the non-Hispanic white and African American populations. We focus on

gaps between African Americans and non-Hispanic whites because historically these have been the largest

and most well-documented gaps. Additionally, there are potential measurement issues in studying differences

between Hispanics and non-Hispanic whites over time. For example, studies which have linked individual

responses to the 2000 and 2010 Decennial Censuses find evidence that Hispanic identity is more fluid over

time than white or black racial identities (Liebler, Porter, Fernandez, Noon, and Ennis, 2017). Examination

of disparities among Hispanics, non-Hispanic whites and non-Hispanic African-Americans is fruitful ground

for future work, however.

      Figure 1 plots mean pollution exposure for both the African American (dotted red line) and non-Hispanic

white population (solid blue line) from 2000 to 2015. The observed black-white gap in mean pollution

exposure is 1.6 micrograms per cubic meter (µg/m3 ) in 2000, narrowing to 0.54 µg/m3 in 2015. One way to

interpret these differences is to translate the gaps into racial differences in life-expectancy through the lens

of a PM2.5 concentration-mortality response function. Ebenstein et al. (2017) estimate that life expectancy

is reduced by 0.98 years for each 10 µg/m3 increase in sustained exposure to PM2.5. Over this time period,

the black-white gap in life expectancy fell from about 5 years to 3.5 years (Arias and Xu, 2019). Thus,

the observed 1 µg/m3 improvement in the black-white pollution gap could potentially explain 7% of this

improvement in the black-white mortality gap.9
  9
      This is calculated as 0.98*(1/10)/1.5 years. Note that the Arias and Xu (2019) only reports black-white gaps in life


                                                             6
    While Figure 1 presents the mean black-white gap over time, the data also allow us to explore the entire

distribution of pollution exposure for each race group and how these distributions have changed over time.

Figure 2 plots the pollution densities, separately for the African American and non-Hispanic white population

in both 2000 and 2015.10 When comparing the x-axis of both the 2000 and 2015 figures, it becomes clear

that PM2.5 pollution levels have fallen dramatically for both groups. For example, in 2000, the bulk of both

distributions lies above 10 µg/m3 , while in 2015 the bulk of both distributions lies below that threshold.

The other salient feature of these densities is that most of the improvements for blacks relative to whites

between 2000 and 2015 come from compressing the upper portion of the pollution distribution, a point to

which we will return.



3    Decomposing Differences in Pollution Exposure

What explains the observed differences in pollution exposure? Perhaps lower income individuals live in

more polluted places, and differences disappear or are greatly attenuated when we condition on income. Or

perhaps differences in education and/or knowledge about the potential harms of PM2.5 exposure lead to

observed differences in pollution exposure? The Census Bureau demographic data allow us to explore the

cross-sectional and time-series differences in pollution exposure between racial groups. The demographic

data also allow us to begin to explore the extent to which individual endowments can explain the observed

differences and changes. Conditional on income differences, does the observed black-white gap in pollution

exposure remain? We focus on the following individual-level characteristics measured in the Decennial

Census long-form and ACS surveys: race, age, gender, income, education, number of children, and home

ownership. We also explore the role of neighborhood characteristics in explaining pollution disparities, using

Census tract characteristics constructed from the underlying microdata, including: the population share

of African Americans in a tract, mean public assistance income, the teen pregnancy rate, average years of

schooling, the population share living in single family residences, and the home ownership rate. Appendix

Table B1 presents summary statistics of these variables, separately for non-Hispanic white and African

American individuals in our sample.
expectancy as far back as 2006. The 2000-2015 change in the black-white life expectancy was likely larger than 1.5, reducing
the percentage contribution of PM2.5 in explaining this improvement.
  10
     Due to Census disclosure avoidance review guidelines, we trim the upper 97th and lower 3rd percentiles of each pollution
distribution.




                                                             7
3.1   Conditional versus Unconditional Differences in Pollution Exposure

Figure 1 shows a large gap in pollution exposure in 2000, which fell considerably over the next fifteen years.

As a first step towards understanding the reasons for this declining gap, we start by asking whether cross-

sectional differences in exposure in any given year can be explained by differences in individual characteristics

from the Decennial Census and ACS. One natural way to do this is to compare the conditional mean

differences in pollution exposure between racial groups to the unconditional mean differences using the

following linear regression model:



                                     Pi =  1 [African Americani ] + X  +    i                                (1)

where pollution for individual i is regressed on an indicator for whether or not the individual is African

American, controlling for individual demographic characteristics in the vector (X ). Specifically, we control

for individual income, age, education, number of children, gender, and an indicator for homeownership.

Regressions are weighted using 2000 long form and ACS weights, and inference is conducted with cluster-

robust standard errors, clustering by commuting zone. Figure 3a plots the coefficient  and associated

confidence intervals from 15 separate regressions, one per year, representing the conditional mean differences

in black-white pollution exposure over time. Figure 3b compares these estimates to the unconditional

mean differences in pollution exposure over time. The lines look almost identical. This similarity implies

that differences in individual characteristics, such as income, explain almost none of the cross-sectional

differences in pollution exposure between African Americans and non-Hispanic whites. This conclusion is

striking considering that African American households have mean household income more than $15,000 lower

than non-Hispanic whites (see Appendix Table B1). These differences in income and other characteristics

explain almost none of the observed differences in pollution exposure. Appendix A.1 formally decomposes

these cross-sectional differences in mean pollution exposure using methods pioneered by Oaxaca (1973) and

Blinder (1973). Observable differences in individual and household characteristics are able to explain at

most 8 percent of the gap in mean differences in any given year.

   Gaps in pollution exposure are also found at different points within the income distribution. Table 1

presents the results from 10 separate estimates of  from equation (1), where we stratify the data by income

quintiles in both 2000 and 2015. At each quintile, the conditional gap remains similar to the unconditional

gap in a given year. Differences in individual characteristics do little to explain the mean differences in


                                                       8
pollution exposure within these income categories.

   Equation (1) and the Oaxaca-Blinder exercise in Appendix A.1 are well-suited for decomposing differences

in mean black-white pollution exposure. However, Figure 2 suggests there exist additional racial differences

at different quantiles of the pollution distribution. A natural question to ask is whether differences in

individual or household characteristics are able to explain differences in pollution exposure at other parts of

the pollution distribution. DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) provide a straightforward semi-parametric

approach to answering this question. The basic idea is to estimate what the entire distribution of African

American pollution exposure would look like if African Americans had the same observable characteristics

as non-Hispanic whites. In practice, this amounts to constructing a weighting function that is then used to

re-weight a kernel density estimate of the African American pollution distribution to provide the relevant

counterfactual distribution African Americans would have experienced given the same characteristics as

non-Hispanic whites. This weighting function boils down to estimating a conditional probability of being

a non-Hispanic white individual based on observable, demographic characteristics via a probit regression.

This conditional probability is then used, along with the unconditional probabilities of being white/black in

our sample to reweight the African American kernel density in a given year.

   The results from this exercise are presented in Figure 4. Figure 4a presents estimates of the counterfactual

pollution distribution in 2000, and Figure 4b presents estimates of the counterfactual pollution distribution in

2015. In both cases, the counterfactual density looks very similar to the actual density, again suggesting that

individual characteristics are able to explain little of the observed pollution gap throughout the distribution.

Appendix A.1 and Appendix Table B3 use methods proposed by Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009) to

formally decompose the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the pollution distribution into the parts that can

be explained by observable covariates versus the part that remains unexplained. Once again, we find that

little can be explained by observable individual-level characteristics from Census Bureau data.


3.2   Controlling for neighborhood characteristics

While individual and/or household characteristics explain little of the black-white pollution gap, there is

substantial racial segregation into different areas within and across communities (Logan and Parman, 2017).

Are the differences in characteristics of black and white neighborhoods able to explain these gaps in exposure?

Panel 2 of Appendix Table B1 presents mean Census tract characteristics, separately for non-Hispanic

whites and African Americans. African Americans not only have different individual and household-level

                                                       9
characteristics on average, but they also tend to be concentrated in Census tracts with a high percentage

of other African Americans and with many relatively disadvantaged neighbors. Note that there is nothing

mechanical about this -- if neighborhoods were perfectly integrated in terms of race and socioeconomic

status, then everyone would live in a similar Census tract regardless of their own characteristics. Hence, we

can control for characteristics of neighborhoods or Census tracts as well as characteristics of individuals in

equation (1) in order to explore whether black-white differences in neighborhood characteristics (conditional

on individual characteristics) are able to explain some of the observed differences in PM2.5 exposure.

   Figure 5 shows the results of adding neighborhood characteristics to equation (1), and Appendix Table B4

presents the associated Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition. Specifically, we add census-tract level measures of

percent African American, mean public assistance income, the teen pregnancy rate, years of schooling, the

share living in single family residences, and the home ownership rate to equation (1). Figure 5, which

plots year-by-year estimates of  , looks substantially different than Figure 3a. Namely, the conditional

gap in pollution exposure between African Americans and non-Hispanic whites is entirely explained by

differences in neighborhood characteristics. Appendix Table B4 explores this result in greater detail. The

table shows the fraction of the gap that is "explained" and "unexplained" by each variable separately, as

well as the combined effect of these neighborhood characteristics. As one can see from the "Explained"

panel of Appendix Table B4, black-white differences in neighborhood characteristics explain the entire gap

in pollution exposure and more. More specifically, the mean difference in the African American proportion

of the population in a black vs. a white person's Census tract explains 140% of the overall PM2.5 pollution

gap in 2000. In 2015, the mean difference in this single neighborhood covariate explained 135% of the

observed pollution gap. There are also substantial differences in the returns or responsiveness of individuals

to differences in neighborhood characteristics (i.e. Panel B); a one-year increase in the mean Census tract

education translates into substantially less pollution exposure for whites than it does for blacks in our sample,

which is reflected in the relatively large difference in estimated "slopes" on the "Tract Years of Schooling"

variable in Panel B.

   The fact that African Americans live in different neighborhoods than non-Hispanic whites on average

explains virtually all of the gap in pollution exposure but also raises further questions. Does the shrinking of

the racial gap in pollution exposure come from disproportionate improvements in air quality in neighborhoods

that have higher proportions of African Americans, or is the improvement due to the relative movement of

African Americans away from dirty neighborhoods towards cleaner ones? We next present an additional

                                                       10
decomposition which attempts to shed light on these questions.


3.3    People versus Places: Understanding How Relative Mobility Has Affected Pollu-
       tion Disparities

One straightforward way to understand the role of mobility in contributing to the convergence in pollution

exposure between blacks and whites is to consider what the pollution gap in 2015 would have been if we

fixed individuals in their 2000 locations but let pollution in their respective Census block change to its 2015

level.11 Table 2 presents results from this type of counterfactual exercise. Columns (1) and (2) present

the actual pollution levels experienced by blacks and whites in 2000 and 2015, and the associated gap (row

3) and change in gap (row 4). Column (3) of Table 2 presents the results from a counterfactual exercise,

where we simulate what the gap (and change in gap) would have been in 2015 if people's locations had

been held fixed. The last row of Column (3) tells us that the change in the pollution gap would have

been smaller if individuals were unable to move between 2000 and 2015. Relative differences in mobility

between blacks and whites over this time period contributed to additional convergence in the pollution gap.

African Americans moved to relatively cleaner places between 200 and 2015, and the opposite is true for

non-Hispanic Whites. This pattern is consistent with recent findings in urban economics which show that,

after decades of suburbanization, the urban population became whiter and more college-educated in most

large U.S. cities after 2000 (Baum-Snow and Hartley, 2019; Couture and Handbury, 2017), and similarly,

suburbs have become more diverse. The shift in white population shares towards urban centers contributes

to higher levels of average pollution exposure among whites than they would have experienced had they

remained in predominantly suburban locations.

    One can decompose the overall shrinkage in the black-white exposure gap into the part which can be

explained by mobility versus the part which remains unexplained. If populations were fixed in their 2000

locations, the gain would have been 0.89 µg/m3 versus 1.02 µg/m3 . Thus, only 12.7% of the improvement

in the exposure gap stems from relative mobility differences over this time period, leaving the rest to be

explained by a greater improvement in pollution in disproportionately African American areas.

    Appendix A.3 presents additional results that explore the year-by-year changes in black-white population

shares and pollution exposure in ways that shed further light on the role of mobility in explaining pollution
  11
     For this counterfactual exercise, we use the public-use 100% count population data from the 2000 Decennial Census at the
Census block level. We merge these data to the 2000 and 2015 Di, Kloog, Koutrakis, Lyapustin, Wang, and Schwartz (2016)
data to calculate mean exposure gaps using block level population counts for non-Hispanic whites and African Americans.


                                                             11
gaps. For example, the once strong negative assortative relationship between white population shares and

pollution levels has weakened over time. Even so, the role of relative mobility differences remains small

(certainly less than 15%).

         There is a separate question as to whether relative mobility is related to changes in air quality over this

time period. Are non-Hispanic whites moving into the set of cities that have seen the largest improvements

in air quality over this time period? It's possible that both non-Hispanic whites are moving into areas where

air quality has dramatically improved and increasing their relative pollution exposure. Consider the case

where an individual moves from the relatively less polluted suburbs towards the city center where air quality

has improved; while this individual is moving to the urban center that has cleaned up, her new air quality

exposure may remain above what her exposure would have been in the suburbs. We explore these issues in

more detail in subsequent sections.



4         The Clean Air Act and Relative Changes in Pollution Exposure

Thus far, we have documented that a) the black-white gap in exposure to particulate matter has declined

substantially since 2000, and b) neither individual characteristics nor residential mobility of individuals

appears to fully explain why this gap has declined. Rather, it appears that the black-white gap in exposure

has declined primarily because African American neighborhoods had greater improvements in air quality.

But why did these particular neighborhoods experience improvements in air quality? We hypothesize that a

major reason for the narrowing of the black-white gap in air quality is that changes in the enforcement of the

Clean Air Act between 2000-2015 were more binding in predominantly black neighborhoods. We formally

investigate this hypothesis below.

         The CAA was first implemented in 1963, but the original legislation provided limited federal oversight of

state efforts and did not lead to large improvements in air quality. In response, Congress enacted the Clean

Air Act Amendments of 1970 and established the EPA, which vastly increased federal power to address

air pollution.12 The CAA initially focused on common, dangerous, air pollutants known as "criteria air

pollutants." Compliance was to be achieved through regulations governing both stationary sources (e.g.,

factories) and mobile sources (e.g., cars).

         For stationary sources, the CAA created pollutant-specific national ambient air quality standards (NAAQS)
    12
         Currie and Walker (2019) provide a more complete overview of the Clean Air Act and associated research by economists.



                                                                12
that specify maximum allowable concentrations of criterion air pollutants. NAAQS were initially established

for sulfur dioxide (SO2 ), carbon monoxide (CO), nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ), lead, particulates (TSP), and even-

tually ozone (O3 ). Stationary source regulations focus primarily on areas that are out of compliance with

the NAAQS. Each year in July, the EPA determines the set of counties that are in violation or "nonattain-

ment" of a particular NAAQS standard based on air pollution monitor measurements in those or nearby

counties. The consequences of being a "nonattainment" area can be severe. State governments must de-

velop a pollutant-specific plan, known as a State Implementation Plan, describing how areas will improve

air quality and come into compliance. The EPA reviews these state plans. If a state fails to act or de-

velop an inadequate plan, the EPA can withhold federal funding for the state air pollution control program,

highway construction, and the construction of sewage treatment plants. The EPA can also ban permits for

construction of major new and/or modified sources of a pollutant in communities that are out of compliance

with NAAQS. In addition, the EPA can impose its own federal plan if it deems a state's plan inadequate.

Thus, the CAA gives the EPA sweeping powers to take action to improve air quality, with or without state

cooperation.

   Since 1970, there have been two major amendments to the CAA, in 1977 and 1990, and hundreds of

additional policies designed to respond to changing scientific consensus about both the harms from pollution

and feasible compliance technologies. In 1997, the EPA tightened the NAAQS pertaining to ozone and

particles further, regulating fine particles less than 2.5 micrometers in diameter (PM2.5) for the first time.

The new standards were extremely controversial and were challenged in the courts for years, but ultimately

the EPA prevailed, and the new standards were implemented in April 2005. The EPA revised the PM2.5

(24 hour) standard again in 2006, and the revision went into effect in 2009. However, since all counties

which were in nonattainment of the annual PM2.5 standard in 2009 were also in nonattainment of the 24

hour standard, the 2009 designations do not appear to have caused additional new areas to be subject to

NAAQS nonattainment regulations. We focus on the effects of mandated reductions in annual PM2.5 under

the 1997 standards which finally began to be implemented in 2005.

   To what extent is the cleanup of predominantly African American areas a result of the implementation

of these new standards? We have seen that African Americans lived in more polluted places on average

in 2000, and the initial impact of the CAA was therefore likely to be greatest in these places. Figure 6a

shows the distribution of the African American and non-Hispanic white populations by vigintile of PM2.5

levels in 2000; the former were much more likely to live in the highest pollution deciles, while for whites the

                                                      13
situation is reversed. Figure 6b shows that it was predominantly counties in the highest PM2.5 deciles that

were impacted by the enforcement of the standards in 2005. Hence, unless the initial impact of stronger

regulation was undone by re-sorting of population shares, we would expect the regulations to close gaps

between blacks and whites.

       We begin by examining the effect of these new air quality standards on pollution exposure in a standard

difference-in-difference, event-study design. To better mimic the way the regulations work in practice we

adopt a slightly unconventional regression model when compared to the existing literature. Whenever a

county exceeds the air quality standard based on a local monitoring station, the regulator decides whether

nearby or adjacent counties could also have contributed to this violation. Thus, these nonattainment desig-

nations apply to "air regions" or groups of counties in the same local market, typically not a single county.

We approximate these air region definitions using county-aggregates in the form of commuting zones (CZs)

or local labor markets.13 Figure 7 shows that, once the standards went into effect in 2005, 62 commuting

zones, consisting of 250 counties in 20 states, were designated as nonattainment areas.

       We estimate an event study model of the following form:

                                      2015
                            Pict =            t (1 [Nonattainc ] × 1[yeart = t]) + c + t +       ict                        (2)
                                     t=2000


where pollution Pict for person i residing in CZ c in year t is regressed on a series of interaction terms for

whether a CZ is newly designated as nonattainment for the PM2.5 standard (1 [Nonattainc ] = 1) interacted

with a dummy for each year before and after the regulations went into place. Equation (2) also controls

for county fixed effects c and (state-)year fixed effects t . All regressions are weighted using Census survey

weights, and standard errors are clustered at the CZ level.

       The coefficients of interest, t , compare the CZs that became newly regulated under the PM2.5 standard

to areas that were in compliance with the standard, before and after the regulations went into place. The

identifying assumption is that the newly regulated CZs would have trended similarly, in terms of pollution

levels, to the unregulated CZs in the absence of the treatment. Alternatively, the identifying assumption

relies on there being no common shock to the treated CZs in the years after the regulations went into place.14
  13
     There is no formal EPA definition of "air regions", as they are decided on a case-by-case basis. Thus, air regions are only
defined for nonattainment areas. Our use of commuting zone boundaries is meant to approximate air region boundaries in
the attainment areas. In practice, our results are not sensitive to using either county or commuting zone boundaries to assign
treatment/control, but we chose the latter to better mimic the regulatory variation while also accounting for potential spatial
correlation in treatment.
  14
     Once potential concern may be state-level regulations which coincide with the PM2.5 standards, however, these changes


                                                              14
While these assumptions are inherently untestable, the event study design affords us a useful indirect test; we

can examine the event study coefficients and trends leading up to the regulation in pollution levels between

the regulated and unregulated CZs and test whether the two groups were trending similarly in the years

prior to the regulation going into place.

    We also estimate a version of equation (2) with an additional, three-way interaction term between

indicators for ever being in nonattainment status, year, and whether the individual is African American.15

This "triple-difference" regression equation allows the impact of the CAA to vary differentially by race (i.e. do

black neighborhoods clean up more or less in newly regulated CZs when compared to white neighborhoods)?

    Lastly, we explore how the CAA regulatory variation affects different quantiles of the pollution distribu-

tion. The basic idea is to combine our difference-in-difference estimator with quantile regression methods

to estimate the counterfactual outcome distribution in the absence of the policy intervention. We can then

compare this no-regulation, counterfactual distribution to the actual outcome distribution when subject to

the policy intervention. We can go further to calculate mean black-white gaps in pollution exposure in

this counterfactual world, to better understand the role of the CAA in contributing to the convergence of

black-white pollution levels.

    Recent advances in quantile regression allow us to estimate the causal effect of the Clean Air Act's PM2.5

National Ambient Air Quality Standard on the unconditional pollution distribution (Firpo et al. 2009). The

basic idea is to transform the problem by considering a covariate's influence on population shares rather than

quantiles. By estimating how a covariate (e.g., nonattainment status) affects the share of the population

below various pollution thresholds, the semi-elasticities show the effect of an increase in CAA regulatory

stringency on the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of pollution (see e.g., Chernozhukov et al. 2013).

We can then invert the impact of nonattainment on the CDF of pollution to estimate the impact on a

pollution quantile. The re-centered influence function (RIF) regression approach proposed by Firpo et al.

(2009) performs this inversion using a local linear approximation to the counterfactual CDF, rescaling the

marginal effect of the CAA on the population share above a pollution cutoff by the probability density of

pollution at that cutoff.
should be absorbed in the state-year fixed effects.
  15
     Formally, we estimate the following equation
                        2015
              Plet =            t (1 [Nonattainc ] × 1[yeart = t] × 1[African Americani ]) + ict + c + t + X  +   ict
                       t=2000

where the vector ict includes the full set of two-way interaction terms to facilitate interpretation.


                                                                 15
   In practice, RIF regression requires first transforming the outcome variable, PM2.5 pollution, using a re-

centered influence function before projecting this transformation onto the explanatory variables of interest.

Firpo et al. (2009) consider the following model of pollution P :


                                                   P = h(X, )


where X represents the set of independent, explanatory variables and          is the scalar unobserved error term.

The unconditional partial effect is defined as the shift in the distribution of a variable X on the distributional

statistic v (FP ), which can be expressed as:

                                            dE [RIF(P, v )|X = x]
                                                                  dF (x),
                                                    dx

where RIF (P, v ) is the recentered influence function. When the distributional statistic v is the  th quantile

function qt = inf q {q : FP (q )   } the RIF (P, q ) can be represented as

                                                              - 1 {p  q }
                                       RIF (P, q ) = q +                  ,
                                                               fP (q )

where fP (q ) is the density function of pollution P evaluated at quantile q .

   The relevant property of a re-centered influence function is that its expectation equals the distributional
                                                                                                         -1(p<Q )
statistic of interest. For quantile  denoted Q , the quantile RIF is given by RIF (p, Q ) = Q +           fp (Q )

and taking expectations verifies E [RIF (p, Q )] = Q . Since the mean of the RIF is equal to the quantile,

we can use the law of iterated expectations to go between conditional and unconditional partial effects.

Firpo et al. (2009) show that a regression of the RIF on covariates yields the approximate effect of the

covariates on the distributional statistic of interest (applied to the unconditional distribution). This feature

of RIF regressions allows researchers to estimate how treatment effects (e.g., the effects of the CAA PM2.5

regulations on county-year pollution levels) map into the unconditional distribution of pollution.

   In practice, this exercise entails first defining a series of pollution cutoffs corresponding to specified

quantiles of the empirical pollution distribution, and then for each cutoff, estimating the effect of the Clean

Air Act's PM2.5 NAAQS policy on the probability of being above that cutoff. We begin by creating 19 RIF

statistics, one for each pollution vigintile from the 5th to the 95th percentiles of the pollution distribution. We

then replace the dependent variable in equation (2) with one of the RIF-quantile statistics. The event study


                                                        16
coefficients for each RIF-quantile can be interpreted as the effect of the PM2.5 nonattainment designations

on the qth quantile of the unconditional PM2.5 exposure distribution.

   Figure 8 presents the estimated event-study coefficients ^t from a version of equation (2) where the

dependent variable is the pollution level for an individual survey respondent in a given year. There are

two main findings. First, in the years leading up to the implementation of the regulation, the trends in

air quality between the newly regulated counties and the unregulated counties are not statistically different

from zero. After 2005, when the policy was first enacted, pollution levels in newly regulated counties fall by

about 8% and remain there through the end of our sample.

   Table 3 presents the difference-in-difference analog to Figure 8 and equation (2). In particular, we replace

the 1 [year = t] variable in equation (2) with a single indicator equal to one for year >= 2005:


                      Pict =  (1 [Nonattainc ] × 1 [yeart  2005]) + c + t + X  +      ict                  (3)


The regression coefficient of interest  from this more parsimonious model tells us the average difference in

pollution levels in the years after, relative to before, comparing regulated counties to counties not subject

to the regulation. Column (1) suggests that PM2.5 levels fell by 1.23 µg/m3 in nonattainment counties in

the years after the regulation went into place. Column (3) presents the same model except the dependent

variable has been transformed via the natural log. As suggested by the figures, these estimates suggest that

pollution levels in newly regulated counties improved by about 8 percent in the years after the policy went

into place.

   The even columns of Table 3 add a triple interaction between the county ever being in non-attainment

status, a post-2005 time period, and an indicator for whether the individual is African American. Recall

that African Americans and non-Hispanic whites tend to live in different parts of the same counties, so there

is scope for regulation at the county-level to have a differential impact on different communities within a

county. These estimates suggest that the within-county improvements in air quality were slightly less for

African Americans than for non-Hispanic whites, though the difference is not statistically significant in the

log specification.

   Columns (5) through (8) of Table 3 add state-by-year fixed effects to equation (3) to control for any

unobserved, statewide changes to air quality that are common to all individuals in a given state-year. These

controls substantially attenuate the coefficients from columns (1) through (4) by almost 50 percent. There


                                                     17
are potentially many reasons for this attenuation, having to do with unobserved, time-varying correlated

unobservables. From this point forward, we treat the estimates with state-by-year fixed effects as our

preferred specification in order to flexibly control for this potential form of omitted variable bias.

   While the estimates from Figure 8 and Table 3 tell us about the average effects in the treated counties,

relative to the controls, they tell us little about other parts of the pollution distribution that might otherwise

be affected by this increased regulatory stringency. To explore the distributional impacts of the PM2.5

NAAQS we next turn to our unconditional quantile regression estimates. Figure 9 presents nineteen separate

regression estimates of  from equation (3), where we replace the dependent variable in this model with

the RIF counterpart for each respective pollution quantile. The figure visually summarizes the effect of the

PM2.5 nonattainment designation on different quantiles of the unconditional PM2.5 pollution distribution.

The estimates suggest that the most significant effects of the new standards were to improve air quality

in areas between the 50th and 90th percentiles of PM2.5 distribution. This result must be true almost

by construction, as the PM2.5 standards only bind at the upper quantiles of the pollution distribution.

It is somewhat surprising to see that the estimated effect of the regulations are somewhat smaller at the

95th percentile of the pollution distribution than at the 50th-80th percentiles. This smaller effect may be

partly due to the fact that the EPA and local regulators have faced severe difficulties in addressing air

quality problems in the most severely polluted parts of the country (e.g., the San Joaquin Valley or parts of

Southern California).

   Figure 10 presents RIF-Quantile regression results that estimate each quantile specific RIF separately by

race. This results in 38 versions of equation (3), and the corresponding estimates are plotted in Figure 10.

While the estimates from Table 3 suggested there was little difference in the treatment effects of nonattain-

ment between African Americans and non-Hispanic whites on average (see e.g., Column (6)), the results in

Figure 10 suggest that at the upper quantiles of the pollution distribution, African Americans have seen

larger improvements in air quality relative to their non-Hispanic white counterparts. For visual clarity, we

have omitted the associated confidence intervals, but they are shown in Appendix Figure B2. In general,

the race-specific confidence intervals overlap with one another, and thus it is difficult to reject the null that

the treatment effects at each quantile are equal.




                                                       18
4.1    What Fraction of Black-White Convergence is Attributable to the CAA Regulation
       of PM2.5?

We can use the RIF estimates from Figure 10, combined with population shares of African Americans and

non-Hispanic whites in each vigintile of the initial distribution of PM2.5, to compute counterfactual pollution

levels in the absence of the implementation of the nonattainment designations.16 Table 4 walks through these

calculations. Columns (1) and (2) of the top panel describe actual pollution levels within each quantile bin in

2005 and 2015, respectively. Columns (3) and (4) use estimates from Figure 10 to calculate what pollution in

each quantile would have been in 2015 in the absence of the CAA PM2.5 NAAQS implementation, separately

for African Americans and non-Hispanic whites.

    The second panel of Table 4 considers the counterfactual gap that would have existed in 2015 in the

absence of the CAA PM2.5 NAAQS. The actual gap in 2015 was 0.61 µg/m3 , whereas the counterfactual gap

is 0.97 µg/m3 . The actual change in the black-white gap between 2005 and 2015 was 0.59 µg/m3 , and the

implied counterfactual change is a narrowing of 0.23 µg/m3 . Since, we would have observed a 0.23 µg/m3

improvement in the black-white gap in the absence of the policy, we conclude that the CAA can account for

over 60% of the relative improvement in black-white outcomes.17

    The last panel of Table 4 considers an alternative counterfactual, recognizing that there may have been

some endogenous mobility in response to these CAA-induced improvements in air quality that may have

attenuated or exacerbated the relative improvements in outcomes between African Americans and non-

Hispanic whites. To explore this counterfactual, we weight columns (3) and (4) by the pre-regulation, 2005

population shares of whites and blacks in the respective quantile bins. Holding fixed the relative population

shares, the no-regulation, counterfactual change in the black-white pollution exposure gap would have been

only 0.04 µg/m3 instead of 0.59 µg/m3 . Thus, between 2005 and 2015 there were large relative shifts in

population that unraveled some of the relative black-white convergence in mean air quality exposure.

    Appendix Figure B3 explores this mobility response in more detail. Figure B3a plots the change in

the black population share between 2005 and 2015, separately by pollution quantile; negative numbers

imply a reduction in the black share in the particular quantile bin over this time period. These changes in

population are plotted against the RIF-quantile treatment effects for blacks in the respective quantile (i.e.
  16
     For the calculations in this exercise, we use tract-level population shares by race from the public-use American Community
Survey 5-year files.
  17
     This is calculated as (0.59-0.23)/0.59.




                                                              19
taken from Figure 10). We include a linear fit that suggests the areas that saw the largest improvements for

African Americans over this time period are also the areas where the share of African Americans declined

the most. Figure B3b shows the opposite is true for non-Hispanic whites. The quantiles which saw the

largest improvements in air quality for non-Hispanic whites saw the largest increases in white population

shares over this time period. These relative shifts in mobility served to offset some of the CAA-induced

convergence over this time period.

    How does one reconcile the results in Figure B3 with the earlier mobility results from Table 2 that

suggested whites have moved to relatively more polluted areas in 2015 versus where they were in 2000? These

findings are not necessarily inconsistent with one another. While whites are disproportionately moving to

urban areas (i.e. Table 2), they are moving to the urban areas that have experienced large improvements

in air quality between 2000-2015 (i.e. Figure B3). By the same token, African-Americans who were already

living in polluted urban areas became less dominant in these areas by 2015 as non-Hispanic whites moved

in and so saw less of the gains than they otherwise would have.



5    Conclusion

This paper shows that racial differences in ambient particulate exposure declined significantly between 2000

and 2015. We add to the small but growing literature using high-resolution, nationwide data on pollution

to examine racial differences in potential pollution exposure. We focus on PM2.5 and show that the gap

between African Americans and non-Hispanic whites narrowed from -1.6 µg/m3 in 2000 to -0.5 µg/m3 by

2015. To our knowledge, this is the first paper to explore the underlying causal drivers that contributed to

the narrowing of this gap. We find that very little of the decline in the gap in mean exposure levels can be

accounted for by changes in mobility, individual, or household-level characteristics. Similarly, we find that

racial gaps in exposure have narrowed at each quantile of the PM2.5 distribution, and that little of this

narrowing can be explained by the demographic characteristics available in Census Bureau data. Instead,

we find that virtually all of the closure of the gap is due to falling pollution levels in the areas where African

Americans are more likely to live. There is little evidence that movement of African Americans to relatively

cleaner neighborhoods or non-Hispanic whites to relatively dirtier neighborhoods has played a significant

role in the observed convergence.

    Why then has pollution fallen faster in areas that are home to disproportionate numbers of African


                                                       20
Americans? Since African Americans have historically been concentrated in areas with more polluted air,

and because the CAA targets the dirtiest areas for cleanup, it is reasonable to expect that the CAA could

have a disproportionate impact on African Americans. However, set against this expectation are market

forces that might cause African Americans in search of lower rents to move away from newly cleaner places.

Our analysis shows that implementation of new PM2.5 standards in 2005 sharply reduced pollution in a way

that was sustained over time and is responsible for much of the closure of the racial gap in PM2.5 exposure

between 2000 and 2015. We find some evidence, however, to suggest that changes in PM2.5 levels were

associated with re-sorting of African Americans across areas in ways that undid some of these gains.

   These findings suggest that the CAA has likely played a significant role in reducing the black-white gaps

in exposure to air pollution, because the legislation systematically targeted the dirtiest areas for cleanup,

and African Americans were disproportionately likely to live in areas with dirty air. Hence, although the

CAA was not explicitly designed to address disparities in pollution exposure, the CAA has nonetheless

contributed to reductions in environmental inequality between racial groups in the United States.




References
Abel, T. D., and J. White (2011): "Skewed riskscapes and gentrified inequities: environmental exposure
 disparities in Seattle, Washington," American journal of public health, 101(S1), S246­S254.

Ard, K. (2015): "Trends in exposure to industrial air toxins for different racial and socioeconomic groups:
 A spatial and temporal examination of environmental inequality in the US from 1995 to 2004," Social
 Science Research, 53, 375­390.

Banzhaf, S., L. Ma, and C. Timmins (2019): "Environmental justice: The economics of race, place, and
 pollution," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 33(1), 185­208.

Baum-Snow, N., and D. Hartley (2019): "Accounting for central neighborhood change," Working Paper.

Blinder, A. S. (1973): "Wage discrimination: reduced form and structural estimates," Journal of Human
 resources, pp. 436­455.

Brajer, V., and J. V. Hall (2005): "Changes in the distribution of air pollution exposure in the Los
 Angeles basin from 1990 to 1999," Contemporary Economic Policy, 23(1), 50­58.

Chavis, B. F., and C. Lee (1987): "Toxic wastes and race in the United States: A national report
 on the racial and socio-economic characteristics of communities with hazardous waste sites," New York:
 Commission for Racial Justice, United Church of Christ.

Chay, K. Y., and M. Greenstone (2003): "Air quality, infant mortality, and the Clean Air Act of 1970,"
 Discussion paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                                     21
Clark, L. P., D. B. Millet, and J. D. Marshall (2014): "National patterns in environmental injustice
 and inequality: outdoor NO2 air pollution in the United States," PloS one, 9(4), e94431.
         (2017): "Changes in transportation-related air pollution exposures by race-ethnicity and socioe-
  conomic status: outdoor nitrogen dioxide in the United States in 2000 and 2010," Environmental health
  perspectives, 125(9), 097012.
Couture, V., and J. Handbury (2017): "Urban revival in America, 2000 to 2010," Discussion paper,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.
Currie, J., and R. Walker (2019): "What Do Economists Have to Say about the Clean Air Act 50 Years
 after the Establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency?," The Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 33(4), 3­26.
Depro, B., C. Timmins, and M. O'Neil (2015): "White flight and coming to the nuisance: can residential
 mobility explain environmental injustice?," Journal of the Association of Environmental and resource
 Economists, 2(3), 439­468.
Di, Q., I. Kloog, P. Koutrakis, A. Lyapustin, Y. Wang, and J. Schwartz (2016): "Assessing PM2.
  5 exposures with high spatiotemporal resolution across the continental United States," Environmental
  science & technology, 50(9), 4712­4721.
DiNardo, J., N. M. Fortin, and T. Lemieux (1996): "Labor Market Institutions and the Distribution
  of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach," Econometrica, 64(5), 1001­1044.
Firpo, S., N. M. Fortin, and T. Lemieux (2009): "Unconditional quantile regressions," Econometrica,
  77(3), 953­973.
Fowlie, M., E. Rubin, and R. Walker (2019): "Bringing Satellite-Based Air Quality Estimates Down
  to Earth," in AEA Papers and Proceedings, vol. 109, pp. 283­88.
Hipp, J. R., and C. M. Lakon (2010): "Social disparities in health: disproportionate toxicity proximity
  in minority communities over a decade," Health & place, 16(4), 674­683.
Hsiang, S., P. Oliva, and R. Walker (2019): "The distribution of environmental damages," Review of
 Environmental Economics and Policy, 13(1), 83­103.
Isen, A., M. Rossin-Slater, and W. R. Walker (2017): "Every breath you take--every dollar you'll
  make: The long-term consequences of the clean air act of 1970," Journal of Political Economy, 125(3),
  848­902.
Kravitz-Wirtz, N., K. Crowder, A. Hajat, and V. Sass (2016): "The long-term dynamics of
 racial/ethnic inequality in neighborhood air pollution exposure, 1990-2009," Du Bois review: social science
 research on race, 13(2), 237­259.
Liebler, C. A., S. R. Porter, L. E. Fernandez, J. M. Noon, and S. R. Ennis (2017): "Amer-
  ica's churning races: Race and ethnicity response changes between Census 2000 and the 2010 Census,"
  Demography, 54(1), 259­284.
Logan, T. D., and J. M. Parman (2017): "The National Rise in Residential Segregation," The Journal
 of Economic History, 77(1), 127­170.
Mohai, P., D. Pellow, and J. T. Roberts (2009): "Environmental justice," Annual review of environ-
 ment and resources, 34, 405­430.

                                                    22
Mohai, P., and R. Saha (2006): "Reassessing racial and socioeconomic disparities in environmental justice
 research," Demography, 43(2), 383­399.

Oaxaca, R. (1973): "Male-female wage differentials in urban labor markets," International economic re-
 view, pp. 693­709.

Pais, J., K. Crowder, and L. Downey (2013): "Unequal trajectories: Racial and class differences in
  residential exposure to industrial hazard," Social Forces, 92(3), 1189­1215.

US General Accounting Office (1983): "Siting of hazardous waste landfills and their correlation with
 racial and economic status of surrounding communities," GAOfRCED-83-168. Washington, DC: US.
 General Accounting Office.

Van Donkelaar, A., R. V. Martin, M. Brauer, N. C. Hsu, R. A. Kahn, R. C. Levy, A. Lyapustin,
 A. M. Sayer, and D. M. Winker (2016): "Global estimates of fine particulate matter using a combined
 geophysical-statistical method with information from satellites, models, and monitors," Environmental
 science & technology, 50(7), 3762­3772.

Voorheis, J., et al. (2017): "Longitudinal Environmental Inequality and Environmental Gentrification:
 Who Gains From Cleaner Air?," Discussion paper, Center for Economic Studies, US Census Bureau.




                                                   23
6    Tables and Figures

                                  Figure 1: Trends in Pollution Exposure by Race




                                                   16
                                  Population Weighted PM2.5 (µg/m3)
                                       10        128       14




                                                                      2000        2005              2010                 2015
                                                                                             Year

                                                                             Non-Hispanic White       African American




Notes: This figure plots mean PM2.5 exposure by year, separately for African-Americans and the non-Hispanic white popula-
tion. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).


                          Figure 2: Distributions of Pollution Exposure, 2000 and 2015

                           (a) 2000                                                                                      (b) 2015




Notes: This figure plots the PM2.5 density, separately for African-Americans and the non-Hispanic white population in both
2000 and 2015. Due to Census Bureau disclosure avoidance review guidelines, we trim the upper 97th and lower 3rd percentiles
of each density. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).




                                                                                          24
                                                                                   Figure 3: Residual Black-White Pollution Gap: PM2.5

                 (a) Conditional Gap with 95% Confidence Intervals                                                                                                        (b) Conditional vs. Unconditional Gap
   Residual White-Black Pollution Gap PM2.5 (µg/m3)
                                                2




                                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                                       White-Black Pollution Gap PM2.5 (µg/m3)
                                     1.5




                                                                                                                                                   1.5
                          1




                                                                                                                                           1
                .5




                                                                                                                               .5
     0




                                                                                                                                             0
                                                      2000             2005              2010              2015                                                    2000              2005                 2010                2015
                                                                                  Year                                                                                                             Year

                                                                     Conditional Gap       95 Percent CI                                                                         Conditional Gap          Unconditional Gap




Notes: Figure (a) plots the regression coefficients from 15 separate estimates of equation (1), regressing pollution on an
indicator for whether an individual is an African-American, controlling for individual and household characteristics. The
coefficient estimates correspond to the conditional mean black-white difference in air pollution, after adjusting for differences in
observable individual and household characteristics. Dashed lines correspond to 95 percent confidence intervals, where standard
errors have been clustered by commuting zone. Regressions are weighted using Census survey weights. Figure (b) compares
the conditional mean coefficients to the unconditional mean differences by year. See text for details. Source: 2000 Decennial
Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).

                                                             Figure 4: Actual versus Counterfactual African American Pollution Distribution: PM2.5

                                                         (a) Reweighted vs. Actual PM2.5 Density                                                                      (b) Reweighted vs. Actual PM2.5 Density
                                                                 African Americans, 2000                                                                                      African Americans, 2015




Notes: These figures plot the actual versus counterfactual densities of pollution exposure for African Americans in 2000 and
2015. The counterfactual densities stem from an application of Dinardo, Fortin, Lemieux (1996), whereby we reweight the
African American pollution distribution to reflect what the distribution would have looked like if they had the same individual
characteristics as non-Hispanic whites in our sample. See text for details. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community
Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).




                                                                                                                  25
Figure 5: Residual Black-White Pollution Gap After Controlling for Neighborhood Characteristics: PM2.5
                                                                                    2
                                     Residual White-Black Pollution Gap PM2.5 (µg/m3)
                                      0          .5          1          1.5




                                                                                        2000   2005           2010   2015
                                                                                                       Year



Notes: This figure plots the regression coefficients from 15 separate estimates of equation (1), regressing pollution on an indicator
for whether an individual is an African-American, controlling for individual, household, and Census tract characteristics. The
coefficient estimates correspond to the conditional mean black-white difference in air pollution, after adjusting for differences in
observable individual, household, and Census tract characteristics. Dashed lines correspond to 95 percent confidence intervals,
where standard errors have been clustered by commuting zone. Regressions are weighted using Census survey weights. See text
for details. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).




                                                                                                      26
             Figure 6: Racial Distribution of Population and Impact of CAA by Pollution Decile

        (a) Distribution of African-American and non-Hispanic White population by decile of PM2.5 in 2000


                                                                  .08
                                                                  .06
                         Population Share
                                                                  .04
                                                                  .02
                                                                  0




                                                                        1   2   3       4   5   6   7   8    9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
                                                                                                        Pollution Vigintile
                                                                                                            White             Black


                                                                  (b) Counties impacted by the CAA, by decile of PM2.5 in 2005
                                                                  80
                         Counties in Nonattainment PM2.5 (2005)
                                                                  60
                                                                  40
                                                                  20
                                                                  0




                                                                        1           2           3       4           5   6        7    8    9
                                                                                                        Pollution Quantile


Notes: Figure 6a plots population shares by pollution decile, separately for African American and non-Hispanic whites.
Figure 6b shows the total number of counties subject to the Clean Air Act's 1997 NAAQS PM2.5 standard, by pollution decile.
Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, EPA NAAQS Greenbook, and Di et al. (2016).




                                                                                                             27
Figure 7: Commuting Zones in Nonattainment After the Adoption of the PM2.5 National Ambient Air
Quality Standards




Notes: This figure plots all the commuting zones containing at least one nonattainment county in 2005 for the Clean Air Act's
1997 NAAQS PM2.5 standard. While the PM2.5 NAAQS was initially proposed in 1997, the first year of regulatory enforcement
began in 2005. Source: EPA NAAQS Greenbook.




              Figure 8: The Effect of the PM2.5 NAAQS on Newly Regulated Commuting Zones
                                  2
                                  1
                                  0
                          PM2.5
                                  -1
                                  -2
                                  -3




                                       2000          2005                   2010                  2015
                                                                 Year


Notes: This figure plots the event-time coefficient estimates from a version of equation (2), where the dependent variable
consists of PM2.5 exposure (µg/m3 ) for a given individual-year. The regression model controls for county and year fixed effects.
The dashed lines represent 95% confidence intervals. Regressions are weighted by Census survey weights and errors are clustered
by commuting zone. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, EPA NAAQS Greenbook, Di et
al. (2016).




                                                               28
         Figure 9: RIF-Quantile Treatment Effects of the 2005 CAA PM2.5 NAAQS Implementation




                                                .5
                                RIF/Quantile Treatment Effect
                                  -1.5     -1   -2-.5      0




                                                                 0   10   20   30     40      50     60      70      80     90   100
                                                                                     Pollution Percentile

                                                                                     RIF/QTE                95% CI




Notes: This figure plots the regression coefficient ^ from 19 separate versions of equation (3), where the dependent variable
consists of the RIF-Quantile transformation of the respective PM2.5 vigintile (indicated by the x-axis). The regression model
controls for county fixed effects and state-by-year fixed effects. The solid red lines represent 95% confidence intervals. Regressions
are weighted by Census survey weights and errors are clustered by commuting zone. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American
Community Survey 2001-2015, EPA NAAQS Greenbook, Di et al. (2016).



Figure 10: Race-Specific RIF-Quantile Treatment Effects of the 2005 CAA PM2.5 NAAQS Implementation
                                                .5
                                 RIF/Quantile Treatment Effect
                                -1.5     -1     -2-.5       0




                                                                 0   10   20   30     40      50     60      70      80     90   100
                                                                                     Pollution Percentile

                                                                               QTE/RIF White                QTE/RIF Black




Notes: This figure plots the regression coefficient ^ from 38 separate versions of equation (3), 19 regressions for each race, where
the dependent variable consists of the RIF-Quantile transformation of the respective PM2.5 vigintile (indicated by the x-axis).
The regression model controls for county fixed effects and state-by-year fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by Census survey
weights and errors are clustered by commuting zone. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015,
EPA NAAQS Greenbook, Di et al. (2016).



                                                                                         29
                    Table 1: Residual Black-White Pollution Gap by Income Quintile: PM2.5


                                                                        Income Quintile
                                                     1             2          3         4                5
                                                                       Panel A: Year 2000

                     1[African-American]          1.535          1.603       1.616      1.590        1.396
                                                 (0.180)        (0.190)     (0.193)    (0.195)      (0.183)
                     Observations                1791000        1967000     2397000    2277000      2204000

                                                                       Panel B: Year 2015

                     1[African-American]          0.499           0.463      0.512       0.558        0.570
                                                 (0.097)         (0.093)    (0.096)     (0.089)      (0.099)
                     Observations                235000          223000     224000      226000       244000

Notes: This table presents the regression coefficients from 10 separate estimates of equation (1), 5 per panel. We regress pollution
on an indicator for whether an individual is an African-American, controlling for individual and household characteristics, and
we stratify the data by income quintile. The coefficient estimates correspond to the conditional mean black-white difference
in air pollution, after adjusting for differences in observable individual and household characteristics. Panel A does this for
the year 2000, and Panel B repeats this exercise in 2015. Regressions are weighted using Census survey weights, and standard
errors are clustered by commuting zone. See text for details. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey
2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).


                   Table 2: Counterfactual Pollution Levels and Gaps Holding Location Fixed


                                                       (1)                  (2)                (3)
                                                   Actual 2000          Actual 2015    Counterfactual 2015
                                                    Exposure             Exposure      using 2000 locations
                   White PM2.5 µg/m3                     12.96             8.25                  8.22
                   Black PM2.5 µg/m3                     14.52             8.79                  8.89
                   Black-White Difference                1.56              0.54                  0.67
                   Change in B-W Diff                                      1.02                  0.89

Notes: Rows (1) and (2) of columns (1) and (2) present mean pollution exposure separately for African American and non-
Hispanic Whites in years 2000 and 2015. Row (3) presents the mean gap in pollution exposure in either each year. Row (4)
presents the change in black-white gap between 2000 and 2015. Column (3) presents a counterfactual exercise, whereby we ask
what pollution levels would be and by how much the gap would have converged between 2000-2015 if we fixed the population
in their 2000 location and assigned the 2015 pollution levels for their respective Census block. Source: 2000 Decennial Census,
American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).




                                                                  30
                                 Table 3: The Impact of the 2005 Implementation of PM2.5 Standards on PM2.5 levels


                                              (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)
                                             PM2.5         PM2.5      ln(PM2.5)      ln(PM2.5)       PM2.5         PM2.5       ln(PM2.5)     ln(PM2.5)
            PM2.5 Nonattain×Post              -1.230       -1.237        -0.075         -0.076        -0.727       -0.726        -0.036         -0.036
                                             (0.335)      (0.334)       (0.020)        (0.020)       (0.080)      (0.082)       (0.006)        (0.006)
            PM2.5 Non×Black×Post                           0.149                         0.008                      0.048                        0.004
                                                          (0.088)                      (0.007)                    (0.091)                      (0.005)
            Year FE                             X            X             X              X
            State-Year FE                                                                               X            X             X              X
            County FE                           X            X             X              X             X            X             X              X
            Observations                    32360000     32360000      32360000       32360000      32360000     32360000      32360000       32360000

     Notes: This table presents regression coefficients from 8 separate versions of equation (3), one per column, where the dependent variable consists of PM2.5
     or ln(PM2.5) for an individual in a given year. Columns (2), (4), (6), and (8) add an additional interaction for African Americans to test for heterogeneity
     in regulatory impacts for African Americans. Regressions are weighted by Census survey weights and errors are clustered by commuting zone. Source: 2000
     Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, EPA NAAQS Greenbook, Di et al. (2016).
31
             Table 4: Calculating the Effect of CAA Regulations on the Black-White PM2.5 Gap


                       (1)          (2)        (3)              (4)                       (5)
                      PM2.5       Actual     Actual     White Counterfactual      Black Counterfactual
                     Quantile      PM2.5      PM2.5       PM2.5 in 2015              PM2.5 in 2015
                       Bin        in 2005    in 2015      Without CAA                Without CAA
                         5          5.32      4.34               4.37                      4.36
                         10        7.87       5.63               5.69                      5.63
                         15        8.91       6.25               6.18                      6.24
                         20        9.65       6.72               6.62                      6.62
                         25        10.33      7.11               7.03                      6.88
                         30        10.90      7.45               7.56                      7.17
                         35        11.42      7.75               8.12                      7.64
                         40        11.90      8.01               8.67                      8.23
                         45        12.34      8.24               9.28                      8.92
                         50        12.73      8.44               9.89                      9.65
                         55        13.09      8.65               10.39                     10.43
                         60        13.44      8.84               10.57                     10.73
                         65        13.80      9.03               10.68                     10.93
                         70        14.15      9.22               10.75                     11.09
                         75        14.51      9.42               10.71                     11.00
                         80        14.91      9.67               10.80                     11.17
                         85        15.27      9.98               10.93                     11.43
                         90        15.72      10.49              11.41                     12.27
                         95        17.01      12.21              12.46                     13.48
                              Main Counterfactual: Including 2005-2015 Mobility Responses
                     2005 Actual Black-White Gap:                                           1.20
                     2015 Counterfactual Black-White Gap:                                   0.97
                     Counterfactual Change in Black-White Gap:                             -0.23
                     Actual Change in Black-White Gap:                                     -0.59
                     % of Actual Gap Attributable to CAA:                                 61.2%
                        Alternative Counterfactual: Holding Population Fixed in 2005 Locations
                     2005 Actual Black-White Gap:                                           1.20
                     2015 Counterfactual Black-White Gap:                                   1.16
                     Counterfactual Change in Black-White Gap:                             -0.04
                     Actual Change in Black-White Gap:                                     -0.59

Notes: This table presents calculations used to explore what fraction of the observed racial convergence in mean PM2.5 levels
can be attributed to the regulatory variation embedded into the Clean Air Act's 2005 PM2.5 NAAQS. The top panel describes
actual pollution levels within each quantile bin in 2000 and 2015. Columns (3) and (4) use estimates from Figure 10 to calculate
what pollution would be in 2015 in the absence of the CAA PM2.5 NAAQS implementation, separately for African Americans
and non-Hispanic whites. The second panel computes the counterfactual gap in 2015 in the absence of the CAA NAAQS and
the implied 2005-2015 change in the gap. The last panel asks what the change in the black-white gap would have been if people
did not move between 2005-2015, and the CAA NAAQS was not implemented. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American
Community Survey 2001-2015, EPA NAAQS Greenbook, Di et al. (2016).




                                                              32
Appendix A              Pollution Decompositions
Appendix A.1           Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition of Racial Pollution Gaps
Assume that for an individual i in group g  {b, w} pollution exposure Pgi can be written as a linear function
of observed characteristics (Xgi ) and an error term µgi

                                                   Pgi = g Xgi + µgi                                                   (4)
where g are defined so that E [µgi | Xgi ] = 0. The difference in expected pollution exposure for blacks and
whites can be written as:

                                      Pb - Pw = (Xb - Xw ) b + (b - w ) Xw                                             (5)
where Pg and Xg represent mean pollution and mean characteristics for all individuals in group g . The first
term on the right-hand side of equation (2) is the part of the gap explained by differences in the average
observable characteristics of the two groups; namely, how large would the observed pollution gap be if we
gave blacks the same mean characteristics as whites? The second term is the part of the mean difference in
pollution exposure that is not explained by differences in characteristics; instead it reflect differences in the
"returns" to the observable characteristics (that is, the differences in slopes between groups, b - w , for
each observed characteristic).
    The results of this initial decomposition are shown in Appendix Table B2 for the two end points of our
sample, 2000 and 2015. The first row shows the predicted difference in pollution exposure obtained from
left hand side of equation (5): The gap is -1.616 µg/m3 in 2000, falling to -0.544 µg/m3 by 2015. The first
panel of Table B2 ("Explained") shows that very little of the racial gap in predicted pollution exposure
can be explained by an individual's observable characteristics. While African American households have
mean household income more than $15,000 less than non-Hispanic whites (see Appendix Table B1), these
differences in income explain almost none of the observed differences in pollution exposure. In fact, almost
none of the observed individual or household characteristics are able to explain any portion of the observed
difference in pollution exposure. Only 4.8 percent of the gap (-0.078/-1.616) is explained by differences in
income, age, schooling, children, gender, and/or homeownership. In 2015, differences in these characteristics
between blacks and whites are able to explain only 8 percent (-0.044/-0.544) of the gap in pollution exposure
between black and whites.18 Hence, differential racial exposure to pollution cannot be explained simply by
the fact that African Americans are more disadvantaged in terms of measured characteristics on average
than non-Hispanic whites.
    The second panel of Table B2 ("Unexplained") shows that the bulk of the racial gap in pollution exposure
instead reflects racial differences in the "returns" to observed characteristics and/or differences in unmeasured
characteristics. In particular, differences in the coefficients on age and education explain a significant portion
of the gap in both 2000 and 2015.

Appendix A.2           Decompositions Using Recentered Influence Functions (RIF)
While the previous section explored differences in mean outcomes between blacks and whites, it is also
possible to decompose other parts of the pollution distribution (e.g., the 10th or 90th percentiles of the white
and black pollution distributions). Are observable characteristics able to explain more of the difference in
outcomes at the 90th percentiles? What about the 10th percentiles? Recent advances in quantile regression
allow us to decompose differences in quantiles of the unconditional pollution distribution using recentered
  18
    We have experimented with a range of more flexible functional forms for all the control variables, and the qualitative
results are nearly identical when including higher order polynomials and/or more flexible dummy variable transformations of
the observed continuous variables.


                                                            33
influence functions (RIF) (Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux, 2009). The basic idea is to transform the problem by
considering a covariate's influence on population shares rather than quantiles. By estimating how a covariate
(e.g., income) affects the share of the population below various pollution thresholds, we can identify the
marginal effect of income on the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of pollution. We can then invert
the impact of income on the CDF of pollution to estimate the impact on a pollution quantile. The RIF
regression approach proposed by Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009) performs this inversion using a local
linear approximation to the counterfactual CDF, rescaling the marginal effect of each covariate on the share
above a pollution cutoff by the probability density of pollution at that cutoff.
    In practice, RIF regression requires first transforming the outcome variable, PM2.5 pollution, using a
recentered influence function before projecting this transformation on the explanatory variables of interest.
RIF-regression methods provide a simple way of performing decompositions for any distributional statistic
for which an "influence function" can be computed.
    Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009) consider the following model of pollution P:

                                                  P = h(X, )

where X represents the set of independent, explanatory variables and is the scalar unobserved error term.
The unconditional partial effect is defined as the shift in the distribution of a variable X on the distributional
statistic v (FP ), which can be expressed as
                                            dE [RIF(P, v )|X = x]
                                                                  dF (x)
                                                    dx
where RIF(P, v ) is the recentered influence function. When the distributional statistic v is the  th quantile
function qt = inf q {q : FP (q )   } the RIF(P, q ) can be represented as:

                                                             - 1 {p  q }
                                      RIF (P, q ) = q +                  ,
                                                              fP (q )
where fP (q ) is the density function of pollution P evaluated at quantile q .
    The relevant property of a recentered influence function is that its expectation equals the distributional
statistic of interest. For quantile  denoted Q , the quantile RIF is given by RIF (p, Q ) = Q +  -f1       (p<Q )
                                                                                                          p (Q )
and taking expectations verifies E [RIF (p, Q )] = Q . Since the mean of the RIF is equal to the quantile,
we can use the law of iterated expectations to decompose each unconditional quantile, as Oaxaca (1973) and
Blinder (1973) do when they decompose the mean.
    Firpo, Fortin, and Lemieux (2009) show that a regression of the RIF on covariates yields the approximate
effect of the covariates on the distributional statistic of interest (applied to the unconditional distribution).
As we show in the text, this feature of RIF regressions provides a natural bridge to exploring how treat-
ment effects (e.g., the effects of the CAA PM2.5 regulations on county-year pollution levels) map into the
unconditional distribution of pollution.
    Appendix Table B3 shows the results of decompositions of the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of the
pollution distributions for non-Hispanic whites and African Americans using re-centered influence functions.
The first three columns show the estimates for 2000, while the last three columns show the estimates for
2015. Both sets of estimates indicate larger gaps at the 10th percentile than at the 90th percentile. These
patterns of quantile differences can largely be explained by recognizing that both non-Hispanic whites and
African American live in large cities with high levels of air pollution (i.e. the 90th percentiles of their
respective pollution distributions are somewhat similar); whereas rural locations, that also tend to be the
least polluted parts of the United States, are disproportionately white, leading to larger gaps in the 10th
percentiles of the respective race-specific pollution distributions. As in the Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions,
these breakdowns indicate that relatively little of the predicted differences in exposure can be explained by

                                                       34
differences in individual and household level characteristics. By 2015, the racial gap in the 90th percentile
of exposure has narrowed significantly, and, for the first time, most of the gap can be accounted for by
differences in observable characteristics. For the most part, however, the quantile decompositions present a
pattern similar to the original mean decompositions; black-white differences in individual or household-level
characteristics explain very little of the black-white difference in PM2.5 pollution exposure, especially in
earlier years.

Appendix A.3        People versus Places: Decomposing the Role of Population Shifts in
                    Changing the Pollution Gap
We consider an alternative mobility decomposition in order the further explore the role of reallocation of
population shares within racial groups over time. We consider pollution exposure () as the population
share (denoted by sit ) weighted average of tract i level pollution in year t it . We rely on the following
definition of nationwide pollution exposure in year t t = i sit it , which corresponds to the share weighted
average of Census tract pollution exposure over all i tracts. This differs from the unweighted average of
                                                        1
Census tract pollution exposure in a given year t = N    t  i it .
    We decompose this nationwide pollution term into unweighted tract-level pollution and the covariance
between pollution and tract-level population shares. The same decomposition can be applied by race group
, which can inform us whether the observed pollution changes are driven mostly by improvements in average
Census tracts versus shifts in race-specific population shares across Census tracts over time. Denote the
population share of each race group as s()t = i sit . Likewise, denote race-specific pollution is t (),
while the average tract-level pollution within a race group is ¯ t () Then we can write nationwide pollution
exposure as a weighted average of the race-specific components

                                                                                    

                       t =         st () ¯ t () +       (it - ¯ t ()) (sit () - s
                                                                                ¯t ()) .                  (6)
                             b,w                    i

                                     =         st () (¯
                                                      t () + t ())                                        (7)
                                         b,w

where t () reflects the covariance between population shares and pollution levels for a respective race
group. If African Americans are more concentrated in Census tracts with high pollution levels, this term
will be positive for African Americans.
    This equation allows us to explain changes in nationwide pollution, through (i) changes in the average
pollution of black and white Census tracts (¯ t ()), and (ii) changes in the covariance between population
shares and pollution, separately for both blacks and whites (t ()).
    We perform this decomposition year by year to better understand the dynamics of this covariance term;
if the covariance is falling over time, this would suggest that African Americans were becoming less con-
centrated in neighborhoods with the worst air quality. If the covariance term were relatively constant over
time, the observed improvement in air quality for African Americans is primarily the result of the average
African American Census tract getting cleaner.
    Appendix Figure B1 shows the results of implementing the decomposition in equation (4) year-by-year,
separately for non-Hispanic whites and African Americans. Appendix Table B5 similarly decomposes the
2000-2015 difference in PM2.5 exposure. Figure B1a shows that there is little change in the covariance
between air pollution levels and share African American in a Census tract. However, over time, the negative
relationship between pollution and non-Hispanic white population shares weakens.
    Figure B1b shows that for African Americans, there is virtually a one to one relationship between average
individual exposure and the unweighted mean Census tract pollution level, consistent with the flat trend in

                                                        35
the covariances in Figure B1a. Hence, among African Americans, virtually all of the reduction in pollution
exposure can be accounted for by the average African American tract cleaning up, rather than by relocation
of African Americans to relatively cleaner tracts. Formally, Column (2) of Table B5 suggests 93% of the 2000-
2015 improvement in air quality for African Americans can be explained by changes in the average African
American tract. The remaining seven percent can be explained by a weakening of the covariance between
African American population shares and pollution exposure. Figure B1c shows that the average white
pollution exposure is slightly lower than average tract-level exposure, indicating that whites live in cleaner
tracts. However, this gap narrows over time, consistent with the trend in covariances shown in Figure B1a.
Overall then, this decomposition indicates that a small part of the gap between African Americans and
non-Hispanic whites can be accounted for by whites becoming less concentrated in the relatively cleanest
neighborhoods, but that most of the relative air quality improvement for African Americans reflects clean
ups within tracts rather than relative shifts in black-white population shares to cleaner or dirtier tracts.




                                                     36
Appendix B               Appendix Tables and Figures

   Figure B1: Individual vs. Tract-Level Exposure and Covariance Between Race Share and Air Quality

                                   (a) Tract PM2.5 and Population Share Covariances




                                                .5    0
                                          PM2.5 (µg/m3)
                                        -.5     -1




                                                          2000         2005               2010                   2015
                                                                                  Year

                                                                 Covariance - Black        Covariance - White


                        (b) Individual and Tract Average PM2.5 Exposure: African Americans
                                                1
                                                .9
                                        PM2.5 (µg/m3)
                                             .8 .7
                                                .6




                                                          2000         2005               2010                   2015
                                                                                  Year

                                                                  Tract Average - Black          PM2.5 - Black


                        (c) Individual and Tract Average PM2.5 Exposure: non-Hispanic White
                                                1.1
                                                1
                                        PM2.5 (µg/m3)
                                         .8     .7
                                                .6.9




                                                          2000         2005               2010                   2015
                                                                                  Year

                                                                  Tract Average - White          PM2.5 - White




Notes: These figures present results from decomposing average PM2.5 exposure into the unweighted average Census tract
exposure for each race group and the assortative relationship between race-specific population shares and pollution levels.
Figure (a) presents the year-by-year covariance between race-specific population shares and pollution levels, separately by
race. Figure (b) plots the population-weighted trend in PM2.5 exposure for African Americans (dashed line) and the trend in
unweighted Census tract exposure for African Americans (solid line). Figure (c) replicates Figure (b) for Non-Hispanic whites.
See text for details. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).



                                                                               37
Figure B2: Race-Specific RIF-Quantile Treatment Effects of the 2005 CAA PM2.5 NAAQS Implementation




                                                                                                  1
                                                                                   RIF/Quantile Treatment Effect
                                                                                     -2         -1-3       0




                                                                                                                   0   10   20   30     40      50     60                                                    70     80       90     100
                                                                                                                                       Pollution Percentile

                                                                                                                                 QTE/RIF White                                                              QTE/RIF Black



Notes: This figure reproduces Figure 10, including confidence intervals for the regression coefficients. The figure plots the
regression coefficient ^ from 38 separate versions of equation (3), 19 regressions for each race, where the dependent variable
consists of the RIF-Quantile transformation of the respective PM2.5 vigintile (indicated by the x-axis). The regression model
controls for county fixed effects and state-by-year fixed effects. The solid gray lines represent 95% confidence intervals. Re-
gressions are weighted by Census survey weights and errors are clustered by commuting zone. Source: 2000 Decennial Census,
American Community Survey 2001-2015, EPA NAAQS Greenbook, Di et al. (2016).



                                                         Figure B3: 2005-2015 Change in Population Plotted Against Quantile Treatment Effects

                                                                 (a) African Americans                                                                                                                             (b) Non-Hispanic White
                                                                                                                                                                                                .004
                                              .02




                                                                                                                                                     2005-2015 Change in White Population Share
   2005-2015 Change in Black Population Share




                                                                                                                                                                                  .002
                      0          .01




                                                                                                                                                           -.002         0
         -.01




                                                                                                                                                 -.004
                           -.02




                                                    -2        -1.5            -1             -.5                             0         .5                                                              -2          -1.5              -1                -.5    0
                                                                     RIF/Quantile Treatment Effects: White                                                                                                            RIF/Quantile Treatment Effects: Black



Notes: Figure B3a plots the within-quantile change in the black population share between 2005 and 2015 against the RIF-
quantile treatment effects for blacks in the respective quantile (i.e. taken from Figure 10). Figure B3b repeats this exercise
for non-Hispanic whites. An observation corresponds to a particular quantile bin. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American
Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).



                                                                                                                                            38
                                               Table B1: Summary Statistics by Race, Overall, and Sub-Periods


                                                        (1)       (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)              (7)         (8)
                                                           Overall          African-American     Non-Hispanic White        Mean Diff.
                                                       Mean   Std. Dev.     Mean    Std. Dev.    Mean     Std. Dev.         (5)-(3)     p-value

                                                                                Panel A: Individual Characteristics
                     Age                               40.010     8.573     39.410     8.536      40.100      8.575           0.687     (0.000)
                     Years of School                   13.650     2.650     13.130     2.405      13.720      2.674           0.587     (0.000)
                     Sex (1=Female)                     0.514     0.500      0.549     0.498       0.509      0.500          -0.041     (0.000)
                     Homeowner                          0.703     0.457      0.486     0.500       0.733      0.443           0.247     (0.000)
                     Number of Children                 1.070     1.213      1.039     1.267       1.074      1.206           0.035     (0.000)
                     Income                            48130      51590     34300      34630      50070       53250          15760      (0.000)
                     Bottom Income Quintile             0.200     0.400      0.264     0.441       0.191      0.393          -0.073     (0.000)
                     Top Income Quintile                0.200     0.400      0.106     0.307       0.213      0.410           0.108     (0.000)
                     PM2.5 (Satellite, Block)          10.770     2.980     11.460     2.748      10.680      2.999          -0.780     (0.000)
                     PM2.5 (Satellite, County)         10.770     2.812     11.390     2.608      10.680      2.829          -0.705     (0.000)
                     PM2.5 (EPA Monitors, County)      11.460     2.948     12.040     2.781      11.360      2.964          -0.679     (0.000)

                                                                           Panel B: Census Tract Characteristics in 2000
                     African American                   0.123     0.131      0.262      0.175     0.103       0.110          -0.158     (0.000)
39




                     Public Assistance Income           34.04     39.98      34.35      40.89     33.99       39.85          -0.352     (0.902)
                     Income                            48130     12920      47660      12780     48200       12930             540      (0.392)
                     Years of Schooling                13.640     0.708     13.680      0.683    13.640       0.712          -0.035     (0.276)
                     % Worked Last Year                 0.834     0.047      0.828      0.046     0.835       0.047           0.007     (0.012)
                     Housing Value                     292500    183000     292200     178900    292500      183500            299      (0.980)
                     Housing Rent                       1096       317       1116        294      1094         320          -22.220     (0.203)
                     % Home Owners                      0.703     0.111      0.657      0.120     0.709       0.108           0.053     (0.000)
                     % Single Family Residence          0.831     0.051      0.822      0.049     0.833       0.051           0.011     (0.000)
                     % in Urban County                  0.992     0.089      0.997      0.057     0.991       0.092          -0.005     (0.000)
                     % Manufacturing Emp.               0.133     0.095      0.115      0.086     0.136       0.096           0.022     (0.000)

                                                                           Panel C: County-Level Characteristics in 2000
                     African American                   0.129     0.232      0.556      0.320      0.069      0.134          -0.487     (0.000)
                     Welfare Income                     30.50    135.80      51.71     205.90     27.53      122.60         -24.180     (0.000)
                     Years of School                   13.590     1.409     13.150      1.305     13.650      1.412           0.496     (0.000)
                     Single Family Residence            0.824     0.163      0.792      0.186      0.829      0.159           0.037     (0.000)
                     Teen Pregnancy                    -0.042    0.061      -0.063      0.074     -0.039     0.058           0.024      (0.000)
                     Home Ownership                     0.720     0.204      0.603      0.236      0.737      0.194          0.134      (0.000)


     Notes: This table presents summary statistics for individual and neighborhood characteristics for our main analysis sample. Source: 2000 Decennial Census,
     American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).
Table B2: Decomposition of Mean Differences in Pollution Exposure into Components Explained by Differ-
ences in Individual Characteristics and due to Differences in "Returns" to Characteristics


                                                               (1)            (2)
                                                            Year 2000      Year 2015
                                   Predicted difference         -1.616       -0.544
                                             Panel A: Explained Gap
                                     Income               -0.001             0.000
                                     Age                  -0.009             -0.002
                                     Schooling            -0.011             -0.010
                                     Kids                  0.003              0.001
                                     Gender                0.000              0.000
                                     Homeowner            -0.061             -0.033
                                   Total                  -0.078             -0.044
                                           Panel B: Unexplained Gap
                                     Income               0.040      0.013
                                     Age                 -0.412     -0.251
                                     Schooling           -0.419     -0.456
                                     Kids                 0.018      0.049
                                     Gender              -0.009     -0.002
                                     Homeowner           -0.002      0.000
                                     Constant             -0.755     0.146
                                   Total                 -1.537     -0.500
                                   N                         10550000       1185000

Notes: This table plots the results from an Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition of mean differences in PM2.5 exposure between
African-Americans and non-Hispanic whites. Column (1) performs this decomposition for the year 2000, whereas column (2)
decomposes differences originating in 2015. Panel A displays the amount by which black-white differences in the respective
covariates explain the gap in mean PM2.5 exposure between groups. Panel B presents the amount by which black-white
differences in the respective coefficient estimates explain the gap in mean PM2.5 exposure between groups. Source: 2000
Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).




                                                           40
Table B3: Decomposition of Quantile Differences in Pollution Exposure into Components Explained by
Differences in Individual Characteristics and due to Differences in "Returns" to Characteristics


                                      (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)           (5)          (6)

                                                Year 2000                                  Year 2015
                                    10th          50th         90th             10th         50th          90th
                                  Percentile    Percentile   Percentile       Percentile   Percentile    Percentile
          Predicted difference      -2.360        -1.607       -0.861           -1.081       -0.434        -0.130
                                                              Panel A: Explained Gap
            Income                   0.004        -0.003       -0.001         0.001           0.000         0.001
            Age                     -0.015        -0.008       -0.002         -0.003         -0.002        -0.002
            Schooling                0.002        -0.006        0.001          0.003         -0.001        -0.021
            Kids                    0.004          0.004       0.002          -0.001          0.000         0.002
            Gender                  -0.002         0.001        0.001         0.0001          0.000        0.000
            Homeowner               -0.041        -0.010       -0.120         -0.034         -0.018        -0.056
          Total                     -0.049        -0.023       -0.119         -0.034         -0.019        -0.077
                                                             Panel B: Unexplained Gap
            Income                   0.240        -0.057        0.011          0.016         -0.008         0.046
            Age                     -0.696        -0.352        0.036         -0.399         -0.205        -0.262
            Schooling                0.316        -0.147       -0.981         -0.114         -0.263        -0.696
            Kids                    0.045         -0.004        0.013          0.040          0.034         0.059
            Gender                  -0.018        -0.007       -0.002         -0.007         -0.002         0.001
            Homeowner               -0.006         0.004       -0.000          0.001         -0.003         0.003
            Constant                -2.191        -1.020        0.181         -0.585          0.031         0.795
          Total                     -2.311        -1.584       -0.742         -1.047         -0.415        -0.053
          N                       10550000      10550000      10550000         1185000      1185000       1185000

Notes: This table plots the results from six RIF decompositions of quantile differences in PM2.5 exposure between African-
Americans and non-Hispanic whites, where quantiles are indicate in the column headings. Columns (1)-(3) perform this decom-
position for the year 2000, whereas columns (4)-(6) decompose differences originating in 2015. Panel A displays the amount by
which black-white differences in the respective covariates explain the gap in quantile PM2.5 exposure between groups. Panel B
presents the amount by which black-white differences in the respective coefficient estimates explain the gap in quantile PM2.5
exposure between groups. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).




                                                             41
                   Table B4: Oaxaca-Blinder Decomposition, Census Tract Characteristics


                                                                          (1)           (2)
                                                                       Year 2000     Year 2015
                         Predicted difference                            -1.617        -0.772
                                           Panel A: Explained Gap
                           Income                                0.000                 0.000
                           Age                                  -0.008                 -0.003
                           Schooling                            -0.002                 -0.003
                           Kids                                 0.002                   0.001
                           Gender                               -0.001                  0.000
                           Homeowner                            0.001                   0.019
                           Neighborhood/Tract
                             Tract % Black                      -2.311                 -0.502
                             Tract Public Assistance Income     -0.037                 -0.007
                             Tract Years of Schooling           -0.034                 -0.021
                             Tract % Single Family Residence     0.280                  0.010
                             Tract Teen Pregnancy Rate           0.032                 -0.002
                             Tract Home Ownership Rate          -0.266                 -0.116
                         Total                                  -2.344                 -1.032
                                          Panel B: Unexplained Gap
                           Income                               -0.052                 0.028
                           Age                                  -0.221                 -0.218
                           Schooling                            -0.359                 -0.292
                           Kids                                 0.039                   0.047
                           Gender                               -0.003                 -0.003
                           Homeowner                            0.002                  -0.004
                           Neighborhood/Tract
                             Tract % Black                       1.687                 0.185
                             Tract Public Assistance Income     -0.190                  0.010
                             Tract Years of Schooling           -3.274                 -1.046
                             Tract % Single Family Residence     1.692                  0.139
                             Tract Teen Pregnancy Rate          -0.074                 -0.015
                             Tract Home Ownership Rate          -0.875                 -0.403
                           Constant                              2.356                  0.866
                         Total                                   0.727                 0.260
                         N                                             10550000       1185000

Notes: This table plots the results from two Oaxaca-Blinder decompositions of mean differences in PM2.5 exposure between
African-Americans and non-Hispanic whites. Column (1) performs this decomposition for the year 2000, whereas column (2)
decomposes differences originating in 2015. Panel A displays the amount by which black-white differences in the respective
covariates explain the gap in mean PM2.5 exposure between groups. Panel B presents the amount by which black-white
differences in the respective coefficient estimates explain the gap in mean PM2.5 exposure between groups. Source: 2000
Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).




                                                           42
                  Table B5: Decompositions of PM2.5 Exposure Changes 2000-2015 by Race


                                                                               (1)                      (2)
                                                                        Non-Hispanic White       African American
         Average PM2.5 Change by Race: 2000-2015 (())                           -4.716                 -5.728
         Decomposition:
           Unweighted Average Tract Change: 2000-2015 (¯
                                                        ())                -5.176 (110%)          -5.349 (93.3%)
           Change in Covariance 2000-2015 (OP ())                          0.478 (-0.10%)          -0.375 (6.6%)


Notes: This table decomposes the average 2000-2015 change in pollution exposure by race into that which can be explained by
unweighted Census-tract level changes in PM2.5 versus reallocation of population shares to cleaner/dirtier Census tracts over
time. Source: 2000 Decennial Census, American Community Survey 2001-2015, and Di et al. (2016).




                                                             43
