                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           MONETARY POLICY STRATEGIES FOR THE FEDERAL RESERVE

                                      Lars E.O. Svensson

                                      Working Paper 26657
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26657


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




A previous version of this paper was prepared for the conference Monetary Policy Strategy,
Tools, and Communication Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 4­5, 2019. I am
grateful to Stefan Laséen, Edward Nelson, the conference discussant Sharon Kozicki, participants
in the conference, and the editor for comments and helpful suggestions. Support from the Knut
and Alice Wallenberg Research Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. Any views expressed
and any errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lars E.O. Svensson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve
Lars E.O. Svensson
NBER Working Paper No. 26657
January 2020
JEL No. E52,E58

                                           ABSTRACT

The general monetary policy strategy of "forecast targeting" allows the Federal Reserve to
respond flexibly to all relevant information in achieving its dual mandate of maximum
employment and price stability. In contrast, a simple "instrument" rule such as a Taylor-type rule
restricts the Federal Reserve to only respond in a rigid way to the partial information of current
inflation and output. Forecast targeting can be used for any of the more specific strategies of
annual-inflation targeting, price-level targeting, temporary price-level targeting, average-inflation
targeting, and nominal-GDP targeting. These specific strategies are examined and evaluated
according to how well they may fulfill the dual mandate, considering the possibilities of a binding
effective lower bound for the federal funds rate and a flatter Phillips curve. Nominal-GPD
targeting means that GDP and the GDP deflator are considered perfect substitutes. It therefore
does not treat maximum employment and price stability as separate and independent targets. In
addition, data on GDP and the GDP deflator have longer reporting lags and are subject to
substantial ex post revisions. The latter will require both retrospective and prospective revisions
of the target path, with large communication difficulties. Average-inflation targeting has good
prospects of handling the problems of a binding effective lower bound and a flatter Phillips curve.
As a permanently applied strategy, it would also have good possibilities of becoming understood
by and credible with markets and the general public.


Lars E.O. Svensson
Department of Economics
Stockholm School of Economics
P.O. Box 6501
SE-11383 Stockholm
Sweden
and NBER
Leosven@gmail.com
Contents
1 Introduction                                                                                         1

2 The Federal Reserve's mandate                                                                        3

3 Fulfilling the mandate: Forecast targeting                                                           5
  3.1 Accountability and commitment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        6
  3.2 The reaction function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    7
  3.3 Forecast targeting summarized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7

4 Alternative monetary policy strategies, forecast targeting, and simple instrument
  rules                                                                             10

5 Price-level targeting                                                                               13

6 Temporary price-level targeting when the ELB binds                                                  20

7 Average-inflation targeting                                                                         23

8 Nominal-GDP targeting                                                                              27
  8.1 Comparing NGDP targeting and (flexible) price-level targeting . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
  8.2 Further issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31

9 Conclusion                                                                                          32

References                                                                                            34

Appendix                                                                                              41

A Endogenous or exogenous labor-market participation rate                                             41

B Forecast targeting: The intertemporal forecast loss function                                        41

C Temporary price-level targeting when the ELB binds                                                  43

D An interest-rate rule with a lower intercept                                                        44
1    Introduction

The Federal Reserve is undertaking a broad review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy frame-
work this year. As explained by Vice Chair Clarida (2019), the Federal Reserve will examine the
policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that it uses to pursue its dual-mandate goals of
maximum employment and price stability. The review is not provoked by any dissatisfaction with
the existing policy framework, but given the unprecedented events of the past decade, the Federal
Reserve believes it is a good time to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways,
it can refine its strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain these goals
as consistently and robustly as possible. By conducting the review, the Federal Reserve wants to
ensure that it is well positioned to continue to meet its statutory goals in coming years. The review
will also evaluate the new policy tools and communication practices that the Federal Reserve has
used in response to the financial crisis 2008­2009 and the Great Recession.
    A significant background for the review is that neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in both
the US and other advanced economies, and this global decline is widely expected to persist for years.
All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate
will reach its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns (Kiley and Roberts, 2017).
That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to
support spending and employment and keep inflation from falling below the inflation target.
    Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource
slack. The short-run Phillips curve appears to have flattened. A flatter Phillips curve reduces the
role of aggregate demand and increases the role of inflation expectations in controlling inflation and
keeping inflation close to its target.
    The Federal Reserve has been charged by the US Congress with a dual mandate to achieve
maximum employment and price stability. Clarida (2019) notes that the review will take this
mandate as given. It will also take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for
personal consumption expenditures (PCE) is the operational goal most consistent with the Federal
Reserve's price stability mandate. Furthermore, the review will focus on three broad questions,
highlighted by events of the past decade.
    The first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing
monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the
inflation objective?" The background for this is that the Federal Reserve's current approach, as
that of other central banks conducting flexible inflation-targeting, treats past deviations of inflation
from the target--including the persistent shortfalls of inflation from the target that many advanced
economies have experienced over most of the past decade--as "bygones." There is no attempt to

                                                   1
offset past inflation undershoots of the inflation target with future overshoots, or vice versa. Given
the fall in the natural interest rate and the resulting increase in the probability that the ELB will
bind in the future, persistent undershoots may be more likely. This may move inflation expectations
below the inflation target and make it more difficult to achieve the target.
   Several academics and central bankers have suggested various "makeup" strategies for the Fed-
eral Reserve, such as price-level targeting, temporary price-level targeting, and average-inflation
targeting. Under these, policymakers seek to undo, in part or in whole, past inflation deviations
from target. To the extent such strategies become credible, a shortfall of inflation from the target
will raise inflation expectations, lower the real interest rate also if the ELB is binding, and this way
provide stimulus to the economy and help increasing inflation back toward the target. Furthermore,
the direct effect of inflation expectations on inflation in the Phillips curve may raise inflation, in
spite of the Phillips curve being flat.
   This "automatic" stabilization property of makeup strategies makes them a partial remedy
against a binding ELB. In models, it has also been shown that they can provide improved sta-
bility of both inflation and employment--including in situations when the ELB does not bind.
However, the automatic stabilization requires that the strategies have become credible and that the
private sector believes that the central bank will deliver and make up according to the strategy. This
probably requires that economic agents need to see the policy practiced and its principles obeyed
for some time, in order to believe that it will be maintained and be successful in the future. This is
similar to how the first inflation-targeting central banks had to earn the credibility of their inflation
target.
   The second question is, "Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain
maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded?" The third question
is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?"
   This paper will mainly deal with the first question, on makeup monetary policy strategies. It
will also discuss the general strategy of "forecast targeting" and compare it to some extent to the
alternative of following a simple "instrument rule" such as a Taylor-type rule--where by a Taylor-
type rule I mean variants of the original Taylor (1993) rule. The discussion of the communications
part of forecast targeting will touch on the third question. The second question will not be dealt
with.
   First, relying on a more extensive treatment in Svensson (2019), the paper briefly summarizes
why forecast targeting allows the Federal Reserve to respond flecibly to all information that is
relevant to achieving the Federal Reserve's mandate--interpreted as flexible inflation targeting--
whereas a Taylor-type rule restricts the Federal Reserve to only respond in a rigid way to the partial


                                                   2
information of current inflation and output. Then, the paper considers the pros and cons relative
to standard flexible inflation targeting of four specific "makeup" monetary policy strategies: flexible
price-level targeting, a temporary price-level target when the ELB binds, flexible average-inflation
targeting, and nominal-GDP targeting. The main conclusion is that average-inflation targeting is
more flexible than the alternatives and has good prospects of handling the problems of a binding
ELB and a flatter Phillips curve. As a permanently applied strategy, it has good possibilities to
become understood by and credible with markets and the general public. Nominal-GPD targeting
means that GDP and the GDP deflator are considered perfect substitutes, and it therefore does not
treat maximum employment and price stability as separate and independent targets. In addition,
data on GDP and the GDP deflator have longer reporting lags and substantial ex post revisions.
The latter will require both retrospective and prospective revisions of the target path, with large
communication difficulties.
        The paper is outlined as follows: Section 2 summarizes the Federal Reserve's mandate--interpreted
as flexible inflation targeting (Clarida, 2019)--and a loss function consistent with the mandate. Sec-
tion 3 summarizes why forecast targeting dominates Taylor-type rules as a general strategy to fulfill
the mandate. Section 4 further contrasts forecast targeting with the common habit of representing
alternative monetary policy strategies not with loss functions of target variables to be minimized but
with simple instrument rules where the policy rate responds to the target variables. Section 5 exam-
ines price-level targeting, section 6 discusses temporary price-level targeting when the ELB binds,
and section 7 considers average-inflation targeting. Section 8 examines nominal-GDP targeting, and
section 9 presents some conclusions. An appendix contains some technical details.


2        The Federal Reserve's mandate

The one-page well-written FOMC "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy"
(FOMC, 2019, first adopted in January 2012) clarifies the Federal Reserve's monetary policy goals
and strategy. The Federal Reserve's statutory mandate is to promote maximum employment and
price stability.1 The FOMC has decided that a "symmetric 2% inflation goal" is most consistent over
the longer run with its statutory mandate.2 Regarding maximum employment, the FOMC notes
that the maximum level of employment, in contrast to the rate of inflation, is largely determined not
by monetary policy but by nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor
market. These factors may change over time and may not be directly measurable. Consequently,
    1
     More precisely, the Congress has given the Federal Reserve the statutory mandate "to promote effectively
maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates." Moderate long-term interest rates will
normally follow from low and stable inflation.
   2
     The word "symmetric" was added in January 2016.


                                                       3
it would not be appropriate to specify a fixed goal for employment; rather, the maximum level of
employment must be estimated from a range of indicators and such estimates are uncertain and
subject to revision. An important indicator is the FOMC's estimate of what it calls the longer-run
normal rate of unemployment.
   The FOMC provides further clarification on how it sets monetary policy:

     In setting monetary policy, the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from
     its longer-run goal and deviations of employment from the Committee's assessments
     of its maximum level. These objectives are generally complementary. However, under
     circumstances in which the Committee judges that the objectives are not complementary,
     it follows a balanced approach in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of
     the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over which employment and
     inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its mandate. (FOMC,
     2019)

   As discussed in Svensson (2019), given this, the mandate can be well formalized by a standard
quadratic loss function of inflation and employment representing flexible inflation targeting (where
"flexible" means some weight on also stabilizing the real economy; "strict" would refer to stabilizing
inflation only). If, for simplicity, the labor-market participation rate is assumed to be independent
of monetary policy, maximum employment can be replaced by the (minimum) longer-run normal
unemployment rate (appendix A). The mandate can then be expressed in terms of a standard
quadratic loss function of inflation and unemployment.
   Furthermore, the "balanced approach" can be interpreted as an equal weight on stabilization of
inflation and stabilization of unemployment--especially given several statements of "equal weight,"
"equal footing," and "neither one takes precedent over the other" by, respectively, Bernanke (2015b),
Yellen (2012), and Clarida (2019).
   Then the quarter-t loss, Lt , can be represented by the quadratic loss function,

                                     Lt = (t -   )2 + (ut - u  2
                                                             t) .                                 (1)

Here t denotes the annual (4-quarter) inflation rate in quarter t,

                                           t  pt - pt-4 ,                                         (2)

where pt denotes the natural logarithm of the price level. Furthermore,   denotes the 2% inflation
target, ut denotes the unemployment rate (measured so that, for example, 0.04 is 4%), and ut

denotes the FOMC's (latest) estimate of the longer-run normal unemployment rate, which I will
call the (minimum) long-run sustainable unemployment rate. The inflation rate, t , and the unem-
ployment rate, ut , can be seen as the two target variables of monetary policy (target variables are


                                                  4
the variables that enter the loss function).3 In line with the "balanced approach," the loss function
(1) has equal weights on stabilizing unemployment around the long-run sustainable unemployment
rate and inflation around the inflation target.4
        In a given quarter t, the mandate can then be formalized as setting monetary policy so as to
minimize the intertemporal loss function
                               T                   T
                          Et         
                                      Lt+ = Et            [(t+ -   )2 + (ut+ - u    2
                                                                                t+ ) ],                                 (4)
                                =0                 =0

where Et denotes FOMC expectations conditional on its information in quarter t, T denotes a finite
horizon (measured in quarters), and  is a discount factor that satisfies 0 <   1. In practice, it is
close to or equal to one.5


                                                                                    6
3        Fulfilling the mandate: Forecast targeting

Forecast targeting--applied to the dual mandate interpreted as flexible inflation targeting--means
selecting a policy rate and policy-rate path so that the forecasts of inflation and employment "look
good." Here "looking good" means best fulfilling the dual mandate of price stability and maximum
employment, that is, best stabilizing inflation around the inflation target and employment around
its maximum level. Forecast targeting also means publishing the policy-rate path and the forecasts
of inflation and employment forecasts and, importantly, explaining and justifying them. This jus-
tification may involve demonstrations that other policy-rate paths would lead to worse mandate
fulfillment. Publication and justification will contribute to making the policy-rate path and the
forecasts credible with the financial market and other economic agents and thereby more effectively
implement the Federal Reserve's policy. With such information made public, external observers
can review Federal Reserve policy, both in real time and after the outcomes for inflation and em-
ployment have been observed, and the Federal Reserve can be held accountable for fulfilling its
mandate. In contrast to simple policy rules that rely on very partial information in a rigid way,
    3
     Because the FOMC's estimate of the long-run sustainable rate may change over time, it could be indexed by the
quarter of the latest estimate.
   4
     It should be noted that, if the Okun coefficient is assumed to be 2, such that the unemployment gap is related
to the GDP gap by ut - u                                          
                             t = - (1/2)(yt - yt ) (where yt and yt denote GDP and an estimate of potential GDP,
respectively), the loss function in terms of the GDP gap will be

                                           Lt = (t -   )2 + (1/4)(yt - yt
                                                                         2
                                                                          ) ,                                           (3)

that is, with a relative weight on 1/4 rather than unity on GDP-gap stabilization. Thus, it matters that the "balanced
approach" refers to employment rather than GDP.
   5
     The horizon, T , can in theory be infinite, but in practice it is finite, for example, 20 quarters. Central banks often
publish forecasts for up to 12 quarters. A finite horizon also implies that the intertemporal loss function converges
not only for 0 <  < 1 but also for  = 1.
   6
     See Svensson (2019) for a detailed discussion of forecast targeting applied to the Federal Reserves's dual mandate.


                                                             5
such as Taylor-type rules, forecast targeting allows all relevant information to be taken into account
and has the flexibility and robustness to adapt to new circumstances. Forecast targeting can also
handle issues of time consistency and determinacy.7
    As argued in some detail in Bernanke (2015a) and Svensson (2019), the Federal Reserve is
already to some extent practicing forecast targeting. In particular Bernanke (2015a) states:

          The FOMC's policy framework corresponds to what Lars Svensson has called a tar-
      geting rule (see my 2004 speech, "The Logic of Monetary Policy" [Bernanke (2004)] for
      further discussion). In a targets-based framework, the central bank forecasts its goal
      variables--inflation and employment, in the case of the Fed--and describes its policy
      strategy for bringing the forecasts in line with its stated objectives. Although targeting
      rules are not mechanical, they do provide a transparent framework that, importantly, is
      robust to changes in the structure of the economy or the effectiveness of monetary policy,
      so long as those changes can be incorporated into forecasts. Targeting rules also conform
      to the basic economic dictum that principals (in this case, Congress and the public) are
      better off monitoring their agents' outputs (in the case of the FOMC, the outcomes of
      policy choices) rather than their inputs (the specific settings of policy instruments).

    The terminology used may need some clarification. I believe "forecast targeting" is the most
appropriate name for this general policy framework--or general policy rule. I have previously also
used the terms targeting rule, forecast-targeting rule, or general forecast-targeting rule.8 Bernanke
(2004) and Erceg et al. (2012a) use the term "forecast-based targeting." Some confusion is possibly
caused by the practice in some of the literature of using the term "forecast-based policy rules" for
simple instrument rules in which the policy rate responds to forecasts of the target variables, as in
Levin et al. (2003). Using such forecast-based instrument rules is different from forecast targeting.


3.1    Accountability and commitment

The publication and justification of the FOMC's policy-rate path and inflation and unemployment
forecasts make it possible to hold the FOMC accountable for fulfilling the mandate. The policy-
rate path and forecasts of inflation and unemployment, the FOMC's justification of them and its
fulfillment of its mandate can be scrutinized and reviewed both in real time and after the fact--that
is, after the outcome for inflation and unemployment have been observed--by external observers
and experts and at the usual hearings in congressional committees (Svensson, 2012). Altogether,
forecast targeting can be seen as a case of "constrained discretion" (Bernanke and Mishkin, 1997),
where the constraint to fulfill the mandate is most explicit.
   7
     Forecast targeting rather than Taylor-type rules is discussed and promoted in, for example, Bernanke (2004,
2015a), Kohn (2007, 2012), Qvigstad (2005), Svensson (1997, 2003b, 2011), and Woodford (2004, 2007, 2012).
   8
     The term "inflation-forecast targeting" was introduced in Svensson (1997) and the term "forecast targeting" in
Svensson (2003b).




                                                        6
    The transparency of forecast targeting--with the publication, explanation, and justification of
policy-rate paths and forecasts of inflation and unemployment--may allow the FOMC a substantial
degree of commitment. This may be especially so, if it becomes established that deviations and shifts
from previously published policy-rate paths and forecasts come with good explanations. Forecast
targeting may imply a policy that is approximately optimal under commitment.9


3.2    The reaction function

It is common to argue that central banks should convey their reaction function to the market
participants and other economic agents. However, under forecast targeting, the reaction function--
meaning how the policy rate and the policy-rate path respond to information available to the central
bank--is far too complex to write as a simple formula such as a Taylor-type rule. It is actually too
complex to write down, period. The policy rate and policy-rate path will normally respond to all
relevant information, that is, all information that shifts the forecasts of inflation and unemployment.
This is a long and changing list, with response coefficients that cannot be specified in advance.10
    But the reaction function can be conveyed in more general but still both systematic and simple
terms. If initially the forecasts look good, for any piece of information that shifts the inflation
forecast up (down) and/or shifts the unemployment forecast down (up), policy will normally be
tightened (eased), meaning that the policy-rate path will shift up (down). If this response is under-
stood by and credible with the market participants, any new information that is deemed to shift up
(down) the inflation outlook or shift down (up) the unemployment outlook, may result in a market
response that shifts up (down) the yield curve. This way the financial conditions may shift in the
appropriate direction--perhaps even of the appropriate amount--even before the central bank has
responded with a new policy rate and policy-rate paths at the next decision.11


3.3    Forecast targeting summarized

Forecast targeting can be summarized and simplified as these three steps:
   1. For a given policy-rate path (for example, the policy-rate path from the previous decision),
      construct new inflation and unemployment forecasts, taking into account new information
      received since the previous decision.12
   9
     Issues of time-consistency, discretion, and commitment with forecast targeting are discussed in some detail in
Svensson and Woodford (2005) and Svensson (2011, 2019). Appendix B shows how the intertemporal loss function
can be modified to be consistent with optimal policy under commitment.
  10
     Svensson (2019, section 3.2) includes an examples in two empirical models of the US economy of how forecast
targeting performs much better than a Taylor rule when there is information about future shocks to inflation and
demand that forecast targeting but not a Taylor-type rule responds to.
  11
     To an outside observer, it would look like the FOMC would be mechanically following the market. But it would
actually be the market anticipating FOMC policy decisions.
  12
     Svensson (2011, 2019) discusses how some issues of determinacy with an exogenous policy-rate path can be


                                                        7
   2. If the new inflation and unemployment forecasts "look good" (meaning best fulfilling the man-
      date), select the given policy-rate path as the decision; if the new inflation and unemployment
      forecasts do not look good, adjust the policy-rate path so that they do look good.

   3. Publish the policy-rate path and inflation and unemployment forecasts and justify the decision
      in order to make the published path and forecasts credible, meaning making market partici-
      pant's and other economic agents' expectations align with the published path and forecasts.
      The justification of the decision may include the publication of inflation and unemployment
      forecasts for alternative policy-rate paths different from the selected one and the demonstra-
      tion that these forecasts do not fulfill the mandate to the same degree.13

    In support of the view that the Federal Reserve is already to some extent practicing forecast
targeting, one can note that, regarding steps 1 and 2 about the selection of an appropriate policy
rate path, the tools and techniques needed are already on display in the many simulations presented
in the Tealbook B document prepared by the Federal Reserve Board staff for FOMC meetings,
especially the simulations of the so-called Constrained and Unconstrained Optimal Control Policy
shown in Federal Reserve Board (2013, p. 9) (reproduced as figure 1).14
    Regarding step 3, the publication and justification of the decision, the FOMC is already publish-
ing its Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), which include economic projections of the FOMC
participants under their individual assessments of projected appropriate monetary policy. These
projections receive considerable emphasis in the Chair's press conference after policy meetings.15
    Even if the SEP is conceptually different from the forecast-targeting policy-rate path and fore-
casts of inflation and unemployment, it is not clear how quantitatively different it is from a joint
managed. Regarding, determinacy, by the well-known result of Sargent and Wallace (1975), for an exogenous policy
rate the (rational-expectations) equilibrium may be indeterminate. Uniqueness of policy simulations with exogenous
policy-rate paths in forward-looking models can be ensured by a terminal condition at a future quarter, T      ¯, beyond
the forecast horizon, T , where (i) either policy is assumed to switch to a reaction function for which the equilibrium
is unique, or (ii) the forecasts of inflation and unemployment are restricted to reach a steady state in which they are
                                                                                                                   
equal to, respectively, the inflation target and the long-run sustainable unemployment rate, that is, t+T  ¯ ,t =  and
             
ut+T ¯ ,t = u (Svensson, 2005; Svensson and Tetlow, 2005; Laséen and Svensson, 2011).
   Furthermore, as discussed in detail in Svensson and Woodford (2005), theoretically, the announcement of a policy
rate and a policy-rate path and forecasts of inflation and unemployment--even if these are credible with economic
agents and their expectations are aligned with the announcement--may not be sufficient to ensure determinacy.
Instead an explicit or implicit out-of-equilibrium commitment, understood by and credible with the economic agents,
may be required. Such a commitment is typically quite intuitive, such that it is understood that the central bank
will--all else being equal--raise (lower) the actual policy rate sufficiently above (below) the previously announced
policy-rate path, if realized inflation exceeds (falls short of) the forecast or realized unemployment falls short of
(exceeds) the long-run sustainable unemployment rate. Such a commitment can thus be seen as a kind of Taylor
principle applied to realized deviations of inflation and unemployment from the previous forecasts. Similar results to
those in Svensson and Woodford (2005) have later appeared in Atkeson et al. (2010).
   13
       Mean squared gaps (MSGs) for inflation and unemployment as quantitative measures of the degree of mandate
fulfillment may be used (appendix B). An example is given by a then typical figure in the Riksbank minutes of the
February 2013 policy meeting, discussed in Svensson (2019, section 4.1).
   14
        The Federal Reserve staff's optimal-control simulations have been described and discussed in Brayton et al.
(2014). See Svensson and Tetlow (2005) for the technique of incorporating various assumptions as judgment and "add
factors" in optimal policy projections.
   15
       Se Svensson (2019) for examples.



                                                           8
                                                                       Authorized for Public Release
                                Class I FOMC - Restricted Controlled (FR)                                                             January 24, 2013




                                  Constrained vs. vs.
                        Figure 1: Constrained         unconstrained
                                                  Unconstrained         optimal
                                                                Optimal Control     control policy
                                                                                Policy




                                                                                                                                                                   Strategies
                       Nominal Federal Funds Rate                                                Real Federal Funds Rate
                                                                            Percent                                                                   Percent
                  8                                                               8         4                                                               4
                                Current Tealbook: Constrained
                  7             Previous Tealbook: Constrained                    7
                                Current Tealbook: Unconstrained                             3                                                                3
                                Tealbook baseline
                  6                                                               6
                                                                                            2                                                                2
                  5                                                               5

                                                                                            1                                                                1
                  4                                                               4


                  3                                                               3         0                                                                0


                  2                                                               2         -1                                                               -1

                  1                                                               1
                                                                                            -2                                                               -2

                  0                                                               0
                                                                                            -3                                                               -3
                  -1                                                              -1

                                                                                            -4                                                               -4
                  -2                                                              -2


                  -3                                                              -3        -5                                                               -5
                         2013    2014   2015   2016   2017   2018   2019   2020                    2013   2014   2015   2016   2017    2018   2019   2020


                       Unemployment Rate                                                         PCE Inflation
                                                                            Percent              Four-quarter average                                    Percent
                 10                                                              10        4.0                                                               4.0



                                                                                           3.5                                                               3.5
                  9                                                               9


                                                                                           3.0                                                               3.0


                  8                                                               8
                                                                                           2.5                                                               2.5



                  7                                                               7        2.0                                                               2.0



                                                                                           1.5                                                               1.5
                  6                                                               6


                                                                                           1.0                                                               1.0


                  5                                                               5
                                                                                           0.5                                                               0.5



                  4                                                               4        0.0                                                               0.0
                         2013    2014   2015   2016   2017   2018   2019   2020                    2013   2014   2015   2016   2017    2018   2019   2020



Source and note: Federal Reserve Board (2013, p. 9). The        figure compares optimal control simulations derived for
                                                          9 of 59
the January 2013 Tealbook with those for the December 2012 Tealbook. Assumptions about underlying economic
conditions used in the staff's baseline forecast and about balance sheet policies are incorporated. Policymakers are
assumed to place equal weights on keeping headline PCE inflation close to the Committee's 2 percent goal, on keeping
the unemployment rate close to the staff's estimate of the effective natural rate of unemployment, and on minimizing
changes in the federal funds rate.


FOMC decision. Majority voting about paths in a committee may result in medians consisting of
sections from different committee members, but it is not clear whether this would be problem of
quantitative importance.16 But it is clear that the SEP is more of a snapshot of the different views
  16
     Svensson (2007) discusses majority voting on forecast paths and argues that they are completely feasible and
already occurring in a few central banks. For example, the nine-member monetary policy committee of Bank of
England makes decisions on the quarterly forecast paths of inflation, unemployment, and GDP growth three years
out. It is not obvious that a twelve-member FOMC could not do the same and include a policy-rate path as well.




                                                                                       9
of the FOMC participants and do not represent a joint decision by the FOMC members.17
    Nevertheless, the FOMC can to some extent be held accountable in real time with the current
SEP. With some reservations due to the problems mentioned, it is possible to compare the median
projection of the federal funds rate with market expectations and the median projections of inflation
and unemployment with, respectively, the 2% target and the FOMC's estimate of the long-run
sustainable unemployment rate and assess whether the FOMC is best fulfilling its mandate.


4     Alternative monetary policy strategies, forecast targeting, and
      simple instrument rules

Forecast targeting has above been discussed as a general monetary policy strategy to fulfill the
Federal Reserve's mandate. The mandate has been interpreted as the specific strategy of flexible
inflation targeting, corresponding to a loss function such as (1), with annual inflation and the un-
employment rate (or the employment rate) as the two target variables. But forecast targeting can
obviously be applied to alternative interpretations of the mandate, such as the specific strategies
of flexible price-level targeting, flexible temporary price-level targeting, flexible average-inflation
targeting, and nominal-GDP targeting, when these alternative strategies are associated with cor-
responding alternative loss functions. For the first three alternative strategies, annual inflation is
replaced as a target variable by the price level or average inflation; for nominal-GDP targeting,
the two target variables of inflation and unemployment are replaced the single target variable of
nominal GDP.
    However, it is important to note that using forecast targeting and a loss function to implement
these alternative strategies is very different from the common practice of using a specific simple
"instrument" rule to represent and implement the alternative strategies. As discussed in detail in
Svensson (2003b, 2011), a problem and source of confusion in the literature on monetary policy is
   17
      The FOMC has undertaken some experiments in constructing a consensus policy-rate path and forecasts of in-
flation and unemployment. They are discussed in some detail under the heading "Experimental Consensus Forecast"
in the October 2012 transcripts, FOMC (2012, pp. 201­279). There were several difficulties noted about constructing
consensus forecasts, including that that the policymaking environment was unusually complex with both unconven-
tional portfolio actions and forward guidance being important policy tools. Some, but not all, disagreements among
participants might be because they would disagree about the likely future evolution of asset purchases. There were
also some production-related challenges. Because the Committee's policy decisions are not known in advance of the
meeting, it would not be possible to guarantee the production of a forecast that incorporates the Committee's policy
decision in time for the Chair's press conference. In view of these difficulties, the FOMC abandoned the consensus
forecast exercise at the time--perhaps not permanently--and instead focused on improvements on the SEP.
   It is obvious that such a decision process that includes reaching a decision on the policy-rate path faces difficulties
when the FOMC also decides on balance-sheet policies and thus has several policy instruments. However, when the
balance-sheet reduction is set on autopilot and the FOMC has the federal funds rate as its one policy instrument,
perhaps such a decision-making process is possible and can be followed. From a production point of view, having the
press conference the next day--as is done at the Riksbank--may help with the production problems.



                                                           10
that it remains quite common to specify monetary policy strategies not primarily in terms of a loss
function that is increasing the deviations of the target variables from their target levels. Instead
the strategies are specified in terms of a simple instrument rule where the policy instrument--the
policy rate--responds to the target-variable gaps, that is, the gaps between the target variables and
their target levels. Then, by "targeting" a variable is not meant minimizing the deviation from its
target level but responding to the deviation. There are actually several examples of this in the staff
memos presented to the FOMC when alternative policy strategies have been discussed in 2011 and
2012 (Erceg et al., 2011, 2012a,b).
       Indeed, many simple instrument rules that have been used in the literature can be written on
the form
                                       it = it-1 + (1 - )[r + t + Rt ],                                              (5)

where the coefficient  satisfies 0   < 1 and denotes the degree of inertia (the degree of policy-rate
smoothing). Such inertia serves to introduce some history-dependence in the policy (Woodford,
2003b). Furthermore, r denotes an estimate of the neutral real interest rate, and the term Rt
includes the response to the target-variable gaps.
       In this approach, flexible inflation targeting, aiming to stabilize the inflation and GDP gaps, is
then represented by a Taylor-type rule, for which

                                          Rt = a(t -   ) + b(yt - yt
                                                                   
                                                                     ),                                              (6)

and a, b > 0 denote the response coefficients of the inflation and GDP gaps, respectively. In
particular, for the Taylor (1993) rule,  = 0 and a = b = 0.5. For an inertial Taylor (1999) rule,
instead  > 0, a = 0.5, and b = 1. Strict inflation targeting would then be characterized by a
response to the inflation gap only, that is, a > 0 and b = 0.18
       Along this approach, flexible price-level targeting would be characterized by a response to both
the price-level gap and the GDP gap,

                                          Rt = a(pt - p              
                                                       t ) + b(yt - yt ),                                            (7)

where pt - pt denotes the price-level gap, that is, the gap between (the log of) the price level, pt ,

and (the log of) the price-level target, pt . Then strict price-level targeting might be represented by

responding to the price-level gap only, that is, b = 0.
  18
     In contrast, Svensson (1997) includes an example of a simple model in which the optimal reaction function
that minimizes the loss function corresponding to strict inflation targeting, Lt = (t -   )2 , is of the form it =
r + t + a(t -   ) + b(yt - yt  
                                 ) + cxt . Here, xt is an exogenous variable that affects inflation and aggregate demand,
and the nonzero coefficients a, b, and c depend on the parameters of the Phillips curve, the aggregate-demand function,
and the dynamics of the exogenous variable. Optimal policy requires a response to all relevant state variables--the
state variables that affect the forecasts of the target variable(s)--not just the target variable(s).


                                                           11
      Flexible average-inflation targeting could be represented by responding to the average-inflation
and GDP gaps,
                                                 t -   ) + b(yt - yt
                                          Rt = a(¯                 
                                                                     ),                            (8)

where, for example, ¯t = (pt - pt-20 )/5 denotes average inflation over the last 5 years (20 quarters)
at an annual rate.
      In particular, nominal-GDP (level) targeting would be represented by responding to the nominal-
GDP gap,
                                                 Rt = a(Yt - Yt ),                                 (9)

where Yt - Yt denotes the nominal-GDP gap, that is, the gap between (the log of) nominal GPD,
Yt  pt + yt , and (the log of) the nominal-GDP target, Yt  p      19
                                                            t + yt .

      However, because

                      a(Yt - Yt ) = a[(pt + yt ) - (p                                  
                                                     t + yt )] = a(pt - pt ) + a(yt - yt ),       (10)

it follows that, for the special case when the response coefficients are equal, b = a, the instrument
rule corresponding to flexible price-level targeting, (7), would be identical to the rule corresponding
to nominal-GDP targeting, (9).
      For a concrete example, consider the memo on alternative monetary policy frameworks for the
November 2011 FOMC meeting (Erceg et al., 2011). There, an analysis of flexible inflation targeting,
price-level targeting, and nominal-GDP targeting is not done in terms of forecast targeting and the
minimization of the corresponding loss functions. Instead, it is done in terms of alternative simple
policy rules, more precisely (Erceg et al., 2011, footnote 10) using (5) with  = 0.9 and

                 Rt = 0.5(t -   ) + (yt - y  ),                  Flexible inflation targeting,    (11)

                 Rt = pt - pt,                                   Strict price-level targeting,    (12)

                 Rt = (pt + yt ) - (p     
                                     t + y ).                    Nominal-GDP targeting,           (13)

      As we observed above, if flexible price-level targeting had been represented with an additional
unitary response to the GDP gap in (12), the simple instrument rule would have been identical
to that for nominal-GDP targeting, (13). This in spite of the very different loss function (20) for
flexible price-level targeting and (21) for nominal-GDP targeting--illustrated in the corresponding
figures 9 and 10--to be examined in section 8. Clearly, two very different loss functions can hardly
be minimized with the same reaction function.
      Section 3 above summarized why forecast targeting applied to the mandate interpreted as the
strategy of flexible inflation targeting--with the period loss function (1) and the intertemporal loss
 19
      Here pt refers to (the log of) the GDP deflator.


                                                         12
function (4)--allows monetary policy to respond flexibly to all relevant information, in contrast to
using a simple instrument rule such as Taylor-type rule, which restricts policy to respond in a rigid
way to only part of the relevant information. This is also the case, if forecast targeting is applied to
the alternative strategies to be examined. Good monetary policy implies responding to all relevant
state variables, that is, responding to all information that affects the forecasts of the target variables,
which includes much more information than the current values of the target variables.


5         Price-level targeting

Flexible inflation targeting--with a loss function such as (1)--implies that past inflation deviations
are disregarded, "bygones are bygones." Even if there has been a long period of inflation under-
shooting the target--because policy has not been sufficiently expansionary, for example because of
a binding ELB--there is no attempt to later undo the undershooting by overshooting the target for
some time. If average inflation falls below the target for long periods, inflation expectations may
fall below the target and make achieving the target more difficult in the future.
         To avoid such outcomes, some economists and policymakers have advocated various "makeup"
strategies, where the policy involves undoing, partly or completely, past inflation deviations from
the target. These strategies are also referred to as "history dependent" (Woodford, 2003a). Flexible
price-level targeting, in which past inflation deviations eventually are completely undone, is promi-
nent among these strategies and has been much discussed recently (for example, Bernanke, 2017;
Bullard, 2018; Evans, 2019; Williams, 2017). Instead of stabilizing inflation around an inflation
target, it involves stabilizing the price level around a price-level target. The price-level target is
not constant but follows a deterministic increasing path corresponding to a steady positive inflation
rate.20
         Flexible price-level targeting can be represented by the loss function

                                          Lt = (pt - p   2          2
                                                      t ) + (ut - ut ) ,                                          (14)

where pt denotes the (log) price-level target and is given by


                                                  p           
                                                   t = pt-1 +  .                                                  (15)

Thus, the price-level target corresponds to a price-level target path that increases by the constant
rate   , for example, 2%. Importantly, using forecast targeting to minimize the period loss (14)
and intertemporal loss (4) is different from applying the simple instrument rule (7).
    20
     There is a considerable amount of past research on price-level targeting and the relative performance of inflation
targeting and performance, discussed, for instance, in the surveys by Ambler (2009) and Hatcher and Minford (2014).


                                                          13
       In (14), it is assumed that the FOMC reinterprets the "balanced" approach to refer to unem-
ployment relative to the price-level gap rather than to the inflation gap. An alternative is that the
FOMC retains the balanced approach to refer to the inflation gap, in which case a non-unity weight
on unemployment-gap stabilization relative to price-level stabilization may be appropriate.21
       If inflation targeting means that past inflation deviations from the target are disregarded and
not undone by policymakers, this should in principle introduce a unit root in the price level. This
means that price level would not be trend-stationary. That is, it would be nonstationary also after
the removal of a deterministic trend. This in turn implies that the conditional variance of the
future price level would increase without bound with the horizon. The price-level would in principle
behave like a random walk with drift. Given this, it is a bit ironic that inflation targeting with a low
inflation target is widely referred to as "price stability." "Low inflation" might be a more appropriate
name.
       In contrast, price-level targeting would make the price level trend-stationary, and the price level
would display mean reversion toward the price-level target path. The conditional variance of the
future price level would be bounded and long-run price-level uncertainty would be much less than
under inflation targeting. Price-level targeting would make long-run inflation stable and close to
the implicit inflation target.
       The second paragraph above--starting with "If inflation targeting. . . "--uses the expression "in
principle" twice. This is because the practice looks quite different for several advanced economies.
The figures 2b­6b of the price levels of Canada, Australia, the euro area, the UK, and the US show
that the price-level outcomes for these economies, up to around the financial crisis 2008­2009, do not
look like that of a random walk but surprisingly similar to that of price-level targeting (Rosengren,
2013; Ruge-Murcia, 2014). In fact, Canada looks like price-level targeting further, into 2014, and
the euro area also looks pretty much like this into 2014. (Figures 2a­6a show the corresponding
annual and 5-year inflation rates. Figures 7a and 7b allow a comparison between the PCE core and
PCE deflator outcomes of inflation and the price level for the US.)
       Canada stands out among these economies. Using data from 1993:M1 to 2013:M3, Ruge-Murcia
(2014) can indeed reject the hypothesis that the Canadian CPI has a unit root, and he cannot
reject that the CPI is trend-stationary.22 The reasons why the Canadian price-level has so closely
  21
      The determination of such a relative weight is complicated (Vestin, 2006). Depending on the dynamics of
the economy and expectations formation, price-level targeting may decrease inflation variability and reduce any
negative inflation-gap bias because of the ELB. Simulations with realistic models and assumptions about expectations
formation are required to settle the issue of whether a non-unity relative weight is warranted. It is also possible to
consider variants of flexible price-level targeting with some remaining weight on inflation stabilization.
  22
     In contrast, Ruge-Murcia (2014) cannot reject a unit root for the price levels of Australia, New Zealand, Sweden,
and the UK, and he rejects the hypothesis of trend stationarity. In a previous working paper with a shorter sample of
1992:M10­2009:M12, he could reject a unit root for the UK. This is consistent with the UK price level overshooting



                                                         14
                                 Figure 2: Canada: Inflation and price level

                     a. CPI inflation                                               b. CPI level
     5                                                          170
                                        12m CPI CA                       Price level, 2%
                                        5y CPI CA               160      Price level CA
     4
                                                                150
     3
                                                                140

     2                                                          130

                                                                120
     1
                                                                110
     0
                                                                100

     -1                                                          90
     1995     2000      2005   2010     2015     2020             1995     2000        2005      2010   2015   2020
Source and note: Thomson Reuters Datastream. 3-month trailing moving average. The Bank. of Canada has an
"inflation-control" target of 2% for the CPI.

                                Figure 3: Australia: Inflation and price level

                     a. CPI inflation                                               b. CPI level
     6                                                          180
                                         4Q CPI AU                       Price level, 2.5%
     5                                   5y CPI AU                       Price level 2% and 3%
                                                                160      CPI AU
     4

     3                                                          140

     2                                                          120
     1
                                                                100
     0

     -1                                                          80
     1995     2000      2005   2010     2015     2020             1995     2000        2005      2010   2015   2020
Source and note: Thomson Reuters Datastream. 3-month trailing moving average. The Reserve Bank of Australia
has an inflation target of 2­3% over the "medium term" (previously over the "[business] cycle"). On July 1, 2000, a
10 % goods and services tax was introduced in Australia. As a result, the CPI price level increased by 3 %. Hence
the annual inflation rate was increased by 3 percentage points for the next 4 quarters, and the 5-year inflation rate
was increased by 0.6 percentage points for the next 5 years. The increase in the price level was fully anticipated by
the public and financial markets, and the Reserve Bank of Australia did not seek to offset the effect of on the price
level (Debelle, 2018).


followed a price-level target path has been discussed in several papers, including Kamenik et al.
(2013) and Ruge-Murcia (2014).23 The reasons mentioned include small symmetric shocks or some
inherent error-correcting behavior in the policy setting, for example, a high degree of interest-rate
smoothing--but not that the Bank of Canada has covertly and consciously pursued price-level
the implicit price level target from 2009 onward (figure 5b).
  23
     See Ruge-Murcia (2014) for a summary of the discussion.


                                                         15
                                    Figure 4: Euro area: Inflation and price level

                   a. HICP inflation                                                 b. HICP level
     4                                                            150
                                            12m HICP EA                    Price level, 2%
                                            5yr HICP EA                    HICP EA
                                                                  140
     3

                                                                  130
     2
                                                                  120
     1
                                                                  110

     0
                                                                  100

    -1                                                             90
    1995       2000      2005      2010      2015     2020          1995     2000        2005        2010   2015   2020
Source and note: Thomson Reuters Datastream. 3-month trailing moving average. The ECB aims to maintain HICP
inflation "below, but close to, 2% over the medium term."

                                          Figure 5: UK: Inflation and price level

             a. RPIX and CPI inflation                                       b. RPIX and CPI level
     5                                                            150
                                                                           Price level, 2.5%, before 2004
                                                                  140      RPIX UK
     4                                                                     Price level, 2%, from 2004
                                                                  130      CPI UK
     3
                                                                  120

     2                                                            110

                                                                  100
     1
             12m RPIX UK (before 2004)                             90
     0         5y RPIX UK
             12m CPI UK (from 2004)                                80
               5y CPI UK
    -1                                                             70
    1995       2000      2005      2010      2015     2020          1995     2000        2005        2010   2015   2020
Source and note: Thomson Reuters Datastream. 3-month trailing moving average. From 2004, Bank of England has
had an inflation target of 2% for the CPI, which is the name used for the HICP in the UK. Before 2004, it had a
target of 2.5% for the RPIX.


targeting.
    One benefit of price-level targeting compared with inflation targeting is that long-run uncertainty
about the price level is smaller. Another much discussed benefit is that, if the price level falls below
a credible price-level target, inflation expectations would rise and reduce the real interest rate
even if the nominal interest rate is unchanged. The reduced real interest rate would stimulate the
economy and bring the price level back to the target. Furthermore, to the extent that the Phillips
curve is similar to an expectations-augmented Phillips curve, the increase in inflation expectations
would have a separate direct effect on inflation, parallel to the interest-rate effect. Thus, credible

                                                             16
                                     Figure 6: US: Inflation and price level

               a. PCE core inflation                                          b. PCE core level
     3                                                        150
                                                                       Price level, 2%
                                                                       PCE core US
    2.5                                                       140

     2                                                        130

    1.5                                                       120

     1                                                        110

    0.5                                                       100
            12m PCE core US
            5y PCE core US
     0                                                         90
     1995    2000      2005   2010      2015    2020            1995     2000        2005   2010   2015   2020
Source and note: Thomson Reuters Datastream. 3-month trailing moving average. The Federal Reserve was consid-
ered by many to have an unofficial inflation target of 2% from around 2000. From 2012 it has an official inflation
goal of 2% for the PCE deflator.


price-level targeting may imply some--or even substantial-- "automatic" stabilization. Theoretical
research (summarized in Ambler, 2009; Bank of Canada, 2011; Hatcher and Minford, 2014) has
shown that this automatic stabilization may result in less variability of both inflation and output.
    The automatic stabilization makes monetary policy more effective, especially in situations when
the ELB is binding and the nominal interest rate cannot be further reduced. This property of
price-level targeting has increased the interest in price-level targeting in recent years.
    However, the automatic stabilization would work to the extent that the price-level target is
credible, in the sense of the private sector believing that the central bank will take action to limit
deviations of the price level from the target and successfully bring the price level back to the target.
For such credibility to develop, economic agents probably need to see price-level targeting being
operated and consistently applied over time by the central bank, in the same way as inflation-
targeting central banks have had to achieve credibility of their inflation target by consistently
operating inflation targeting over some time.
    As Bernanke (2017) notes, the "bygones are not bygones" aspect of price-level targeting is a two-
edged sword. Under symmetric price-level targeting, the central bank cannot "look through" shocks
to the Phillips curve--"cost-push" shocks--that temporarily drive up inflation, but must commit to
tightening policy in order to reverse the effects of the shock on the price level. This reversal could
be gradual and responsive to real-side conditions, as indeed flexible price-level targeting implies.
Nevertheless, it implies a possibly painful tightening even as the negative supply shock depresses
employment and output. The real cost is reduced if the price-level target is credible and inflation



                                                       17
                             Figure 7: US: PCE core and PCE inflation and price level

              a. PCE core and PCE inflation                           b. PCE core and PCE price level
        4                                                       150
                                                                         Price level, 2%
                                                                         PCE core US
                                                                140      PCE US
        3

                                                                130
        2
                                                                120
        1
                                                                110
                12m PCE core US
        0       5yr PCE core US                                 100
                12m PCE US
                5yr PCE US
       -1                                                        90
       1995       2000     2005    2010   2015    2020            1995     2000        2005   2010   2015   2020
                     Source and note: Thomson Reuters Datastream. 3-month trailing moving average.


expectations shift down, but if not, offsetting possible supply shocks and positive inflation shocks
would be more costly.
       The Bank of Canada has done considerable research on price-level targeting and seriously con-
sidered it in its 2011 5-yearly review of the "inflation-control" target (Bank of Canada, 2011). It
concluded (p. 14):

            Recent research has shown that modest, but economically significant, potential gains
            from price-level targeting can be found in the most favourable model simulations, with
            these gains prospectively enhanced once the costs and risks of the ZLB are incorpo-
            rated. However, these models assume that agents are forward-looking, fully conversant
            with the implications of price-level targeting and trust policy-makers to live up to their
            commitments. While positive, albeit smaller, net gains from price-level targeting may
            still be available if these conditions are not fully satisfied, it is not presently clear that
            they would be sufficiently satisfied in the real world for the Bank to have confidence
            that price-level targeting could improve on the current inflation-targeting framework.

Thus, the bank did not take the jump. Explicit price-level targeting may only have occurred in real
life in Sweden during the 1930's, but the period of explicit price-level targeting is too short and too
special for any general conclusions to be drawn.24
       However, the evaluation of price-level targeting in Canada was done up to 2011, when the
actual outcome was more or less indistinguishable from that of price-level targeting (figure 2b).
Furthermore, when the Bank were doing theoretical model simulations to compare the performance
of inflation targeting and price-level targeting, it apparently used a policy reaction function with a
large coefficient on the lagged interest rate (close to a "difference rule") in the simulations, which
  24
    See Berg and Jonung (1999) for a discussion of the good Swedish experience of price-level targeting during the
Great Depression.


                                                          18
generated results that were very close to those of price-level targeting. As a result, the net benefits
of moving to inflation targeting may have seemed smaller for Canada than they would for other
economies. In particular, an increased probability of being constrained by the ELB would increase
the net benefit of moving.25
    In any case, the Federal Reserve needs to do its own cost-benefit analysis to assess the pros and
cons of a move to flexible price-level targeting, regardless of the Canadian one, while taking into
account the relevant parameters, including the probability of being constrained by the ELB.
    As seen in figures 8a and 8b, Sweden and the Riksbank represent a clear outlier among inflation
targeters in terms of price-level and inflation performance, with a persistent downward inflation
bias. Because inflation expectations have nevertheless been well anchored at the target until the
around 2011, inflation persistently undershooting the target has likely had costs in the form of
persistently higher unemployment (Svensson, 2015). Already in an evaluation of Swedish monetary
policy 1995­2005, commissioned by the Swedish Parliament, Giavazzi and Mishkin (2006, pp. 77-78)
warned about this downward bias and its associated loss in output and employment. Some reasons
for the undershoot and possible remedies--including a 5-year average-inflation target to avoid the
persistent downward bias--are discussed in Svensson (2013, 2018).
    To paraphrase FOMC (2019), in setting monetary policy under flexible price-level targeting, the
FOMC would seek to mitigate deviations of the price level from its longer-run goal and deviations
of employment from the FOMC's assessments of its maximum sustainable level. These objectives
would generally be complementary. However, under circumstances in which the FOMC would judge
that the objectives are not complementary, it would follow a balanced approach in promoting them,
taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different time horizons over
which employment and the price level are projected to return to levels judged consistent with its
mandate.26
    It is often said that price-level targeting would be more difficult to communicate than inflation-
targeting. I am not convinced that this need to be so. First, financial markets should not have
any difficulties in understanding price-level targeting. Second, I don't see why it necessarily would
   25
      According to John Murray--previously Deputy Governor of Bank of Canada--Douglas Laxton, at the IMF,
was the first to uncover this result, and the first to imply that the Bank of Canada was doing price-level targeting.
Murray (2019) further says: "We were surprised and noted that if we had been price-level targeting, we were completely
unaware of it. At first, we credited it to the symmetric nature of the shocks that must have been hitting the economy.
It was only later, when we were doing some simulations to compare the performance of inflation targeting and price-
level targeting, that we realized that our existing policy reaction function generated results that were very close those
of price-level targeting. Adding a lagged interest rate term to the reaction function with a large coefficient on it was
the reason. The downside of this result was that it made selling a move to price-level targeting more difficult--though,
clearly, if you're not doing it intentionally and it's not well advertised, you never get the full benefit."
   26
      However, as noted above on page 14 and in footnote 21, the appropriate degree of "balance" needs to be carefully
considered.



                                                           19
                                Figure 8: Sweden: Inflation and price level

                    a. CPI inflation                                              b. CPI level
     5                                                        160
                                       12m CPI SE                      Price level, 2%
     4                                 5y CPI SE              150      Price level, 1.15%
                                                                       CPI SE
     3                                                        140

     2                                                        130

     1                                                        120

     0                                                        110

    -1                                                        100

    -2                                                         90
    1995     2000      2005   2010     2015     2020            1995     2000        2005   2010   2015   2020
Source and note: Thomson Reuters Datastream. 3-month trailing moving average. The Riksbank had a target of 2%
for CPI inflation since 1995. In September 2017 it switched to a 2% target for the CPIF (which excludes effects of
changes in mortgage rates on the housing-cost component in the CPI).


be more natural for the general public to think in terms of the rate of change of the price level
than in terms of price level itself. Already now, much discussion about prices of goods, services,
and assets--in particular, exchange rates--and of wages is as much in terms of levels as in rates
of change. Much discussion of macroeconomic aggregates--such as employment, unemployment,
and GDP--is in terms levels and not only in terms of changes. With a price-level target, much
discussion would focus on the current and future price level and its relation to the price-level target
path rather than the rate of inflation. Graphs of price-level paths will likely be more common in
the media than of inflation rates. In any case, if the price level has fallen below the path, it can be
said both that the price level needs to go back up toward the path and that inflation will have to
be above the long-run average for a while.
    The move from inflation targeting to full-fledged price-level targeting may nevertheless seem too
risky to many central bankers. An intermediate alternative and a smaller move is to temporary
price-level targeting when the ELB is binding.


6    Temporary price-level targeting when the ELB binds

At the September 2010 meeting of the FOMC, Chicago Fed President Evans proposed a temporary
price-level target for the Federal Reserve (Evans, 2010b).27 The proposal included a mock-up of
a potential FOMC announcement from the upcoming November 2010 meeting, which described
  27
     The original 2010 proposal was authorized for public release by the FOMC Secretariat on November 20, 2017,
after the publication of Bernanke (2017) in October.



                                                       20
the economic situation, the rationale, the specific policy actions, additional commentary and some
frequently-asked-questions posed in discussions with his staff. The background for the proposal was
that, in Evans' opinion, much more policy accommodation was appropriate at the time. He believed
that the US economy was best described as being in a bona fide liquidity trap. Evans (2010a) also
presented the temporary price-level target at a conference at the Boston Fed.
    Evans proposed a state-contingent price-level target consistent with an average annual increase
of 3% from the core PCE index value in December 2007, when the recession began. Monetary
policy actions were to be taken to achieve this target path. Specifically, this state-contingent policy
objective was to be pursued until actual core PCE prices had attained the target-level path. Once
this condition had been achieved with sufficient confidence, policy would return to an affirmed
normal response patterns to achieve 2 percent PCE inflation over the medium-term. The policy
would be supported by large-scale asset purchases. The mock-up FOMC announcement also stated
that "In the event other supporting actions are deemed helpful or necessary to meet the target-
price-level path within a reasonable timeframe, the Committee will take all necessary actions"--
a "do whatever it takes" statement close to two years before that of ECB President Draghi.
    Thus, this was a temporary price-level target with an exit--once the target had been achieved
with sufficient confidence--to a 2% inflation target over the medium term. Had the FOMC taken
the jump and the proposal been adopted in the fall of 2010, we would no doubt have been a bit
wiser today. Its outcome would have been an obvious major discussion point at this conference, if
today's conference had indeed still taken place--and had not been considered redundant.28
    More recently, Bernanke (2017) has proposed that, in a situation away from the ELB, the FOMC
should announce that it will apply a temporary price-level target when the ELB is binding in the
future. In future situations in which the policy rate is at or near the ELB, a necessary condition for
raising the policy rate would be that average inflation since the date at which the policy rate first
hit the ELB be at least 2 percent. Beyond this necessary condition, in deciding whether to raise
the policy rate from zero, the FOMC would consider the outlook for the labor market and whether
the return of inflation to target appears sustainable.
    The average-inflation criterion is equivalent to a temporary price-level target, which applies
only during the ELB episode. The criterion is couched in the language of inflation targeting, which
Bernanke considered to be an advantage from a communications perspective.
   28
      I am naturally very favorably inclined to Evans's proposal. My own 2000 proposal for Japan, the Foolproof Way
of Escaping from a Liquidity Trap (further discussed in Svensson, 2003a), has two similarities and one major difference.
It involved an upward-sloping price-level target path to undo the undesired deflation; a currency depreciation and a
temporary crawling peg in order to achieve the price-level target; and, once the price-level target had been achieved,
an exit to a floating exchange rate and normal inflation or price-level targeting. The Czech National Bank has
successfully used a variant of the Foolproof Way--with a currency depreciation and temporary peg, but without a
price-level target--to achieve its inflation target (Al-Mashat et al., 2018).


                                                          21
   Hebden and López-Salido (2018) (HLS) and Bernanke, Kiley, and Roberts (2019) (BKR) provide
evaluations of variants of Bernanke's proposal in the form of simulations of Federal Reserve mod-
els. Unfortunately, from my point of view--and typically, given the discussion in section 4--they
interpret Bernanke's proposal not in terms of forecast targeting and approximately optimal policy
but in terms of alternative simple instrument rules, more precisely as a temporary deviation from
Taylor-type rules (see appendix C for details).
   HLS interpret Bernanke's proposal as a Taylor-type policy rule where the response to an average-
inflation gap since the start of the ELB episode is added. Under the assumption of model-consistent
expectations and thus that the policy is credible, HLS show that, when the responses coefficient of
the average-inflation gap is chosen optimally, the temporary price-level/average-inflation targeting
rule gives better macroeconomic outcomes than most other instrument rules considered in the
literature, including the Taylor (1993) and Taylor (1999) instrument rules.
   BKR also discuss variants of Bernanke's proposal in terms of a simple instrument rule. Here, an
inertial Taylor (1999) rule is augmented by the price-level gap, which is given by the accumulated
(not average) inflation short-fall since the quarter when the ELB started to bind. The price-level
gap is included as long as it is negative.
   For these policies with a negative average-inflation or price-level gap added to Taylor-type rules,
lift-off may occur while these gaps still are negative, if the inflation and GDP gaps are sufficiently
positive. However, BKR also consider variants of Bernanke's original "threshold rule," according to
which the policy rate would remain at zero regardless of GDP and current inflation until a threshold
condition such as nonnegative average-inflation or price-level gap obtains, at which point the policy
is determined by a Taylor-type rule and the ELB condition. They furthermore consider both the
case when all private agents have model-consistent expectations understand and believe the policy
rule and the case when only asset-market participants have such expectations.
   In particular, under the threshold rule, they take into account that, if the ELB period is extended
and the cumulative inflation shortfall is large, the implied commitment to overshoot inflation may
be correspondingly large. This they consider could be problematic and risk possible unanchoring of
inflation expectations. To mitigate against such risks, they consider a price-level gap with limited
memory and shorter "look back."
   Overall, the simulations of BKR confirm earlier results that the modified Taylor-type rules, the
"low-for-longer" rules, deliver better economic performance than the traditional rules. The relative
advantage of low-for-longer policies is generally somewhat less with less than complete model-
consistent policies, but BKR show that several policies are still more effective than traditional rules.
In particular, rules with price-level gaps with shorter look backs of three years or even one year


                                                  22
deliver significant improvements over traditional rules under both expectations assumptions.
    These proposals for temporary price-level/average-inflation can be seen as compromises between
inflation targeting with a higher inflation target and permanent price-level targeting. However, if
they are only applied occasionally and temporarily, economic agents will not be very used to them,
and considerable explanation and communication may be necessary. But this may still not be
sufficient for the temporary price-level target to be credible, in which case the favorable effect of
raised inflation expectations will be reduced or not occur. Credibility normally needs to be earned,
meaning that economic agents need to see the policy put into practice and its principles obeyed
for some time, in order to believe that it will be maintained and be successful in the future. A
permanent compromise may be preferable, such as permanent average-inflation targeting.


7    Average-inflation targeting

Average-inflation targeting here means flexible inflation targeting when the central bank has a target
for average inflation over a longer period than a year. For simplicity and concreteness, let me assume
a 5-year averaging period, without forgetting that the appropriate averaging period remains to be
determined.29 The 5-year (20-quarter) average inflation rate (at an annual rate) in quarter t, ¯t , is
then given by
                       ¯t = (pt - pt-20 )/5 = (t + t-4 + t-8 + t-12 + t-16 )/5,
                                                                                                                 (16)

where we recall that t by (2) denotes the annual inflation rate in quarter t, pt - pt-4 .
    The central bank may want to put some weight on both the 5-year and the 1-year inflation rate,
corresponding to the loss function

                           Lt = µ   t -   )2 + (1 - µ
                                 ¯ (¯
                                                              2           2
                                                     ¯ )(t -  ) + (ut - ut ) ,                                   (17)

where µ¯ denotes the relative weight on 5-year inflation and satisfies 0 < µ¯  1, with a value

less than 1 corresponding to the situation when there is weight on both the 5-year and the 1-year
inflation rate. Even if the central bank wants to stabilize the 5-year inflation rate, it may want to
avoid too much variability of the 1-year rate. Furthermore, (17) assumes that the FOMC would
interpret its balanced approach to imply a unitary relative weight on unemployment stabilization.
Whether or not the appropriate relative weight on unemployment stabilization is unity under flexible
average-inflation targeting is an issue that remains to be settled.
    Nessén and Vestin (2005) have examined the properties of average-inflation targeting in a model
  29
     In particular, the results of BKR for a temporary price-level targeting with a shorter look back indicates that a
shorter averaging period, such as 3 years, may be appropriate.



                                                         23
with a Phillips curve with both forward- and backward-looking elements.30 31 Svensson (2013) has
proposed some weight on a 5-year inflation target for the Riksbank as a way of mitigating the
persistent downward bias in the inflation outcome since 1996 (clearly visible in figures 8a and 8b).
Svensson (2018) has proposed some weight on a 5-year average-inflation target for the ECB.32
       Most recently, Williams (2018) and Mertens and Williams (2019a,b) have discussed average-
inflation targeting as a possible policy for the Federal Reserve in handling future problems of a
binding ELB. However, they model average-inflation targeting not as a loss function with average
inflation as an argument but as an instrument rule with a lower intercept when the ELB does not
bind. This is equivalent to raising the implicit annual inflation target. Reifschneider and Willams
(2000) used the same method to increase the inflation target, referring to the reduction of the
intercept as "risk adjustment." 33 This results in inflation overshooting the original inflation target
when policy is not constrained by the ELB. In order to result in average inflation equal to the
original target, the increase in the inflation target/reduction in the intercept has to be calibrated
to the estimated future level and binding frequency of the ELB.
       Flexible average-inflation targeting as in (17) would involve the FOMC putting some weight on
keeping 5-year inflation close to the target and include a forecast of the 5-year inflation rate in the
SEP. It is not necessary but may be natural to extend the forecast horizon from 3 to 5 years for at
least annual and 5-year inflation but perhaps also for the other variables in the SEP.
       To paraphrase FOMC (2019), in setting monetary policy under average-inflation targeting, the
FOMC would seek to mitigate deviations of [both] average [and annual] inflation from its longer-run
goal and deviations of employment from the FOMC's assessments of its maximum sustainable level.
These objectives would generally be complementary. However, under circumstances in which the
FOMC would judge that the objectives are not complementary, it would follow a balanced approach
in promoting them, taking into account the magnitude of the deviations and the potentially different
time horizons over which employment and inflation are projected to return to levels judged consistent
  30
      Under the assumption of optimization under discretion, Nessén and Vestin (2005) find that, in a purely forward-
looking economy, price-level targeting dominates average- and annual-inflation targeting. For a more backward-
looking economy, there are intermediate cases when average-inflation targeting with an appropriate choice of the
relative weight on output-gap stabilization dominates both price-level targeting and annual-inflation targeting. The
more backward-looking the economy becomes, the shorter the optimal averaging period. The optimal relative weight
on output-gap stabilization under average-inflation targeting needs to be chosen with care.
   31
      The approach to average-inflation targeting in Nessén and Vestin (2005) is closely related to the work on "hybrid"
price-level targeting in Batini and Yates (2003), Cecchetti and Kim (2005), and Røisland (2006).
   32
      For the Riksbank and the ECB, Svensson (2013, 2018) has proposed that the phrase "without prejudice to the
objective of price stability" in the mandate should not be interpreted as some kind of a hierarchical mandate. Instead
it should simply be fulfilled by keeping the 5-year inflation rate close to a symmetric inflation target and otherwise
allow standard flexible inflation targeting and a dual mandate. Such an interpretation would be fully consistent with
the Maastricht Treaty and the 2018 texts on the ECB's website (Svensson, 2018).
   33
      For details, see appendix D




                                                          24
with its mandate.34
       In mitigating deviations of average inflation from the inflation target, the FOMC would have
incentives to prevent annual inflation from persistently under- or overshooting the inflation target for
longer periods. Any undershooting of annual inflation for a couple of year would normally be followed
by some overshooting, in order to stabilize average inflation around the target. More precisely, if
average inflation during the past 21
                                   /2 years have undershot the target, normally average inflation
over the coming 21
                 /2 would overshoot the target, in order to bring the 5-year average inflation closer
to the target--while also always taking into account the outlook for the labor market, corresponding
to the last term in (17).35
       Several central banks seem to have some (arguably irrational) "fear of overshooting," which may
cause an undershooting bias of inflation. Average-inflation targeting would normalize overshooting
after undershooting and help against this fear.
       In the current situation in the US, 5-year average inflation has undershot the inflation target
for some 8 years (figure 6a with core PCE inflation).36 Under average-inflation targeting, monetary
policy would--all else being equal--aim to make annual inflation overshoot the target for a few
years in order to bring 5-year inflation closer to the target.
       A 5-year average-inflation target is similar to having a 5-year price-level target that exceeds
the current price level by about 10%.37 In a situation when the ELB starts binding, this would
correspond to the temporary price-level target proposed by Bernanke (2017), in particular, when the
latter is coached in terms of average inflation, except that Bernanke's temporary average-inflation
target does not have a fixed horizon. This is because a necessary condition for raising the policy rate
would be that average inflation since the date at which the policy rate first hit zero be at least 2%,
regardless of how soon or late that occurs. However, as noted by BKR and mentioned in section 6,
a fixed averaging period may be preferable also when policy is constrained by the ELB.
       An important difference to the temporary price-level target is that the flexible average-inflation
targeting will be permanent and operate all the time. Market participants and the general public
will see the policy put into practice and its principles obeyed. This makes it more likely that it
will be credible and incorporated in normal expectations formation. Then it is more likely to be
credible also when the ELB is binding, and thus that it will help in achieving a better economic
  34
      As implied by footnote 30, again the appropriate degree of "balance" needs to be carefully considered.
  35
      Doyle (2018) has suggested an "error-correcting inflation target" for the Federal Reserve, to replace its current
fixed 2 percent objective. The new target would be a 10-year rolling average centered on the latest month's data,
therefore encompassing the past 5 years of data and a 5-year projection. So, if inflation was systematically below
target in the preceding half decade, the target would adjust upward to hit the full decade target, correcting the earlier
error. Monetary policy, anticipating the next 5 years, would have to be set accordingly.
   36
      Figure 7a shows that 5-year PCE inflation has undershot the target even more the last few years.
   37
      1.025 - 1 = 10.4%.



                                                           25
performance in such situations.
    Furthermore, suppose that the average-inflation target becomes credible. Then, away from the
ELB and under normal circumstances, inflation expectations may move in favorable directions,
and some of the automatic stabilization under a credible price-level target would also occur under
average-inflation targeting. If annual inflation has been undershooting the target for a couple of
years, expectations of annual inflation for the next couple of years would move above the target,
thus inducing more expansionary monetary policy by reducing the real interest rate at unchanged
nominal interest rates.
    In particular, with inflation expectations entering the Phillips curve, higher inflation expectations
would through this channel independently increase inflation. This may be particularly advantageous
if the Phillips curve is now flatter and inflation is less responsive to slack in the labor market and
other relevant markets.
    In a way, the desired outcome is for expectations of annual inflation to be less anchored to the
inflation target and move around in desirable ways, whereas inflation expectations over several years
ahead would remain anchored to the inflation target.
    However, if annual inflation has overshot the target for several years, symmetric average-inflation
targeting requires that--all else being equal--annual inflation should be brought down to undershoot
the target for a couple of years. If the automatic stabilization is working, inflation expectations
would come down and in this way reduce the required tightening of policy and possible associated
employment cost. Furthermore, the weight on unemployment stabilization implies a gradual, opti-
mal return to the average inflation target. Nevertheless, there are situations--such as some positive
cost-push shocks--when tightening may be rather undesirable and when it may be justified to allow
average inflation to overshoot for some time and allow a corresponding permanent increase in the
price level.
    A clear example is provided by the introduction of a 10% goods-and-services tax in Australia on
July 1, 2000, figure 3. As a result, the CPI price level increased by 3 %. Hence the annual inflation
rate was increased by 3 percentage points for the next 4 quarters, and 5-year inflation was--all else
being equal--increased by 0.6 percentage points for the next 5 years. The increase in the price level
was fully anticipated by the public and financial markets, and the Reserve Bank of Australia did
not seek to offset the effect of it on the price level (Debelle, 2018).38
    Another possible example is from the UK (figure 5). In the UK, annual inflation and 5-year
   38
      The Reserve Bank of Australia has an inflation target of 2­3% over the "medium term" (previously over the
"[business] cycle"). A question is whether this should be interpreted an average-inflation target, especially because the
typical business cycle may be 5­6 years long. As far as I can see, the actual practice of the RBA is hardly different
from that of a standard flexible inflation targeter with a 2.5% inflation target.



                                                           26
inflation was high and above the target during the financial crisis 2008­2009 and several years
after--in contrast to what was the case in several other economies. Although the high inflation
was involuntary, overshooting the target when unemployment is high is consistent with successful
flexible inflation targeting.39 A thorough counterfactual analysis of average-inflation targeting is
required to assess how average-inflation targeting would have performed during this period and
whether it would have been costly to stabilize average inflation more. In particular, one should not
forget that, with a 5-year average-inflation target, 5-year inflation is a bygone after 5 years.
    Given these examples, I believe that it needs to be considered whether or not some explicit escape
clause should be included in average-inflation targeting. Furthermore, the appropriate weights on
average and annual inflation, the appropriate length of the averaging period, and the relative weight
on employment stabilization requires further and thorough studies and considerations.
    Flexible average-inflation targeting represents considerable continuity of current inflation target-
ing but contains considerable potential for improvements. In particular, credibility of an average-
inflation target would imply movements of inflation expectations and automatic stabilization that
would improve performance when the ELB binds and possibly improve inflation control for flatter
Phillips curves.
    Furthermore, if average-inflation targeting works well, it allows possible further benefits by
evolution toward a longer averaging period and an even larger relative weight on average inflation
than on annual inflation, thus approaching price-level targeting. If it does not work well, it allows
a retreat back to current annual-inflation targeting.


8    Nominal-GDP targeting40

Nominal-GDP (NGDP) targeting has been suggested as a suitable monetary policy over the years,
for example, by Taylor (1985), Hall and Mankiw (1994), McCallum and Nelson (1999), Frankel
(2012) and Frankel in Bernanke et al. (2018), and Garín et al. (2016). It has never been tried in
practice.
    Recently, several papers have proposed NGPD targeting with the argument that it may con-
tribute to more complete financial markets by making non-contingent nominal contracts state-
contingent in a welfare-improving way (Koenig, 2013; Sheedy, 2014; Azariadis et al., 2019; Bullard
   39
      The unemployment rate rose from 5.2% in 2008Q2 to 7.8% in 2009Q2 and stayed around 8% until 2013Q2, when
it started to drop rapidly. Inflation overshot the target during 2010­2013.
   40
      In the previous conference version of the paper, nominal-GDP targeting was briefly examined in the appendix
of the paper and found to be inferior to flexible price-level targeting. During the audience Q&A session of the paper
(Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 2019), Eric Sims, Evan Koening, and James Bullard suggested that a monetary
policy strategy of nominal-GDP targeting might have better properties than suggested by the paper. In response to
this, the discussion of nominal-GDP targeting has been expanded and put in the main text.


                                                         27
and DiCecio, 2019; Bullard and Singh, 2019; Beckworth, 2019). The papers argue that this would
create better risk-sharing between debtors and creditors, make nominal loans more like equity and
nominal debt less risky, stabilize the ratio of nominal debt and nominal debt payments to nominal
incomes, and improve financial stability. The idea is that the countercyclical inflation created by
NGDP targeting would cause real debt burdens to vary in a procyclical manner. As a result, debtors
would benefit during recessions and creditors would benefit during booms. Fixed nominal-priced
loans would act more like equity than debt and thereby promote financial stability.41 However,
proposing completion of financial markets, improved risk-sharing, and financial stability as goals
for monetary policy is clearly proposing a new and different mandate for the Federal Reserve, not
consistent with the current dual mandate of both stable prices and maximum employment. The
Federal Reserve's review of its monetary policy framework takes the existing mandate as given.
Furthermore, there is by now considerable evidence and reasons why financial stability is not a
suitable goal for monetary policy and why financial stability and financial-market efficiency must
be achieved with macro- and microprudential policy (Bernanke, 2015c; IMF, 2015; Williams, 2015;
FOMC, 2016; Svensson, 2017a).42
       Targeting the level of nominal GDP can be represented by the loss function

                                                 Lt = (Yt - Yt )2 ,                                              (18)

where Yt denotes the log of nominal GDP and Yt denotes the log of the NGDP target. The latter
  41
      Persson and Svensson (1989) provide an early analysis of how monetary and exchange-rate policies may change
the risk characteristics of nominal bonds and in some cases allow a completion of asset markets. Nominal-GDP
stabilization and resulting countercyclical price movements make nominal bonds have risk characteristics like shares
of GDP.
  42
      In particular, monetary policy leaning against the wind (LAW)--meaning tighter policy for financial-stability
purposes--has been much discussed and examined. The costs of LAW include lower inflation and higher unemploy-
ment; the benefits include possibly lower probability and magnitude of financial crises. Using a robust framework
with a minimal number of assumptions together with conventional benchmark estimates of the effect of the policy
rate on unemployment and debt and of the effect of debt on the probability and magnitude of crises, Svensson (2017a)
shows that the costs of LAW exceed the benefits by a large margin. To overturn this result, policy-rate effects on the
probability and magnitude of crises need to be more than 5­40 standard errors larger than the benchmark estimates.
Adrian and Liang (2018) have challenged the robustness of this result and argued that alternative "reasonable as-
sumptions" about the effect of the policy rate on the probability or magnitude of a crisis would overturn it. However,
as is shown in Svensson (2017a,b), these alternative assumptions require estimates that are 12­43 standard errors
larger than the estimates of Schularick and Taylor (2012), Jordà et al. (2013), and Flodén (2014).
   After a thorough discussion of the evidence at its April 2016 meeting, the FOMC reached a similar conclusion
about the costs and benefits of LAW: "Most participants judged that the benefits of using monetary policy to address
threats to financial stability would typically be outweighed by the costs ...; some also noted that the benefits are
highly uncertain" (FOMC, 2016).
   It is always possible to construct more complicated calibrated models with a number of special and unrealistic
assumptions in which the configuration of costs and benefits imply that some positive LAW is optimal. But then the
results are not robust to alternative and more realistic assumptions. Gourio et al. (2018) present such a model, in
which a financial crisis results in a permanent drop of 10% in productivity, capital, output, and consumption and a
permanent rise in the marginal disutility of labor so as to keep employment and unemployment unchanged. In spite
of this large cost of a financial crisis, the optimal LAW is nevertheless small, corresponding to a reduction of the
annual probability of crises of only 9 basis points, from 2.08% to 1.99%, implying on average one crisis in 50.3 years
instead of one in 48.1 years. Such small LAW is hardly economically significant.


                                                         28
may be given by
                                                Yt = Yt      
                                                       -1 + G ,

corresponding to a deterministic path for nominal GDP that grows at the constant rate G . Nominal
GDP satisfies Yt  pt + yt , where yt denotes the log of (real) GDP and pt (in this section) denotes the
log of the GDP deflator. The NGDP target satisfies Yt  p                
                                                        t + yt , where yt denotes an estimate of

potential output and pt denotes an implicit price-level target determined by the difference between

Yt and yt
        .

       Importantly, NGDP targeting implies a single mandate, stabilizing NGDP, which treats prices
and GDP as perfect substitutes, with a one-to-one tradeoff. In contrast, the dual mandate implies
stabilizing two variables independently, prices and employment, which treats prices and employment
as imperfect substitutes. As then San Francisco Fed President Williams put it in the discussion of
the staff memo by Erceg et al. (2011) on alternative monetary policy framework at the FOMC's
November 2011 meeting (FOMC, 2011, p. 71):43

         Nominal income targeting seems to muddy the waters. Investors care separately about
         prices and about quantities. And, importantly, we care separately about prices and
         about quantities. Looking at only nominal income, which mashes together prices and
         quantities, seems to me at this time to be counterproductive and could undermine the
         anchoring of inflation expectations.


8.1      Comparing NGDP targeting and (flexible) price-level targeting

It is instructive to compare NGDP targeting to (flexible) price-level targeting, with the loss function
(14), where the "balanced approach" to price-level targeting is interpreted to imply equal weight on
stabilizing prices and unemployment.
       First, the price-level loss function (14)--which is in terms of prices and unemployment--need
to be converted to a loss function in terms of prices and GDP. Assume an Okun coefficient of 2 and
that GDP and unemployment gaps satisfy

                                                  
                                            yt - yt = -(ut - ut )/2.                                            (19)

Then, the loss function in terms of prices and GDP that corresponds to price-level targeting can be
written
                                      Lt = (pt - p   2               2
                                                  t ) + (1/4)(yt - yt ) ,                                       (20)
  43
     However, as mentioned in section 4, NGDP targeting in Erceg et al. (2011) is not modeled as a loss function to
be minimized but implemented with a Taylor-type rule where the policy rate responds to the NGDP gap, (5) and
(13). This is in turn indistinguishable from implementing flexible price-level targeting with a Taylor-type rule with
the coefficients of the price-level and GDP gaps being equal, (10).




                                                         29
with a relative weight on stabilizing the GDP gap equal to 1/4 . The surface and contours of the
price-level-targeting loss function (20) are shown in figures 9a and 9b as functions of the price and
GDP gaps, pt - p            
                t and yt - yt .

             Figure 9: Loss as function of price and GDP gaps: Flexible price-level targeting

                       a. Surface                                                            b. Contours
                                                                6                    11.25                              11.25


                                                                4
                                                                    11.25

                                                                2

                                                                                                      0   0.25
                                                                0                                                    2.25
                                                                                                                                6.25
                                                                                                  1
                                                               -2                       4
                                                                            9                                                   11.25
                                                               -4 11.25


                                                               -6
                                                                 -3             -2           -1       0          1          2           3


Note: Surface and contours of the loss Lt = (pt - p      2               2                                      
                                                      t ) + (1/4)(yt - yt ) as function of the price gap, pt - pt , and
                 
GDP gap, yt - yt . The thick red line (gray in black-and-white print) shows the combinations of price levels and GDP
for which the (log of) nominal income Yt = pt + yt equals the target Yt = p        
                                                                              t + yt .




       The loss function for NGDP targeting, (18), can be expanded in terms of the price-level gap and
the GDP gap as

                    Lt = (Yt - Yt )2 = [(pt + yt ) - (p      2                           2
                                                       t + yt )] = [(pt - pt ) + (yt - yt )] .                                    (21)

The surface and contours of the loss function (21) are shown in figures 10a and 10b as functions of
the price and GDP gaps.
       We see a rather dramatic difference between the loss functions for price-level targeting and NGDP
targeting.44 Under NGDP targeting, the loss is zero along the straight line in (pt - p          
                                                                                      t , yt - yt )-space

that corresponds to a zero NGDP gap,

                         (pt - p                                                    
                                t ) + (yt - yt ) = (pt + yt ) - (pt + yt ) = Yt - Yt = 0.                                         (22)

This is the straight thick red (gray in black-and-white print) line from the point (pt - pt , yt -
  , Loss) = (-3, 3, 0) to the point (3, -3, 0) in figures 10a and 10b.
yt
       In contrast, under price-level targeting, the loss is zero only for the point (pt - p          
                                                                                            t , yt - yt ) = (0, 0)

but rises rapidly to 32 + (1/4)32 = 11.25 at the points (pt - p          
                                                               t , yt - yt ) = (3, -3) and (-3, 3); see

the thick red (gray) line in figures 9a and 9b.
  44
       For simplicity, the difference between PCE-deflator and GDP-deflator price gaps is disregarded.


                                                          30
             Figure 10: Loss as function of price and GDP gaps: Nominal-GDP targeting

                       a. Surface                                                        b. Contours
                                                                   6                                         49       64
                                                                                              25    36
                                                                                     9   16

                                                                   4                 4
                                                                                     1
                                                                                 0
                                                                   2
                                                                                 1
                                                                                 4
                                                                   0
                                                                                  9
                                                                                 16
                                                                  -2
                                                                               25
                                                                             36
                                                                  -4       49
                                                                         64
                                                                  -6
                                                                    -3          -2       -1    0         1        2        3


Note: Surface and contours of the loss Lt = (Yt - Yt )2 = [(pt - p              2                                       
                                                                  t ) + (pt - pt )] as function of the price gap, pt - pt ,
                    
and GDP gap, yt - yt . The thick red line (gray in black-and-white print) shows the combinations of price levels and
GDP for which the (log of) nominal income Yt = pt + yt equals the target Yt = p            
                                                                                      t + yt .




    This reflects that the price level and the GDP level are perfect substitutes under NGDP target-
ing, the result of there being only one target variable, nominal GDP, and thus a single mandate,
stabilizing NGDP. Instead, under (flexible) price-level targeting there are two independent target
variables, the price level and employment (where the latter may be replaced by the corresponding
GDP level), and thus a dual mandate. Under NGDP targeting, there is a constant unitary trade-off
between prices and GDP. Under price-level targeting, there is a variable tradeoff. In addition, the
relative weight on stabilizing the GDP gap in (20) is 1/4 rather than unity, implying that for price
and GDP gaps of equal size, the marginal rate of substitution of GDP for prices, dyt /dpt |Lt = const. ,
is 4 in absolute value rather than unity.45
    The fact that the loss functions are so different indicate that the optimal reaction functions
would be different, counter to the tendency of representing NGDP targeting and flexible price-level
targeting with similar--or even identical--simple instrument rules as discussed in section 4.


8.2     Further issues

Some proponents of NGDP-growth targeting, such as Frankel (2012) and Frankel in Bernanke et al.
(2018), seem to confuse inflation targeting with strict inflation targeting--that is, with the loss
function Lt = (t -   )2 with zero weight on stabilizing employment and GDP and thus a single
  45
     The loss function (20) for flexible price-level targeting has a variable marginal rate of substitution of GDP for
prices, dyt /dpt |Lt = const. = -(Lt /pt )/(Lt /yt ) = -4(pt - p            
                                                                 t )/(yt - yt ), whereas the loss function (21) for flexible
price-level targeting has a constant unitary marginal rate of substitution of GDP for prices, dyt /dpt |Lt = const. =
-(Lt /pt )/(Lt /yt ) = - 1.



                                                            31
mandate, inflation stabilization. Compared with strict inflation and strict price-level targeting,
NGDP targeting has the apparent advantage of putting some implicit positive weight on stabilizing
GDP and employment. But the relevant comparison is with flexible inflation or price-level targeting,
in which comparison NGDP growth or level targeting is at a disadvantage.
    Importantly, there are serious practical problems with NGDP targeting, as discussed in some
detail by then Vice Chair of the Board Yellen at the November 2011 FOMC meeting (FOMC, 2011,
pp. 80­82). She noted that that there would be enormous practical challenges in implementing this
framework, which may help explain why no other central bank has ever followed such an approach.
In particular, it would not be appropriate for the target path to be permanently fixed. Rather, it
would need to be revised whenever there were significant changes in the estimated level or growth
rate of potential output. Importantly, such revisions would need to be retrospective as well as
prospective. There would be public confusion on such occasions, and people would complain that
the Federal Reserve is changing the goal posts.
    Additional problems, noted by Mishkin (1998), are that data on nominal GDP are reported
with a larger lag and less frequency than consumer prices and unemployment. Also, the concepts
of consumer-price inflation and unemployment are much better understood by the public than the
concept of nominal GDP, which can easily be confused with real GDP. Consequently, communication
may be more difficult.
    In summary, NGPD targeting means that GDP and the GDP deflator are considered perfect
substitutes. It therefore does not treat maximum employment and price stability as separate and
independent targets. In addition, there are practical problems because data on GDP and the GDP
deflator have longer reporting lags and are subject to substantial ex post revisions. The latter will
require both retrospective and prospective revisions of the target path, with large communication
difficulties. These circumstances may be among the reasons why no central bank has chosen NGDP-
targeting.


9    Conclusion

The general monetary policy strategy of "forecast targeting" allows the Federal Reserve to respond
flexibly to all relevant information in achieving its dual mandate of maximum employment and
price stability. In contrast, a simple "instrument" rule such as a Taylor-type rule restricts the
Federal Reserve to only respond in a rigid way to the partial information of current inflation and
output. In particular, the transparency of forecast targeting--with the publication, explanation, and
justification of policy-rate paths and forecasts of inflation and unemployment, and the possibility



                                                  32
of holding the FOMC accountable for its policy and forecast--may allow the FOMC a substantial
degree of commitment. This may be especially so, if it becomes established that deviations and
shifts from previously published policy-rate paths and forecasts come with good explanations.
   Furthermore, the paper has considered the pros and cons relative to standard flexible inflation
targeting of four "makeup" strategies: flexible price-level targeting, a temporary price-level target
when the ELB binds, flexible average-inflation targeting, and nominal-GDP targeting.
   Nominal GPD targeting makes GDP and the GDP deflator perfect substitutes. It therefore does
not treat maximum employment and price stability as separate and independent targets. Practical
problems include longer reporting lags and large ex post revisions of data. The latter will require
both retrospective and prospective revisions of the target path, with large communication difficulties.
   Average-inflation targeting has good prospects of handling the problems of a binding ELB and
a flatter Phillips curve. Compared with inflation targeting, it implies some automatic stabilization,
if it would become credible. Then inflation expectations would move in a way that would mitigate
problems of both a binding ELB and a flatter Phillips curve. Furthermore, average-inflation target-
ing would normalize overshoots of the annual inflation target after undershoots, thereby help against
the irrational fear of overshooting the inflation target that several central banks have displayed.
   Compared with a temporary price-level target when the ELB binds--which can alternatively be
described as a temporary average-inflation target--average-inflation targeting would be operating
all the time and not just when the ELB is binding. This means that economic agents would see
it in continuous operation over time, which makes it more likely that it would be well understood
and also be credible. Realistically, credibility may have to be earned over time and may not come
immediately, which implies a strong argument for a strategy that operates all the time.
   Compared with price-level targeting, average-inflation targeting is a smaller step from annual-
inflation targeting.   There is a considerable continuity with annual-inflation targeting in that
average-inflation targeting can be seen as just a matter of extending the inflation-averaging period,
from one year to a few years. This is likely to be an advantage in communicating it. Nevertheless,
it can be also seen as a half-way step toward price-level targeting.
   Furthermore, average-inflation targeting as described here is quite flexible. It allows for some
weight on both the annual and the multi-year average-inflation target, keeping some aspect of
annual-inflation targeting. If average-inflation targeting is successful, the averaging period can
be extended, this way getting closer to price-level targeting. If less successful, average-inflation
targeting allows for a retreat to annual-inflation targeting.
   The choice of the appropriate weights on stabilizing average inflation, annual inflation, and
employment--in order to best correspond to the Federal Reserve's "balanced approach" and "equal


                                                  33
footing", once average inflation has entered the loss function--has been left open in this discussion.
This choice needs careful and thorough examination by the Federal Reserve before a move to average-
inflation targeting. The choice of the averaging period also needs consideration. I have used a 5-year
period as an example, but the appropriate averaging period could be longer or shorter than that.
   Another issue left open is whether or not there is a case for some escape clause for special
situations where it may be inappropriate to enforce the symmetry of the makeup mechanism. This
issue would also be relevant for a move to price-level targeting.


References
Adrian, Tobias, and Nellie Liang (2018), "Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial
  Stability," International Journal of Central Banking 14(1), 73­130.

Al-Mashat, Rania, Kevin Clinton, Douglas Laxton, and Hou Wang (2018), "Czech Republic: Tran-
  sition to the Frontier," in Adrian, Tobias, Douglas Laxton, and Maurice Obstfeld (eds.), Advanc-
  ing the Frontiers of Monetary Policy, chap. 10, International Monetary Fund, pages 155­183,
  https://www.bookstore.imf .org/books/title/advancing-the-frontiers-of-monetary-policy.

Ambler, Steve (2009), "Price-Level Targeting and Stabilization Policy: A Survey," Journal of Eco-
 nomic Surveys 23(5), 974­997.

Atkeson, Andrew, V.V. Chari, and Patrick J. Kehoe (2010), "Sophisticated Monetary Policies,"
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 125(1), 47­89.

Azariadis, Costas, James Bullard, Aarti Singh, and Jacek Suda (2019), "Incomplete Credit Markets
  and Monetary Policy," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 103(June), 83­101.

Bank of Canada (2011), Renewal of the Inflation-Control Target: Background Information--
  November 2011, Bank of Canada, https://www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2011/11/
  background_nov11.pdf.

Batini, Nicoletta, and Anthony Yates (2003), "Hybrid Inflation and Price-Level Targeting," Journal
  of Money, Credit and Banking 35(3), 283­300.

Beckworth, David (2019), "The Financial Stability Case for a Nominal GDP Target," Cato Journal
  39(2), 419­447, https://www.cato.org/cato-journal/springsummer-2019/financial-stability-case-
  nominal-gdp-target.

Berg, Claes, and Lars Jonung (1999), "Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience
  1931-1937," Journal of Monetary Economics 43(3), 525­551.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2004), "The Logic of Monetary Policy," speech at the National Economists
  Club, Washington, DC, December 2, Federal Reserve Board, https://www.federalreserve.gov/
  boarddocs/speeches/2004/20041202/default.htm.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2015a), "Monetary Policy in the Future," blog post, April 15, 2105, Brook-
  ings Institution, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/2015/04/15/monetary-policy-
  in-the-future/.


                                                 34
Bernanke, Ben S. (2015b), "Remarks at the Brookings Institution on the FORM Act," video
  clip, Brookings Institution, https://www.youtube.com/embed/KJmA5JDNpKg?start=42&end=
  60&version=3.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2015c), "Should Monetary Policy Take Into Account Risks to Financial Stability,"
  blog post, April 7, 2015, Brookings Institution, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/ben-bernanke/
  2015/04/07/should-monetary-policy-take-into-account-risks-to-financial-stability/.

Bernanke, Ben S. (2017), "Monetary Policy in a New Era," prepared for the conference
  on Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy, Peterson Institute, Washington, DC, October 12­
  13, 2017, Brookings Institution, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/10/
  bernanke_rethinking_macro_final.pdf.

Bernanke, Ben S., Olivier J. Blanchard, Jeffrey Frankel, Frederic S. Mishkin, and John C. Williams
  (2018), "The Options: Keep It, Tweak It, or Replace It," panel at the event "Should the Fed
  Stick with the 2 Percent Inflation Target or Rethink It?", January 8, 2018, Brookings In-
  stitution, https://www.brookings.edu/events/should-the-fed-stick-with-the-2-percent-inflation-
  target-or-rethink-it/.

Bernanke, Ben S., Michael T. Kiley, and John M. Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for
  a Low-Rate Environment," AEA Papers and Proceedings 109(May), 421­426, including online
  appenix, https://doi.org/10.1257/pandp.20191082.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997), "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for
  Monetary Policy," Journal of Economic Perspectives 11(Spring), 97­116.

Brayton, Flint, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2014), "Optimal-Control Mone-
  tary Policy in the FRB/US Model," FEDS Notes, November 21, Federal Reserve Board,
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/notes/feds-notes/2014/optimal-control-monetary-
  policy-in-frbus-20141121.html.

Bullard, James (2018), "A Primer on Price Level Targeting in the U.S." presentation on January 10,
  2018, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, https://www.stlouisfed.org/~/media/files/pdfs/bullard/
  remarks/2018/bullard_cfa_stlouis_10_january_2018.pdf.

Bullard, James, and Riccardo DiCecio (2019), "Optimal Monetary Policy for the Masses," Working
  Papaper 2019-009C, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, https://research.stlouisfed.org/wp/more/
  2019-009.

Bullard, James, and Aarti Singh (2019), "Nominal GDP Targeting with Heterogenous Labor Sup-
  ply," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, forthcoming.

Cecchetti, Stephen G., and Junhan Kim (2005), "Inflation Targeting, Price-Path Targeting, and
  Output Variability," in Bernanke, Ben S., and Michael Woodford (eds.), The Inflation-Targeting
  Debate, chap. 4, University of Chicago Press, pages 173­195, https://www.nber.org/chapters/
  c9558.pdf.

Clarida, Richard H. (2019), "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools,
  and Communication Problems," speech in New York, February 22, 2019, Federal Reserve Board,
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/clarida20190409a.htm.



                                               35
Debelle, Guy (2018), "Twenty-five Years of Inflation Targeting in Australia," in Simon, John,
  and Maxwell Sutton (eds.), Central Bank Frameworks: Evolution or Revolution?, Reserve Bank
  of Australia, pages 53­68, https://www.rba.gov.au/publications/confs/2018/pdf/rba-conference-
  volume-2018-debelle.pdf.
Doyle, Peter (2018), "An Error-Correcting Inflation Target," Alphaville guest post, Decem-
  ber 12, 2018, Financial Times, https://ftalphaville.ft.com/2018/12/12/1544614200000/An-error-
  correcting-inflation-target-/.
Erceg, Christopher, Jon Faust, Michael Kiley, Jean-Philippe Laforte, , David López-Salido, Steve
  Meyer, Edvard Nelson, David Reifschneider, and Robert Tetlow (2012a), "An Overview of Sim-
  ple Policy Rules and ther Use in Policymaking in Normal Times and Under Current Condi-
  tions," Memo for the FOMC Meeting July 31­August1, 2012, Federal Reserve Board, https:
  //www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20120718memo02.pdf.
Erceg, Christopher, Michael Kiley, and David López-Salido (2011), "Alternative Monetary Policy
  Frameworks," Memo for the FOMC Meeting November 1­2, 2011, Federal Reserve Board, https:
  //www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20111006memo02.pdf.
Erceg, Christopher, Michael Kiley, and David López-Salido (2012b), "Simple Rules and Optimal
  Policies in Staff Models," Memo to the FOMC, March 2012, Federal Reserve Board, https://
  www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC20120303memo03.pdf.
Evans, Charles (2010a), "Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment: Developing a State-
  Contingent Price-Level Target," panel contribution in Boston, October 16, 2010, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Chicago, https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/speeches/2010/10-16-boston-speech.
Evans, Charles L. (2010b), "A Proposal for a State-Contingent Price-Level Objective," proposal to
  the FOMC, September 14, 2010; authorized for public release by the FOMC Secretariat on Novem-
  ber 20, 2017, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/
  files/FOMC20100914memo01.pdf.
Evans, Charles L. (2019), "Long-Term Economic Trends and Monetary Policy Frame-
  works and Strategies," summary of presentation on May 6, 2019, Federal Reserve
  Bank of Chicago, https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/speeches/2019/long-term-economic-
  trends-and-monetary-policy-frameworks-and-strategies.
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (2019), "Summary of Audience Q&A - Session #5: Monetary Policy
  Strategies," summary, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, https://www.chicagofed.org/~/media/
  others/events/2019/monetary-policy-conference/session-5-audience-qa-summary-pdf .pdf?la=
  en.
Federal Reserve Board (2013), "Report to the FOMC on Economic Conditions and Mon-
  etary Policy, Book B, Monetary Policy: Strategies and Alternatives," Tealbook B, Jan-
  uary 24, 2013, Federal Reserve Board, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/
  FOMC20130130tealbookb20130124.pdf.
Flodén, Martin (2014), "Did Household Debt Matter in the Great Recession?" Supplement to blog
  post on Ekonomistas.se, https://www.martinfloden.net/files/hhdebt_supplement_2014.pdf.
FOMC (2011), "Transcript of the Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on November
 1­2, 2011," transcript, Federal Reserve Board, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/
 files/FOMC20111102meeting.pdf.

                                               36
FOMC (2012), "Transcript of the Meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee on October 23­
 24, 2012," transcript, Federal Reserve Board, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/
 files/FOMC20121024meeting.pdf.
FOMC (2016), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, April 26­27," minutes, Federal
 Reserve Board, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20160427.pdf.
FOMC (2019), "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," adopted ef-
 fective January 24, 2012, as amended effective January 29, 2019, Federal Reserve Board,
 https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf.
Frankel, Jeffrey (2012), "The Death of Inflation Targeting," Vox Column, June 19, 2012, https:
  //voxeu.org/article/inflation-targeting-dead-long-live-nominal-gdp-targeting.
Garín, Julia, Robert Lester, and Eric Sims (2016), "On the Desirability of Nominal GDP
 Targeting," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 69(21-44), https://doi.org/10.1016/
 j.jedc.2016.05.004.
Giannoni, Marc P., and Michael Woodford (2003), "Optimal Interest-Rate Rules: I. General Theory,"
  NBER Working Paper No. 9419, https://www.nber.org/papers/w9419.
Giavazzi, Francesco, and Frederic S. Mishkin (2006), "An Evaluation of Swedish Mone-
  tary Policy between 1995 and 2005," Report to the Swedish Parliament, Sweden's Parlia-
  ment, https://www.riksdagen.se/globalassets/10.-sprak/engelska/reports-from-the-riksdag/an-
  evaluation-of-swedish-monetary-policy-between-1995-and-2005.pdf.
Gourio, François, Anil K. Kashyap, and Jae W. Sim (2018), "The Tradeoffs in Leaning Against the
 Wind," IMF Economic Review 66(1), 70­115.
Hall, Robert E., and N. Gregory Mankiw (1994), "Nominal Income Targeting," in Mankiw,
  N. Gregory (ed.), Monetary Policy, chap. 2, University of Chicago Press, pages 71­94, https:
  //www.nber.org/chapters/c8329.pdf.
Hatcher, Michael, and Patrick Minford (2014), "Stabilization Policy, Rational Expectations,
  and Price-Level versus Inflation Targeting: A Survey," CEPR Discussion Paper No. 9820,
  Centre for Economic Policy Research, https://cepr.org/active/publications/discussion_papers/
  dp.php?dpno=9820.
Hebden, James, and David López-Salido (2018), "From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price
  Level Targeting," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018­051, Federal Reserve Board,
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/files/2018051pap.pdf.
IMF (2015), "Monetary Policy and Financial Stability," Staff Report, International Monetary Fund,
  https://www.imf .org/external/np/pp/eng/2015/082815a.pdf.
Jordà, Òscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor (2013), "When Credit Bites Back," Journal of
  Money, Credit and Banking 45, Supplement(2), 3­28.
Kamenik, Ondra, Heesun Kiem, Vladimir Klyuev, and Douglas Laxton (2013), "Why is Canada's
 Price Level So Predictable?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 45(1), 71­85.
Kiley, Michael T., and John M. Roberts (2017), "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World,"
  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring), 317­380, https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
  content/uploads/2017/08/kileytextsp17bpea.pdf.

                                               37
Koenig, Evan F. (2013), "Like a Good Neighbor: Monetary Policy, Financial Stability, and the Dis-
 tribution of Risk," International Journal of Central Banking 9(2), 57­82, https://www.ijcb.org/
 journal/ijcb13q2a3.htm.

Kohn, Donald L. (2007), "John Taylor Rules," speech in Dallas, October 12, Federal Reserve Board,
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/kohn20071012a.htm.

Kohn, Donald L. (2012), "It's Not So Simple," in Koenig, Evan F., Robert Leeson, and George A.
  Kahn (eds.), The Taylor Rule and the Transformation of Monetary Policy, chap. 7, Hoover Insti-
  tution Press, pages 173­182.

Laséen, Stefan, and Lars E.O. Svensson (2011), "Anticipated Alternative Instrument-Rate Paths in
  Policy Simulations," International Journal of Central Banking 7(3), 1­35, https://www.ijcb.org/
  journal/ijcb11q3a1.pdf.

Levin, Andrew, Volker Wieland, and John C. Williams (2003), "The Performance of Forecast-Based
  Monetary Policy Rules Under Model Uncertainty," American Economic Review 93(3), 622­645.

McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson (1999), "Nominal Income Targeting in an Open-
 Economy Optimizing Model," Journal of Monetary Economics 43(3), 553­578.

Mertens, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2019a), "Monetary Policy Frameworks and the Effective
 Lower Bound on Interest Rates," AEA Papers and Proceedings 109, 433­437, https://doi.org/
 10.1257/pandp.20191083.

Mertens, Thomas, and John C. Williams (2019b), "Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules
 and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates," Staff Report No. 887, Federal Reserve Bank of New
 York, https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr887.

Mishkin, Frederic S. (1998), "International Experiences with Different Monetary Policy Regimes,"
 Seminar Paper No. 648, Institute for International Economic Studies, http://su.diva-portal.org/
 smash/get/diva2:327976/FULLTEXT01.pdf.

Murray, John (2019), "Price-Level Targeting and the `Difference Rule'," private email, quoted by
 permission.

Nessén, Marianne, and David Vestin (2005), "Average Inflation Targeting," Journal of Money, Credit
  and Banking 37(5), 837­863.

Persson, Torsten, and Lars E.O. Svensson (1989), "Exchange Rate Variability and Asset Trade,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics 23, 485­509, https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3932(89)90043-3.

Qvigstad, Jan F. (2005), "When Does an Interest Rate Path `Look Good' ? Criteria for an Appro-
 priate Future Interest Rate Path--A Practician's Approach," Staff Memo No. 2005/6, Norges
 Bank, https://www.norges-bank.no/globalassets/upload/import/publikasjoner/arbeidsnotater/
 pdf/arb-2006-05.pdf.

Reifschneider, David, and John C Willams (2000), "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a
  Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32(4), 936­966, https://www-jstor-
  org.ez.hhs.se/stable/pdf/2601151.pdf.

Røisland, Øystein (2006), "Inflation Inertia and the Optimal Hybrid Inflation/Price-Level Target,"
  Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 38(8), 2247­2251.

                                               38
Rosengren, Eric S. (2013), "Should Full Employment Be a Mandate for Central Banks?" speech on
  April 12, 2013, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, https://www.bostonfed.org/news-and-events/
  speeches/should-full-employment-be-a-mandate-for-central-banks.aspx.

Ruge-Murcia, Francisco (2014), "Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price
 Level?" International Journal of Central Banking 10(2), 301­326, http://www.ijcb.org/journal/
 ijcb08q4a6.pdf.

Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace (1975), " `Rational' Expectations, the Optimal Monetary
  Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule," Journal of Political Economy 83(2), 241­254.

Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M. Taylor (2012), "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Lever-
  age Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008," American Economic Review 102(2), 1029­1061.

Sheedy, Kevin D. (2014), "Debt and Incomplete Financial Markets: A Case for Nominal GDP
  Targeting," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Spring), https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
  content/uploads/2014/03/2014a_Sheedy.pdf.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997), "Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation
  Targets," European Economic Review 41(6), 1111­1146.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003a), "Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The Foolproof Way
  and Others," Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(4), 145­166.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003b), "What Is Wrong with Taylor Rules? Using Judgment in Monetary
  Policy through Targeting Rules," Journal of Economic Literature 41(2), 426­477.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2005), "Monetary Policy with Judgment: Forecast Targeting," International
  Journal of Central Banking 1(1), 1­54, https://larseosvensson.se/2005/05/01/monetary-policy-
  with-judgment-forecast-targeting/.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2007), "Optimal Inflation Targeting: Further Developments of Inflation Target-
  ing," in Mishkin, Frederic S., and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (eds.), Monetary Policy under Inflation
  Targeting, vol. 11 of Central Banking, Analysis, and Economic Policies, Central Bank of Chile,
  pages 187­225, https://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/OITFD.pdf.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2011), "Inflation Targeting," in Friedman, Benjamin M., and Michael
  Woodford (eds.), Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3b, chap. 22, Elsevier, pages
  1237­1302, https://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/HandbookIT.pdf https://www-sciencedirect-
  com.ez.hhs.se/science/article/pii/B9780444534545000104.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2012), "Evaluating Monetary Policy," in Koenig, Evan F., Robert Leeson, and
  George A. Kahn (eds.), The Taylor Rule and the Transformation of Monetary Policy, chap. 10,
  Hoover Institution Press, pages 245­274, https://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/EvalMP.pdf.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2013), "Some Lessons from Six Years of Practical Inflation Target-
  ing," Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 2013:3, 29­80, https://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/
  Svensson-paper--Some-lessons-from-six-years-of-practical-inflation-targeting.pdf.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2015), "The Possible Unemployment Cost of Average Inflation below a Credible
  Target," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(1), 258­296.



                                                39
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2017a), "Cost-Benefit Analysis of Leaning Against the Wind," Journal of
  Monetary Economics 90(October), 193­213, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/
  pii/S030439321730082X.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2017b), "How Robust Is the Result That the Cost of `Lean-
  ing Against the Wind' Exceeds the Benefit?         Response to Adrian and Liang," work-
  ing paper (also available as CEPR Discussion Paper DP11744), Stockholm School
  of Economics, https://larseosvensson.se/files/papers/how-robust-is-result-that-cost-of-leaning-
  exceeds-benefit-response-to-adrian-and-liang.pdf.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2018), "The Future of Monetary Policy and Macroprudential Policy," in
  The Future of Central Banking: Festschrift in Honour of Vítor Constâncio, European Central
  Bank, pages 69­123, https://larseosvensson.se/2018/05/16/the-future-of-monetary-policy-and-
  macroprudential-policy/.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2019), "What Rule for the Federal Reserve? Forecast Targeting," International
  Journal of Central Banking, forthcoming, https://larseosvensson.se/2017/10/14/what-rule-for-
  the-fed-forecast-targeting/.

Svensson, Lars E.O., and Robert J. Tetlow (2005), "Optimal Policy Projections," International
  Journal of Central Banking 1(3), 177­207, http://www.ijcb.org/journal/ijcb05q4a6.htm.

Svensson, Lars E.O., and Michael Woodford (2005), "Implementing Optimal Policy through
  Inflation-Forecast Targeting," in Bernanke, Ben S., and Michael Woodford (eds.), The Inflation-
  Targeting Debate, chap. 2, University of Chicago Press, pages 19­83, https://www.nber.org/
  chapters/c9556.pdf.

Taylor, John B. (1985), "What Would Nominal GDP Targeting Do to the Business Cycle?" Carnegie-
  Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 22, 61­84.

Taylor, John B. (1993), "Discretion vs Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  Series on Public Policy 39, 195­214.

Taylor, John B. (1999), "Introduction," in Taylor, John B. (ed.), Monetary Policy Rules, Chicago
  University Press, pages 1­14, https://www.nber.org/chapters/c7412.pdf.

Vestin, David (2006), "Price-Level versus Inflation Targeting," Journal of Monetary Economics
  53(7), 1361 ­ 1376.

Williams, John C. (2015), "Macroprudential Policy in a Microprudential World," FRBSF Economic
 Letter 2015-18, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, https://www.frbsf .org/economic-
 research/publications/economic-letter/2015/june/macroprudential-policy-in-a-microprudential-
 world/.

Williams, John C. (2017), "Preparing for the Next Storm: Reassessing Frameworks and Strategies in
 a Low R-star World," FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-13, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
 https://www.frbsf .org/economic-research/files/el2017-13.pdf.

Williams, John C. (2018), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Neutral Interest-Rate World,"
 speech on November 30, 2018, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, https://www.newyorkfed.org/
 newsevents/speeches/2018/wil181130.



                                               40
Woodford, Michael (2003a), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy,
 Princeton University Press.

Woodford, Michael (2003b), "Optimal Interest-Rate Smoothing," The Review of Economic Studies
 70(4), 861­886.

Woodford, Michael (2004), "Inflation Targeting and Optimal Monetary Policy," Federal Reserve
 Bank of St. Louis Review 86(4), 15­41.

Woodford, Michael (2007), "The Case for Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy," Journal
 of Economic Perspectives 21(4), 3­24.

Woodford, Michael (2012), "Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy: Policy Rules in
 Practice," in Koenig, Evan, Robert L. Leeson, and George A. Kahn (eds.), The Taylor Rule and
 the Transformation of Monetary Policy, chap. 8, Hoover Institution Press, pages 185­233.

Yellen, Janet L. (2012), "Revolution or Evolution in Central Bank Communications," speech at the
  Hass School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, November 13, Federal Reserve Board,
  https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen20121113a.htm.


Appendix

A     Endogenous or exogenous labor-market participation rate
Let the quarter-t loss, Lt , be represented by the quadratic loss function,

                                            Lt = (t -   )2 + ( t -      2
                                                                       t) ,                            (A.1)

where t denotes the employment rate and   t denotes the FOMC's estimate of the maximum (sus-
tainable) employment rate.
    Let ut  ¯t - t denote the unemployment rate, where ¯t denotes the labor-market participation
rate. Let u     ¯    
           t  t - t denote the FOMC's estimate of the minimum (sustainable) unemployment
            ¯
rate, where t denotes the FOMC's estimate of the maximum (sustainable) participation rate. Then
                                  
                          t   -   t    ( ¯t - ut ) - ( ¯                         ¯ ¯
                                                        t - ut ) = (ut - ut ) - ( t - t ).             (A.2)

   If the labor-market participation rate is exogenous to monetary policy, we can set ¯    ¯
                                                                                       t = t , so
then
                                                   
                                         t - t = ut - ut ,                                (A.3)
and the loss function can be written as in (1)


B     Forecast targeting: The intertemporal forecast loss function
Forecast targeting can be presented a bit more precisely with some notation and definitions, following
Svensson (2011, 2019). First, let it  (it,t , it+1,t , ..., it+T,t )  {it+,t }T
                                                                               =0 denote the policy-rate path
in the current quarter t. Here it,t denotes the current policy rate and it+,t for  = 1, 2, ..., T
denotes the FOMC's quarter-t mean forecast of, or plan for, the policy rate in future quarters t +  .
Second, let  t  {t+,t }T             t               T
                           =0 and u  {ut+,t } =0 denote the FOMC's mean forecasts of inflation
and unemployment.

                                                          41
    Third, define the forecast loss, Lt+,t , as

                                    Lt+,t = (t+,t -   )2 + (ut+,t - u )2 .                                (B.1)

It represents the loss from deviations of quarter-t forecasts of quarter-(t +  ) inflation and unem-
ployment from, respectively, the inflation target and the long-run sustainable unemployment rate.
Then the quarter-t intertemporal forecast loss, Lt , is given by
                                T               T                           T
                                                                     2
                        Lt =         Lt+,t =         (t+,t -  ) +                (ut+,t - u )2 ,          (B.2)
                                =0              =0                          =0

where the discount factor,  , for simplicity has been set equal to one.
   Furthermore, the deviations of inflation forecast from its target and the unemployment forecast
from its long-run sustainable rate can be measured by the mean squared gaps for inflation and
unemployment, defined as follows. The intertemporal forecast loss, (B.2), divided by the horizon,
can be written
                                      Lt /T = MSG            u
                                                    t + MSGt ,                               (B.3)
where MSG            u
         t and MSGt denote the mean squared gaps (MSGs) for, respectively, inflation and
unemployment and are defined as
                                                      T
                                          MSGt             (t+,t -   )2 /T,                               (B.4)
                                                      =0
                                                      T
                                           MSGu
                                              t            (ut+,t - u )2 /T.                              (B.5)
                                                      =0

Thus, the MSG for a variable is the average deviation of the forecast of the future variable from the
target for the variable. A smaller MSG for a variable indicates better (expected) mandate fulfillment
for the variable, with a zero MSG indicating (unlikely) perfect (expected) mandate fulfillment.46
    The issue of time-consistency in this context is discussed in detail and resolved in Svensson and
Woodford (2005) and summarized in Svensson (2011, section 3). The desired history dependence
under commitment can be imposed in two ways. First, the intertemporal forecast loss, (B.2), can be
modified by the addition of a term that represents the cost of deviating from previously announced
policy. The MSGs, (B.4) and (B.5), can then be adjusted by adding to each MSG this term divided
by 2T .
    The intertemporal forecast loss, (B.2), is then replaced by
                                      T                         T
                             Lt =          (t+,t -   )2 +             (ut+,t - u )2 + t ,                 (B.6)
                                      =0                         =0

where t here is the cost of deviating from previous promises, more precisely a history-dependent
function of the difference between the quarter-t realization of the forward-looking variables and the
previous forecasts and expectations of these variables; see Svensson (2011, equation (26)). Then
   46
      Division by the horizon T to get mean squared gaps instead of cumulative squared gaps is not necessary but
allows a convenient analogy with the well-known concept of mean squared errors in statistics.




                                                           42
the definition of the MSGs, (B.4) and (B.5), is replaced by
                                                T
                                  MSGt               (t+,t -   )2 /T + t /(2T ),                        (B.7)
                                                =0
                                                T
                                  MSGu
                                     t               (ut+,t - u )2 /T + t /(2T ).                       (B.8)
                                                =0

   Alternatively, as shown in Giannoni and Woodford (2003) and Svensson and Woodford (2005)
and summarized in Svensson (2011), a history-dependent restriction on the policy-rate path and
the forecasts can be added. This means that (B.2) is minimized for a restricted set of policy-rate
paths and forecasts that satisfy this restriction in addition to the equations of the model used; see
Svensson (2011, equations (28) and (29)). If the FOMC decides to restrict its policy choices to those
consistent with such commitment, the Federal Reserve staff would then present policy alternatives
that either have modified MSGs or are subject to the restriction mentioned.


C      Temporary price-level targeting when the ELB binds
Hebden and López-Salido (2018) (HLS) examine the policy rule47 

                              it = max[ iT
                                         t + min(f AIGt,t1 , 0), 0 ] f > 0, where                       (C.1)
                                                                                  
                             iT
                              t   = (1 - )r + t + a(t -  ) + b(yt -              yt )   and             (C.2)
                                      t
                                             j -  
                       AIGt,t1 =                       .                                                (C.3)
                                            j + 1 - t1
                                    j =t1

That is, the ELB is set at zero, iT
                                  t denotes the interest rate for a Taylor-type rule, AIGt,t1 denotes
the average-inflation gap since the quarter in which the ELB started to bind, quarter t1 , and f
denotes the response coefficient of the average-inflation gap. Then the policy rate equals zero when
iT                           T
 t + f AIGt,t1  0, equals it + f AIGt,t1 when this expression is positive and AIGt,t1  0, and equals
iT        T
 t when it and AIGt,t1 are both positive. HLS also examine an optimal versions of the rule, where
the response coefficient f --but not the other coefficients--are chosen to minimize a quadratic loss
function of inflation and unemployment gaps.
    Bernanke et al. (2019) (BKR) also discuss variants of Bernanke's proposal in terms of a simple
instrument rule.

 it = max{ (1 - )it-1 + [r + t + 0.5(t -   ) + (yt - yt
                                                      
                                                        ) +  min(PLGt,t1 , 0)], 0},  > 0, (C.4)

where
                                                             t
                                            PLGt,t1 =              (j -   )/4.                          (C.5)
                                                           j =t1

Here, an inertial Taylor (1999) rule is augmented by the price-level gap, PLGt,t1 , which is given by
the accumulated (not average) inflation short-fall since the quarter, t1 , when the ELB started to
bind. The price-level gap is included as long as it is negative.
   For a policy rule such as (C.1)­(C.3) or (C.4) and (C.5), lift-off may occur while the price-level
gap is negative if the inflation and GDP gaps are sufficiently positive. However, BKR also consider
  47
     The notation of Hebden and López-Salido (2018) and Bernanke et al. (2019) has been modified to agree with
the one used in the present paper.


                                                             43
variants of Bernanke's original "threshold rule," according to which the policy rate remains at zero
regardless of GDP and current inflation until a threshold condition such as PLGt,t1  0 obtains, at
which point the policy is determined by a Taylor-type rule and the non-negativity condition. They
furthermore consider both the case when all private agents have model-consistent expectations
understand and believe the policy rule and the case when only asset-market participants have such
expectations.
    In particular, under the threshold rule, they take into account that if the ELB period is extended
and the cumulative inflation shortfall is large, the implied commitment to overshoot inflation may
be correspondingly large, which they consider could be problematic and risk possible unanchoring
inflation expectations. To mitigate against such risks, they consider a price-level gap with limited
memory, n, and thus a shorter "look back" given by
                                                n
                                  PLGt,t-n =          (t-n+j -   )/4.                           (C.6)
                                               j =0


D     An interest-rate rule with a lower intercept
When the ELB does not bind, Mertens and Williams (2019a,b) consider interest-rate rules of the
form
                            it = 0 + E Et t+1 +  t + µ µt ,                              (D.1)
where E > 1 and t and µt are zero-mean i.i.d. shocks to a the New Keynesian aggregate-demand
function and Phillips curve, respectively. The inflation target is initially set to zero.
   The corresponding interest-rate rule with an nonzero inflation target,   , can be written

                          it = r +   + E (Et t+1 -   ) +  t + µ µt
                            = [r - (E - 1)  ] + E Et t+1 +  t + µ µt ,                          (D.2)

where r is the neutral real interest rate.
   Comparing D.1 and D.2, we can identify 0 ,

                                       0  r - (E - 1)  .                                        (D.3)

Thus, we see that, because E > 1, lowering the intercept 0 implies raising the inflation target   .




                                                    44
