                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             EQUILIBRIUM CONSEQUENCES OF CORRUPTION ON FIRMS:
              EVIDENCE FROM CHINA'S ANTI-CORRUPTION CAMPAIGN

                                        Haoyuan Ding
                                        Hanming Fang
                                          Shu Lin
                                          Kang Shi

                                      Working Paper 26656
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26656


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We are grateful to seminar participants at Tsinghua University, Shanghai University of Finance
and Economics, and NBER Chinese Economy conference (2017) for comments and suggestions
that significantly improved the paper. Ding acknowledges financial support from the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 71703086). Fang acknowledges the financial support
from the China Research Engagement Fund of the University of Pennsylvania. We are
responsible for all remaining errors. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Haoyuan Ding, Hanming Fang, Shu Lin, and Kang Shi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Equilibrium Consequences of Corruption on Firms: Evidence from China's Anti-Corruption
Campaign
Haoyuan Ding, Hanming Fang, Shu Lin, and Kang Shi
NBER Working Paper No. 26656
January 2020
JEL No. D7,D72,G34,G38

                                         ABSTRACT

We use China's recent anti-corruption campaign as a natural experiment to examine the (market
expected) equilibrium consequences of (anti-)corruption. We argue that the announcement of
inspections of provincial governments by the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection
(CCDI) on May 17, 2013 represents a significant departure of past norms of anti-corruption
campaigns, and thus serves a rare empirical opportunity to examine the equilibrium effects of
anti-corruption campaigns for firms. We first present a conceptual framework to illustrate the
channels through which anti-corruption actions can influence firms. Using an event study
approach and May 17, 2013 as the event date, we find that, overall, the stock market responded
positively to the announcement of strong anti-corruption actions. The announcement returns are
significantly lower for luxury-goods producers, and SOES, large firms, or politically connected
firms earn lower returns than private, small, or non-connected firms. We also find that existing
local institutions play a crucial role in determining the announcement returns across firms.
Moreover, a long-term difference-in-differences analysis shows that higher returns during the
event window are associated with more subsequent entries of new firms and faster expansions of
existing firms. Finally, we also provide direct evidence consistent with the endogenous grits
effect.

Haoyuan Ding                                       Shu Lin
Shanghai University of Finance and Economics       Department of Economics Chinese
Shanghai, China                                    University of Hong Kong Shatin,
ding.haoyuan@mail.shufe.edu.cn                     New Territories
                                                   Hong Kong
Hanming Fang                                       shulin75@gmail.com
Department of Economics
Ronald O. Perelman Center                          Kang Shi
for Political Science and Economics                Department of Economics Chinese
133 South 36th Street                              University of Hong Kong Shatin,
Suite 150                                          New Territories
Philadelphia, PA 19104                             Hong Kong
and NBER                                           kangshi@cuhk.edu.hk
hanming.fang@econ.upenn.edu
1 Introduction

        Corruption is a widespread phenomenon in many developing and transitional

economies. A crucial, yet unsettled, question is: what are the consequences of

corruption? There are two different views of the effect of corruption on economic

development.1 The conventional wisdom holds that corruption is a distortion and is

costly for economic development (e.g., Klitgaard, 1991; La Porta, et al., 1999;

Shleifer and Vishny, 1993). The "grabbing hands" of bureaucrats increase the cost of

operating business, leading to less entry on the extensive margin and to smaller scale

on the intensive margin. Under this view, eliminating governments' grabbing hands

will lead to more firm entry and higher profits for existing firms and in general will

improve economic efficiency.

        An alternative view, however, argues that in an environment with excessive

bureaucratic burden, paying bribes may help avoid bureaucratic delays and make

government officials work harder. This view is first put forth by Leff (1964) in his

influential essay "Economic Development Through Bureaucratic Corruption" where

he laid out several arguments for the possible efficiency-enhancing role of corruption.

As Leff put it: "The critique of bureaucratic corruption often seems to have in mind a

picture in which the government and civil service of underdeveloped countries are

working intelligently and actively to promote economic development, only to be

thwarted by the efforts of grafters. Once the validity of this interpretation is disputed,

the effects of corruption must also be reevaluated." Leff suggested that the

government would often be indifferent or even hostile to entrepreneurs, and it could

establish misguided anti-market policies in the form of crushing government

bureaucracy and red tapes; bribery of government officials would help the market

1
    See Bardhan (1997) for a review of these issues and also see Chapter 4 of Fisman and Golden (2017) for the
consequences of corruption.

                                                       2
function by allowing the entrepreneurs who pay the bribes to avoid the shackles of the

bureaucracy.2 This view of corruption as the "grease for the squeaking wheels" of a

rigid administration is famously summarized by Huntington (1968, p. 386):3 "In

terms of economic growth, the only thing worse than a society with a rigid,

over-centralized, dishonest bureaucracy is one with a rigid, over-centralized, honest

bureaucracy."

        These two views are not necessarily conflicting. To the extent that red tapes and

misguided regulations are endogenous choices of bureaucrats, rent-seeking incentives

by the bureaucrats can serve as the source of the red tapes and misguided regulations

that lead to distortions; and at the same time, corruption can serve as the grease to at

least partially undo the distortions by the red tapes and misguided regulations. The

effect of corruption on economic performance in this equilibrium framework is more

nuanced. In the absence of the opportunities to engage in rent-seeking, the red-tapes

and misguided regulations may not be present, thus making moot the

"grease-of-the-wheel" role of corruption. However, whether the opportunities of

corruption by the bureaucrats increase or hinder the economy crucially depends on the

institutions (including government regulations) that would be in place when

corruption is rooted out (see, e.g., Kaufmann and Wei, 1999, and Wei, 2000a, 2000b).

        In order to evaluate the equilibrium consequences of corruption on firms, one

would need to observe firms' performance under different norms of corruption, ceteris

paribus. This poses an empirical challenge, however. In most of the cases, the norms

of corruption in a country change only in conjunction with a radical change in the

2
    Leff also suggested the corruption may help economic development by "making possible a higher rate of
investment than would otherwise be the case", because corruption can enable entrepreneurs to "control and render
predictable this important influence [of harmful government intervention on their affairs] on their environment." In
addition, he argued that corruption can increase development since the market for bribery itself may lead to scare
resources such as licenses to be allocated more efficiently.
3
  See also, e.g. Beck and Maher (1986), Lien, (1986) and Méon and Sekkat (2005) among others.

                                                         3
government caused by either uprising, revolution, or foreign invasion. Therefore, it is

impossible to disentangle the effect of corruption on firms from other disturbances to

the economy. A substantial shift in the norms of corruption among bureaucrats in a

stable country and economy usually do not happen simultaneously. In this paper, we

argue that China's recent strong anti-corruption campaign under President Xi Jinping,

in particular, the announcement that the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection

(CCDI) would conduct several rounds of inspection on May 17, 2013, may signal as

the event suggesting Xi's anti-corruption campaign was not business-as-usual, thus

serving as a rare natural experiment that can allow us to examine the equilibrium

consequences of corruption on firms.4 The CCDI inspections were sweeping, and

resulted in the detainment and prosecution of more than 270,000 bureaucrats at

different levels, including more than 100 high-ranking government officials. This

unprecedented announcement of the inspections by CCDI is likely to have resulted in

a shift in public perception about the nature of President Xi's anti-corruption

campaign, and possibly a shift in the norm of corruption among bureaucrats.

        A second empirical challenge is that it would likely take a long time for the

equilibrium outcomes following the shift of the corruption norm to fully manifest

itself; but during the long time horizon many other factors can also change, which

would then make it harder to distinguish the effect of the changes in the corruption

norm from the effects of other concurrent changes. To overcome this empirical

challenge, we take advantage of the fact that stock market incorporates expectations

about the future developments in the current pricing of a firm's equity; thus, to the

extent that the market expects the anti-corruption campaign to lead to both short- and


4
    In Section 2 we provide more background information about Xi's anti-corruption campaign and argue why the
announcement of inspection of provincial governments by CCDI on May 17, 2013 was different from past
practices.

                                                      4
long-run (i.e., equilibrium) changes in the extent of corruption in the economy, the

equilibrium effects of corruption on firm values will be reflected in the changes in the

stock market prices upon the announcement of the CCDI inspections.

     Specifically, we employ an event study approach and use the announcement date,

May 17, 2013, as our event date, to examine the cumulative abnormal returns (CAR)

of publicly listed stocks around the announcement date. We find that the stock market

overall responded significantly positively to the CCDI inspection announcement,

indicating that the market views this new phase of anti-corruption campaign a positive

news that will improve firms' overall performance once a new corruption norm is

reached. This finding is despite the fact that there have been previous anti-corruption

measures since Xi assumed power, thus it serves as strong evidence that the CCDI

inspection announcement was considered to be a significant event by the market: it

indicates that Xi's anti-corruption campaign is not merely business as usual.

     We then conduct regression analyses to examine the potential determinants of

the CARs, which will then inform us about the possible mechanisms through which

corruption (or anti-corruption) can impact firm performance. The regression results

reveal a substantial amount of heterogeneity across firms. First, there is strong

evidence supporting a market demand channel. The CARs are found to be

significantly lower for firms that produce luxury goods, which are often used as gifts

to bribe government officials (e.g., Cai, Fang, and Xu, 2011; Qian and Wen, 2015).

Second, we find that the announcement returns are significantly higher for private

firms, small firms, or firms with no established political connections. On the one hand,

these firms suffer more from governments' grabbing hands. On the other hand, they

also rely more on the efficiency grease in a corrupt environment. Our finding is thus

consistent with the general equilibrium view. That is, for sufficiently strong


                                           5
anti-corruption measures, the benefits from eliminating governments' grabbing hands

can dominate the costs associated with the loss of the efficient grease. In addition,

there is also evidence that local institutions matter. While private, small or firms

without political connections earn higher announcement returns than state-owned,

large, or connected firms, the return differentials are significantly lower in provinces

with better legal protections (a smaller grabbing-hand effect) or less developed factor

markets (a larger grease-of-wheel effect).

     Next, we further examine the long-term impacts on firm entry and the scales of

existing firms using a generalized difference-in-differences approach. Specifically, we

interact the industry average CARs calculated during the event window with a

post-event dummy and estimate the effects of this interaction term on the entry of new

firms in an industry-year panel (and a province-industry-year panel as well). We also

estimate the long-term effect of this interaction term on the scales of existing firms in

a panel of listed firms. If all new relevant information is fully reflected in firms' stock

prices so that the computed CARs during the event window capture the expected net

impact of all avenues of exposure to the anti-corruption campaign, we should expect

more firms to enter industries with higher average CARs after the campaign on the

extensive margin. Similarly, on the intensive margin, we should expect firms with

higher CARs to expand more in their scales.

     The estimated long-term effects from the generalized DID approach are

consistent with our hypothesis. Using the Chinese Firm Registration data that covers

the universe of China firms, we find that at both the industry-level and the more

disaggregate province-industry level, higher average CARs during the event are

associated with significantly more subsequent entries of new firms. In the listed firm

sample, we also find that, on the intensive margin, firms with higher CARs expand


                                             6
significantly after the anti-corruption campaign.

     Finally, we also provide direct evidence on the "endogenous grits effect" (see

Section 3) that is crucial to our equilibrium analysis of the economic consequences of

anti-corruption actions. Using both the World Bank's "Ease of Doing Business Index"

and the marketization index, we find strong evidence consistent with the prediction

that there was significant improvement of China's institutional environment for

business after the anti-corruption campaign.

     Our work contributes to the corruption literature by offering evidence about the

likely equilibrium impact of corruption on firm performance based on a large-scale

persistent anti-corruption campaign by President Xi. Most of the previous empirical

studies in this literature take a macro approach by relating corruption measures to

economic growth or other macro variables, such as capital flows (e.g. Mauro, 1995;

Mo 2001; Wei, 2000b, 2001; Javorcik and Wei, 2009). Some more recent studies

have also examined the private returns of bribing government officials at the firm

level (Fisman and Svensson 2007; Cai, Fang, and Xu, 2011). This paper contributes to

the existing literature by providing micro evidence on the effects of anti-corruption

actions. We also make efforts to distinguish different channels and explore potential

heterogeneity across firms.

     Our study also fits in a narrower literature on corruptions that focuses

particularly on the case of China. A majority of the existing studies focus on detecting

corruption behavior in China. For example, Fisman and Wang (2014) identify

corruption behavior in the sales of state assets in China. Fang, Gu, and Zhou (2014)

find that government officials receive discounts in real estate purchases. Fisman and

Wei (2004, 2009) use trade data to detect corruption behavior of Chinese customs.

Cai, Fang, and Xu (2011) find Chinese firms often use entertainment and travel


                                           7
expenditures to bribe government officials. They also analyze firms' private return of

paying bribes.

     In particular, our paper is related to several recent working papers that also

examine the impacts of various aspects of Xi's anti-corruption campaign. Qian and

Wen (2015) examine the effect of the recent anti-corruption on imports of luxury

goods. They find a substantial reduction in imports of luxury goods upon the initiation

of Xi's anti-corruption campaign. Li, Wang, and Zhou (2017) empirically examine the

impact of Xi's anti-corruption campaign on the credit allocation between the

state-owned enterprises (SOEs) and the privately-owned non-SOE firms, and they

show that the anti-corruption campaign leads to a credit reallocation from inefficient

SOE firms to more productive private firms. Berkowitz, Lin and Liu (2015) study the

impact of File 18 regulation issued on October 30, 2013 which required "politically

connected" independent directors to resign from the boards. They show that the stock

market returns for the private firms with politically connected independent directors

suffered relative to those of non-connected private firms upon the issuance of File 18

regulation. They also find evidence that the File 18 regulation encouraged private

firms that had politically connected independent directors to become more innovative

and more transparent and more efficient investors. Finally, perhaps the most related

paper to ours is Lin, Morck, Yeung, and Zhao (2016), which also used event study to

investigate the impact of the Eight Point Regulation issued on December 4, 2012 on

stock market valuations. They find that Chinese shares rose broadly upon the news of

the Eight Point Regulation, suggesting that reduced expected corruption adds value to

the firms overall. They also find that the impact is heterogenous: SOEs gain broadly,

but non-SOEs gain in more liberalized provinces, but decline in provinces where

market institutions remain weak.


                                           8
     Our paper is closely related to the above studies, but there are several key

differences that distinguish ours from existing contributions. First, while existing

studies focus on some specific effects of anti-corruption actions, such as luxury

imports or the differential effects on SOEs and non-SOEs, we aim to provide a more

comprehensive analysis on the effects of the anti-corruption campaign on firms and to

identify different channels. Second, to rationalize our empirical study, we also provide

a simple theoretical framework to illustrate the underlying mechanisms through which

anti-corruption actions can influence firms. Moreover, while all studies examine the

impacts of the broadly-defined recent anti-corruption campaign in China, the exact

event each study analyzes is in fact rather different. Qian and Wen (2015) focus on

two events, the release of a new manifesto by the Third Plenum of the 18th CCP on

November 15th, 2013 and the release of CCP's a five-year anti-graft plan on

December 25th, 2013. Lin, Morck, Yeung, and Zhao (2016) examine the impacts of

the Eight-point Regulation policy on government officials' spending of public

revenues announced on December 4, 2012. Li, Wang, and Zhou (2017) study the

investigation of the CEO of Minsheng Bank, one of the largest commercial banks in

China. In contrast, we analyze the stock market responses to the announcement of

anti-corruption inspections to be conducted by the CCDI on May 17, 2013, which is

considered to be a symbolic event of China's anti- corruption campaign. As we shall

discuss in more details in Section 2, this announcement is not only a surprise to the

market but also sends a clear message to market participants about a strong

commitment to fighting corruptions. The anti-corruption inspections would result in

serious investigations and arrests of corrupt government officials. Thus, the CCDI

announcement was likely a significant new phase of the anti-corruption campaign that

could result in an equilibrium response of bureaucrats' behavior. Finally, in addition


                                           9
to exploring stock market responses, our study also utilizes a generalized

difference-in-differences         approach   to    exam   the   long-term   effects   of   the

anti-corruption campaign on entry of new firms and the scales of existing firms.

       The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In Section 2 we present the

institutional background for the anti-corruption campaign. In Section 3, we present a

simple conceptual framework that incorporates various channels of the effect of

corruption and use it to derive our testable hypotheses. In Section 4 we describe the

data set we use in the empirical analysis. In Section 5 we report our empirical results.

Finally, in Section 6 we conclude.



2 Institutional Background

       Like many developing countries, corruption is a central issue in China. Xi

Jinping officially assumed the title of the General Secretary of Communist Party and

Chairman of the Party Central Military Commission on November 14, 2012 at the

conclusion of the Party's 18th National Congress. The new leadership in China

considers corruption as not merely a significant problem to economic growth but a

real threat to the party's survival. Almost immediately upon assuming power, Xi

started an anti-corruption campaign. On November 20, 2012, the Central Commission

for Discipline Inspection (CCDI), which was led by Xi's close ally and CPC Politburo

Standing Committee member Wang Qishan, issued a warning that "the public's trust

in the Party and the government has fallen to a critical level" and argued that the Party

must fight corruption and treat anti-corruption as a major political task. 5 On

December 4, 2012, CPC Politburo of the Central Committee issued a policy document

titled the Eight-Point Regulation, which provides explicit rules regarding the behavior


5
    Xinhua News, November 20, 2012.

                                                  10
of leading cadres from the Communist party, and bans bureaucrats and employees of

state-owned firms of extravagant house, luxury goods purchases, and state-funded

banquets. However, in China anti-corruption campaigns were often waged after an

important political transition, and often such campaigns were short-lived and

considered possible tactics to weaken or purge political opponents in order to

consolidate power. Moreover, no concrete measures were mentioned in the Eight

Point regulations regarding how the regulations would be enforced. Since similar

anti-corruption announcements were also made by previous leaders, the market did

not view them as a credible commitment to fighting corruption (Qian and Wen, 2015).

The expectation at the time when the Eight-Point Regulation was issued was that this

was yet another anti-corruption campaign by President Xi that would be short-lived.

     Concrete and more credible investigation and punishment actions arrive in the

middle of 2013. On May 17, 2013, the Central Commission for Discipline Inspection

(CCDI), which is the highest internal-control institution within the party system, made

an announcement that it will conduct several rounds of inspections. In the first round

of inspections, the CCDI will send inspection teams to five provinces, including

Chongqing, Guizhou, Jiangxi, Inner-Mongolia, and Hubei.

     Inspection teams are responsible to examine every ministry and government

agencies for each province. As leaded by CCDI's secretary, Wang Qishan, the

inspection teams have the unlimited power to investigate, detain, and interrogate

almost anyone that may be involved in bribery, embezzlement, trading power for

profit and other personal favors, no matter how high ranking they are. The inspection

teams first will perform a background checks of the provinces or organizations to be

inspected. Then the teams will stay in the inspected provinces for two months or so

and the teams' contact information is released to the public. During the two-month


                                          11
inspection, the inspectors collect information with the help of local discipline

inspectors and anti-graft agency officers, and take tips from the public and retired

government officials. If there is evidence of corruption, the inspectors will make

records and report it to the CCDI.

     Compared to previous anti-corruption measures, the CCDI inspection has a

concrete plan and emphasizes on fighting corruption at all levels of governments. This

announcement is an unexpected shock and a wake-up call for both government

officials and the market participants. It is quite clear to them that this time is different.

The inspections are often interpreted as the symbolic event of the start of China's

recent anti-corruption campaign. While the announcement on May 17, 2013 did not

mention explicit which provinces will be inspected later, it is quite clear that each

province will eventually be inspected. As a result, we expect its impact is not regional

but national. Firms located in other provinces will also be affected. Indeed, in our

empirical analysis, we do find that its impact is national.

     During the period of 2013-2014, the CCDI conducted a total of four rounds of

inspections, covering all provinces in China (see Appendix A). The inspections broke

the unspoken rule regarding "Politburo Standing Committee criminal immunity" by

arresting the former Politburo Standing Committee Member Zhou Yongkang

(expelled from the Party and sentenced to life in prison). Over 100 high-ranking

government officials, and more than 270,000 bureaucrats at different levels were

detained and punished for corruption activities. Our study examines how the stock

market responds to the announcement of this large-scale anti-corruption campaign.

2.1. Why is the Announcement of CCDI Inspection Different?

     Anti-corruption has been an official theme since President Xi Jinping officially

became the Party Secretary in the Eighteenth National Congress. The first official


                                             12
pronouncement of the anti-campaign is the Eight-Point Regulation announcement on

December 4th, 2012, just weeks after the end of the Eighteenth National Congress. In

Appendix C we provide the details of the Eight-Point Regulation. It mainly regulates

the behavior of the political bureau members going forward. We argue that while

Eight-Point Regulation is a significant event, it was unlikely to be the event that

would suggest this anti-corruption campaign to be "different." First, the issuance of

Eight-Point Regulation was very shortly after the 18th National Congress, and this

was a routine action taken by a new leadership. So to the officialdom, this may still

suggest that the campaign might be temporary. Second, the Eight-Point Regulation

did not specify punishments and enforcement. Third, an ex post examination of the

officials above the vice-ministerial level since 2012 showed that only two officials at

the vice-ministerial level were investigated after the Eight-point Regulation but before

the CCDI inspection announcement. The majority (over 160) were investigated after

the inspection announcement, including 21 top officials at the ministerial level or

above. Moreover, among all investigated officials, only 12 were due to the violation

of the Eight-point Regulation, and these 12 officials all got minimal punishment such

as official warning. Finally, it is worth pointing out that even though 2

vice-ministerial level officials were investigated between the Eight-Point Regulation

announcement and the CCDI inspection announcement, we also observe that, the pace

was not unusual relative to the period before the Eight-Point Regulation

announcement. From 2008 to 2012 before the Eight-Point Regulation announcement

on December 4, 2012, a total of 38 officials at the vice-ministerial level were

investigated. Thus, the investigation of two officials at the vice-ministerial level after

the Eight Point Regulation was indeed nothing more than business-as-usual from an

ex post perspective.


                                            13
3 Conceptual Framework and Testable Hypothesis

3.1. A Simple Conceptual Framework

    In this section, we provide a simple conceptual framework to motivate our

empirical analyses. We consider a game between bureaucrats and firms, and study

how a strong anti-corruption campaign may change firm performance. Base on the

simple framework, we shall develop several testable hypotheses. Let ! denote the

corruption activity by government officials. We hypothesize that corruption activity

by government officials can affect firm "$ net profit via four channels:

1. Grabbing Hand Channel. We model this by assuming that the "effective tax rate"

   of a firm, %; is a non-decreasing function of !: We denote %(!; () ) as tax rate of

   firm " ; with characteristics () , when corruption activity is !; with%(; () )  0.

   It should be understood that the effectiveness tax rate is inclusive of both the tax

   the firm pays to the tax authority and the bribe ! extracted by the bureaucrats.

   The tax the firm pays to the tax authority may be a decreasing function of !.

2. Grease of Wheel Channel. We model this by assuming that the marginal cost of

   production for firm " , denoted by/(!; () ), is a non-increasing function of !, i.e.,

   /(; () )  0.

3. Endogenous Grits Channel. Alternatively, this could be referred to as the

   equilibrium channel. We assume that the grits of the bureaucracy that affects the

   firm's marginal cost of production are partly chosen by the bureaucrats. For

   simplicity, we assume that the bureaucrats can choose between two marginal cost

   functions /1 (!; () ) and /2 (!; () ) , and the two marginal cost functions are

   related as follows:

                               /1 (!; () ) = 4/2 (!; () )


                                          14
   where 4  (0,1) . Thus, one can interpret bureaucrat's choice of 8 as heavy

   regulation and more license requirements, while the choice of 9 is light

   regulation and less licensing requirements.

4. Market Demand Channel. Corruption activity may also affect a firm's profit by

   affecting its demand. For example, many high-end consumer products are popular

   choices for bribing government officials. We model this by assuming that the

   demand curve faced by firm " ,:(;, !; () ), depends on !. That is, we assume that

   :< (;,; () )  >:/>! is not necessarily zero. The exact sign of :< may depend

   on firm "$ main product. If firm " produces higher- end consumer products, it is

   natural to hypothesize that :< > 0 ; but if " produces lower-end consumer

   products, :< < 0 due to substitution.

     We suppose that the bureaucrats choose the regulatory regime B  {8, 9}. They

understand that there is an expected penalty if they are caught accepting bribes. The

penalty function is given by

                                       E(F; G)

where F is the bribe taken by the bureaucrat and G represents the anti-corruption

intensity. Naturally, we assume that >E/>F > 0 and >E/>G > 0, and EH< > 0.

     The bureaucrats' objective function is a weighted average of the bribes net of the

expected penalty and the net tax revenues received by the government. Specifically,

we assume that the bureaucrats' payoff function is given by

                        I(F; J) = KF + (1 - K)J - E(F; G)

where F is the total bribe collected from the firms, J is the total net tax revenue,

and K  (0,1) is the weight on the bribe in the bureaucrats' payoff function.

     In the economy, firms have heterogeneous characteristics denoted by () . In the

population of firms, () is assumed to have a distributionN(). For each firm with


                                           15
characteristics () , the net profit function, when it pays bribe !and charges price ;

is given by:

                      O(;, !; () ) = [1 - %(!; () )][; - /R (!; () )]:(;, !; () )

        In the analysis below, we assume that bureaucrats choose regulatory regime B 

(8, 9) and also dictate a bribe level !) from each firm " , and the firm chooses only

the price ;) .6

        Let us first consider the first case. A firm with characteristics () will choose ;)

to maximize

                ( () ; B)  max[1 - %(!) ;() )][;) - /R (!) ;() )]:(;) , !) ;() )                            (1)
                                 {WX}


        Let the optimal price for firm " be denoted by ;) (() ;!) , B).

        By the Envelope Theorem, we have
                                                        `abccdefgbehijjklm
        > ( () ; B)    \]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]^]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]_
                          [ (! ;( )[;  (( ; ! , B) - / (! ;( )]:(;  (!, B), ! ;( )
                   Z = -%     )  )   )   ) )          R )   )     )          )  )
          >!)       R

                                              `akbnkojmpkqpkkrijjklm
                        \]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]^]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]_
                        -[1 - %(!) ;() )]/ [ R (!) ; () ):(;) (() ;!) , B), !) ; () )

                                                  sktbehijjklm
               \]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]^]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]]_
               +[1 - %(!) ;() )][;) (() ; !) , B) - /R (!) ; () )]:< (;) (!, B), F;() )                     (2)

The first term captures the grabbing hand effect. As we will show below, the

anti-corruption campaign reduces the demand for bribes from the bureaucrats even if

the bureaucrats do not change the regulatory regime in response to the anti-corruption

campaign, then since -% [ (; - /): < 0 , the grabbing hand effect will increase

firm's profit. The second term captures the grease of wheel effect. When !) is


6
    Alternatively, we can assume that the bureaucrats choose only the regulatory regimeB  (8, 9) and each
firm chooses   !) and ;) given the regulatory regime chosen by the bureaucrats. In such a case, the only way
anti-corruption campaigns will affect the level of bribes and firm performance is that the bureaucrats choose a
different regulatory regime. For simplicity, we have assumed only two regulatory regimes,    8 and 9; but we
assume that there is a continuum of regulatory regimes indexed by u, then similar qualitative conclusions can be
obtained in this alternative model as well.

                                                        16
lowered in response to the anti-corruption campaign, and since -(1 - %)/R : > 0,

the grease-of-wheel effect will lower the firm profit, conditional on the same

regulatory regime. The third term(1 - %)(;) - /):< captures the demand effect. As

anti-corruption campaign reduced the total demand for bribes F; then the demand

curve for some firms, e.g., firms that produce luxury products or expensive meals that

are often used as bribes, will be lowered. Whether this effect is positive or negative

for a firm depends on the firm's characteristics () , which will affect the sign of :< .

       What is not yet captured in (2) is the endogenous grits effect. To capture this, we

need to describe the bureaucrats' choice of !) andB  {8, 9}. Fix B  {8, 9}. If the

bureaucrats choose !(() ) for firms with characteristics () , the total bribes will be

                                    FR =  !(() )wN(() ),                                     (3)

and the total net tax revenue collected will be

       %(!(() ); () )[;) (() ;!) , B) - /R (!(() ); () )]:(;) (() ;!) , B), !) ; () ) -
JR =  x                                                                                 y wN(() )(4)
                                           !(() )

       For a given r, and facing anti-corruption intensity G, the bureaucrats' choice of

bribes for firm with characteristics () , !(() ), solves:

                     z R (G)  {G| [KFR + (1 - K)J R - E(FR ; G)]
                                {}(~X )}


where FR and J R are given by (3) and (4) respectively. Clearly, for a given B, we

have

                                           >!  (() )
                                                      < 0.
                                             >G R

       The bureaucrats' optimal choice B   {8, 9} solves:

                             B  (G) = GBÅ{G|{z 1 (G), z 2 (G)}.
                                            B{8,9}


       The endogenous grits effect is captured by how B  (G) is related to the

anti-corruption intensity G. When the anti-corruption intensity increases from GÇ to


                                                     17
GH > GÇ , it is possible that the bureaucrats will switch from the high regulatory

regime to low regulatory regime if taking bribes is too costly and the bureaucrats

choose instead to focus on tax revenues. This is likely to happen when K is not very

high. The switch to low regulatory regime will provide an additional boost to the

firm's profits. However, when K is sufficiently high, it is also possible that the

bureaucrats will stay within the high regulatory regime and demand less bribes,

resulting in higher marginal costs for the firms.

     To summarize, the effect of increasing the anti-corruption intensity G will have

four possible effects. Total bribes will decrease, but the net effect of anti-corruption

on firm " 's after-tax profit is ambiguous and depends on firm characteristics.

3.2. Testable Hypotheses

     The above simple conceptual framework suggests that anti-corruption actions

influence firms through different channels, and their effects are likely to be

heterogeneous across firms. Below we derive some testable hypotheses based on the

predictions of the simple model.

     Hypothesis 1. The overall market response to the announcement is ambiguous.

However, if market participants expect that the anti-corruption actions are strong

enough to change the institutional constraints that give rise to the efficient grease

effect of corruption in the first place, then the overall market reactions are likely to be

positive.

     Our simple model predicts that the anti-corruption actions affect firms through

three channels. Since the market demand effect influences mainly a small fraction of

firms that produce luxury goods, the overall announcement effect depends largely on

the relative strength of the grabbing-hand effect and the grease-of-wheel effect. In a

general equilibrium framework, however, the magnitude of the grease-of-wheel effect


                                            18
depends on market participants' expectations on whether the anti- corruption actions

are strong enough to change the fundamental institutional constraints that give rise to

the efficient grease effect of corruption in the first place. Market anticipations of a

sufficiently strong anti-corruption campaign are thus likely to lead to positive returns.

     Hypothesis 2. The announcement returns are lower for firms that produce luxury

products compared to other firms.

     Hypothesis 3. The announcement effects on state-owned, large, or politically

connected firms depend on the relative strength of the grabbing-hand channel and the

grease-of-wheel channel. An anticipation of sufficiently strong anti-corruption actions

lowers the returns of state-owned, large, or politically connected firms relative to

private, small, or non-connected firms.

     The grabbing-hand and the grease-of-wheel channels predict conflicting effects

on state-owned, large, or politically connected firms. Existing studies have well

documented that those firms are treated favorably in China compared to private, small,

or firms with no political connections (e.g., Dollar and Wei, 2007; Li et al., 2008;

Song et al., 2011). On the one hand, they suffer less from government interventions

and extractions at different levels. The beneficial effects of anti-corruption measures

associated with eliminating the grabbing hands are thus smaller for those firms. On

the other hand, state-owned, large, or connected firms also have access to cheaper

inputs (capital, land, etc.) and are treated favorably in obtaining government services.

As a result, they rely less on the grease-of-wheel channel, and, compared to private,

small, or non-connected firms, they suffer less from anti-corruption measures that

weakens such a channel. Nonetheless, it is important to note that this difference

depends on whether the anti-corruption actions can change the underlying institutional

constraints that give rise to the efficient grease effect of corruption in the first place.


                                            19
For a sufficiently strong anti-corruption campaign, eliminating the grabbing hands

would be the dominant effect, and we would expect a lower announcement return for

state-owned, large, or politically connected firms.

     Hypothesis 4. The announcement return differentials between private and

state-owned firms (small and large firms, or non-connected and connected firms) are

smaller in provinces with better legal protections (a smaller grabbing-hand effect) or

less developed factor markets (a larger grease-of-wheel effect).

     In this hypothesis, we relate the return differentials between different types of

firms to local institutions. Since private, small, or non-connected firms benefit (suffer)

more than state-owned, large, or politically connected firms from the anti-corruption

actions through the grabbing-hand (grease-of-wheel) channel, we expect the return

differentials are smaller in provinces with better legal protections (a smaller

grabbing-hand effect) or less developed factor markets (a larger grease- of-wheel

effect).



4 Data Description

     The main dataset used for our event study in this study covers all non-financial

corporations listed on China's stock exchanges. It contains 2258 firms listed by the

end of 2012. Stock returns and financial data are extracted from the China Stock

Market and Accounting Research Database (CSMAR). In addition, we also make use

of the Chinese Firm Registration Database that covers the universe of firms registered

in China available for the years 2006 to 2015 to estimate the long-term effect on the

entry of new firms. Finally, we employ a panel of Chinese listed firm data for the

years 2007 ­ 2017 to analyze the long-term effect on the scales of existing firms.7



 Since we need the estimated CAR for each to carry out the long-term DID analysis, the listed firm panel includes

                                                      20
      To empirically test our hypotheses, we construct several key firm level variables.

First, we define a LUXURY dummy, which equals one if a company belongs to a

high-end jewelry, high-end health care, or high-end liquor producer, or the high-end

tailing industry, and zero otherwise. Next, we create a dummy variable for state

ownership of a firm, labeled as SOE, which takes the value of one if the firm is

ultimately controlled by the state government directly or through the equity chain, and

zero otherwise. Following existing studies in the literature (Fan et al., 2007), we also

construct a dummy variable to measure political connections (labeled as

CONNECTED), which takes the value of one if a top management team member

belongs to the People's Congress (PC) or the Chinese People's Political Consultative

Conference (CPPCC).8 Firm size is defined as the logarithm of firm total assets. We

also control for other variables at the firm level, including firm tax burden (labeled as

TAX) and leverage ratio (labeled as LEVERAGE).

      In addition, we also create measures of quality of local institutions using the

province-level marketization index constructed by the National Economic Research

Institute (NERI), (e.g., Du et al., 2008; Firth et al.,2009; Fan et al., 2010). This index

is constructed using statistics of enterprise and household surveys. It covers five fields

with a total of 23 basic indicators, ranging from 0 to 10 with higher scores indicating

better quality of local institution. 9 We make use of two of them to proxy two

particular aspects of the quality of local institutions in China. The first indicator is the

protection of producers' legitimate rights and interests. We expect that the

grabbing-hand effect associate with corruption is weaker in provinces with stronger



only firms listed by the end of 2012. Firms listed after the event are not included.
8
  We also tried to use a simple count measure, and our results are robust to this alternative measure.
9
  See Fan et al. (2010) for details of this index.

                                                         21
legal protections. The second indicator we consider is the degree of factor market

development. In provinces with more developed and market-oriented factor markets,

the gains from paying bribes (i.e., the grease-of-wheel effects) are weaker. We also

include other provincial variables, including GDP per capita and education expense as

control variables. Summary statistics are reported in Table 1. Details of variable

definitions and data sources are shown in Appendix B.

                             [Insert Table 1 around Here]



5 Empirical Results

5.1. The Event Date

     We employ an event study approach to examine the reactions of stock market to

the inspection announcement. To implement an event study, we first need to identify a

clear event date. The CCDI launched a total of four rounds of anti-corruption

inspections in years 2013 and 2014. Before each round of inspection, the CCDI would

initiate a deployment meeting, in which the provinces to be inspected are announced.

Appendix A lists the announcement dates and provinces to be inspected in each round.

For an event study to be valid, the event must be unexpected news. Therefore, we pick

the announcement of the first-round inspection as our event date. The effective date is

May 17, 2013.

     We also check whether the inspection announcement is the most relevant news

during the event periods. In Table 2, we report the Baidu Index, an indicator for Baidu

search scale, for each top political event in the inspected month (May 2013). The

anti-corruption inspection is clearly the most relevant news.

                             [Insert Table 2 around Here]




                                           22
5.2. Market Responses

     To examine the market responses to the event, we first estimate a market model

over a 180-day estimation window ending 11 days before the announcement date. A

value-weighted average return of all stocks in our sample is adopted as the market

return. We then calculate cumulative abnormal returns (CARs) over an 11-day (-5, 5)

event window centered on the inspected announcement date (May 17, 2013) and test

their statistical significance. Reported in Table 3, the average of the CARs is positive

and significantly different from zero. We also report the ratio of firms with negative

CARs to the total number of firms. We find only 774 out of 2258 firms experienced a

decline in their stock prices in the 11-day event window. Our results thus indicate that

overall market participants view this anti-corruption inspection as positive news.

Quantitatively, the estimated average CARs suggest that the market gains 2.818% in

the 11-day event window. This finding is consistent with our first hypothesis that

sufficiently strong anti-corruption actions in equilibrium can change the underlying

institutional constraints that give rise to the efficient grease effect of corruption in the

first place.

                              [Insert Table 3 around Here]

     To establish the robustness of our results, we consider a variety of alternative

market benchmarks. Following Ji and Wei (2014), an equal-weighted average return

and Hushen 300 index are considered as alternative market benchmarks. In addition,

we also consider a three-factor model (i.e., adding the size factor and book-to-market

factor as two new factors in addition to the market factor). As shown in Table 3, our

results are not affected by the choice of the market benchmark.

     Another way to check the sensitivity of our results is to choose alternative event

windows. To deal with the issue that eleven days may not be long enough to absorb


                                             23
the inspection news, we also try three longer event windows, a 16-day window, a

21-day window, and a 31-day window. As shown in the last three rows in Table 3,

using alternative event windows does not alter our finding either. The estimated CARs

are all positive and significant.

5.3. Firm Heterogeneity

5.3.1. Benchmark results

     The above results indicate that overall stock market responded positively to the

announcement of anti-corruption inspections by the CCDI. In this subsection, we

explore further the heterogeneous effects of anti-corruption inspections across

different firms. Our simple conceptual framework and the hypotheses developed in

Section 3 suggest that the effects of combating corruption on individual firms depend

on firm characteristics and local institutions. We examine firms' heterogeneous

responses by regressing the estimated firm CARs obtained from the event study on

firm and province characteristics. Specifically, we consider the following model:

/ÉÑ) = Ö + ÜH 9I|IBá) + Ü< àâä) + Üã à"åç) + Üé /èêêçë%çw) + í/) + ìî + ìï (5)

where CAR is cumulative abnormal return of each firm. LUXURY and SOE are

dummies for firms that produce luxury products and firms with state ownership,

respectively. Specifically, LUXURY equals one is a firm is a high-end jewelry,

high-end health care, or high-end liquor producer, or belongs to the high-end tailing

industry, and SOE takes the value of one if a firm is controlled by local or national

governments. SIZE is a measure of firm size and is defined as the logarithm of firm

total assets. CONNECTED is a dummy variable for political connections, which takes

the value of one if a top management team member belongs to the People's congress

or CPPCC. We also control for other variables at the firm level, including firm tax




                                          24
burden (TAX) and leverage ratio (LEVERAGE). ìî and ìï are industry and

province fixed effects, respectively.

     Table 4 shows the benchmark results using the market model and an 11-day

event window. In Column (1), we perform a preliminary analysis without controlling

for industry or province fixed effects. In Column (2), we add industry fixed effects. In

both columns, we also create an INSPECTED dummy variable for provinces to be

inspected in the first round of anti-corruption inspection and include it in the

regressions. The omitted group thus consists of provinces not included in the

first-round inspection. Both regressions yield favorable results supporting our

Hypothesis 2, which is based on the market demand channel illustrated in the simple

theoretical framework. The estimated coefficient on the LUXURY dummy is negative

and significant. Compared to other firms, firms that produce luxury products have a

lower return of 3.19%. We also find that, interestingly, the INSPECTED dummy is

statistically insignificant and quantitatively very small in each column, indicating that

the announcement of the anti-corruption campaign has a nationwide effect. While the

announcement only informs market participates of the five provinces to be inspected

in the first round, the market well anticipates that all provinces will be inspected

eventually in the future.

     Our simple model does not make an unambiguous prediction on the differential

effect of fighting corruption on private and state-owned firms. On the one hand,

private firms are more subject to government extractions. On the other hand, the

grease-of-wheel channel also has greater impact on private firms as their operations

are often more sensitive to government service provision. Anti-corruption measures

thus can have an ambiguous effect on the return differential between private and

state-owned firms. However, as emphasized by Kaufman and Wei (1999), in a general


                                           25
equilibrium, a strong enough combat on corruption can change the institution

constraints giving rise to the grease of wheel channel in the first place. If this is the

case, then we should expect a higher return for private firms. Our results are indeed in

favor of this speculation. We find that state-owned firms have significantly lower

anti-corruption announcement returns than private firms. This finding is also

consistent with those documented by Lin, Morck, Yeung, and Zhao (2016) and Li,

Wang, and Zhou (2017) that non-SOEs benefit more from the anti-corruption actions.

Similarly, we also find that the announcement returns are significantly lower for large

or politically connected firms as the estimated coefficients on firm size and the

political connection dummy are both significantly negative. The evidence from the

return differentials between private and state-owned (small and large, or

non-connected and connected) firms thus is consistent with our third hypothesis.

     In the last column of Table 4, we control for both industry and province fixed

effects. The INSPECTED dummy is absorbed by the inclusion of the province fixed

effects. We, however, still find consistent results that the announcement returns are

significantly lower for luxury goods producers, state-owned, large, or politically

connected firms.

                             [Insert Table 4 around Here]

5.3.2. Robustness checks

     In this subsection, we conduct a series of sensitivity analyses to ensure the

robustness of our results. In Table 5, we conduct two sets of robustness checks. The

first set of robustness checks is to consider alternative event winds. Specifically, we

consider a (-5,10), a (-10,10), and a (-10, 20) event window and report the results in

Columns (1)-(3), respectively. Next, in Columns (4)-(6), we try different market

benchmarks. In Column (4), we change the market model to a three-factor model (i.e.,


                                           26
adding the size factor and book-to-market factor as two additional factors). In

Columns (5) and (6), we use value weighted average return and Hushen 300 index as

market benchmarks, respectively. Using alternative event winds or market

benchmarks does not change our main findings. The estimated coefficients on SOE,

LUXURY, SIZE, and CONNECTED are still negative and mostly significant.

                              [Insert Table 5 around Here]

     Table 6 considers further the robustness of our results to alternative measures to

the three key firm characteristics, ownership, size, and political connections. Column

(1) employs an alternative measure of state-owned firms dummy based on firms'

registration type rather than actual controller. In Column (2), we use number of

employees (in natural log) to proxy for firm size. Finally, we use a count measure

defined as ln (1+number of connected board directors) as an alternative measure of

political connections, where connected board directors are those who are current or

former member of the people's congress or the CPPCC. Using alternative measures of

firm characteristics does not affect our results either. We continue to find a

significantly lower announcement return for state-owned, large, or connected firms.

                              [Insert Table 6 around Here]

5.4. The role of local institutions

     So far, we have shown that the effects of China's anti-corruption campaign vary

across firms. Here we explore further the role of local institutions in determining the

return differentials across different types of firms. As discussed in Hypothesis 4, to the

extent local institutions affect the grabbing-hand and the grease-of-wheel channels,

they also influence the return differentials. For example, compared to private firms,

SOEs benefit less from fighting corruption through the grabbing-hand channel. This

differential, however, is smaller in provinces with better legal protections of firm


                                            27
rights and interests where the grabbing hand effect is weaker. On the other hand, the

impact of the grease-of-wheel channel depends also on local institutions. Our model

suggests that the grease-of-wheel channel works through its impact on firms' marginal

costs. Its impact thus is weaker in provinces where factor markets are more developed

and market-oriented (so that governments have less influence on factor prices and

allocations). While the adverse effect of fighting corruption through the

grease-of-wheel channel is larger for private firms, the differential should be smaller

in provinces with more developed factor markets. Similar arguments also apply to the

comparisons between large and small firms, or connected and non-connected firms.

To empirically test this hypothesis, here we employ two measures of institutions at the

province level constructed by a non-government research institute in China, the

National Economic Research Institute (NERI). The first one is an index of legal

protections, PROTECTION, and a higher value means better legal protections of firm

rights and interests. The second index, FACTORMKT, measures the degree of factor

market development. A higher value of this index means the government plays a

smaller role in determining the allocations or prices of financial resources, labor, and

patents, etc.

     We then re-estimate the benchmark model with industry and province fixed

effects (the last regression in Table 4) but adding the interaction terms between firm

characteristics and local institution measures as additional regressors. The results are

reported in Table 7. Column (1) shows the interaction effects between the two

institution variables and the SOE dummy. The evidence is in favor of our hypothesis.

The estimated coefficient on interaction term SOE*PROTECTION is positive and

statistically significant, while that on SOE*FACTORMKT significantly negative. The

two significant interaction terms suggest that local institutions do play a role in


                                           28
determining the effects of fighting corruption across firms. Specifically, the first

interaction term indicates that the return differentials between private and state-owned

firms due to the grabbing-hand effect declines with the degree of local legal

protections of firm rights. The second interaction effect suggests that the adverse

effect of anti-corruption actions on private firms is smaller in provinces with more

developed factor markets. Columns (2) and (3) report the interaction effects between

the local institution variables and firm size and political connections, respectively. The

results are also consistent with Hypothesis 4. In Column (2), we find that a positive

and significant estimated coefficient on the interaction term between firm size and

PROTECTION, but a negative and significant coefficient on the interaction term

between firm size and FACTORMKT. The two interaction terms in Column (3) also

have correct signs. CONNECTION*PROTECTION has a t-value of 1.5, and

CONNECTION *FACTORMKT is statistically significant at the 5% level.

                              [Insert Table 7 around Here]

5.5. Long-term impacts

     So far, we have shown that our results from the event study analysis are

consistent with the theoretical predictions. A caveat of the event study approach is that

it relies on the market efficiency assumption. If the market efficiency assumption is

invalid, then our event study results may not capture the true effects of anti-corruption.

To address this concern, here we provide further evidence on firms' long-term

performance. Since corruption can lead to both less entry on the extensive margin,

and to smaller scale on the intensive margin (e.g., Klitgaard, 1991; La Porta, et al.,

1999; Shleifer and Vishny, 1993), we examine the long-term effects of the

anti-corruption campaign on both margins. If our event study results are valid, we

should expect industries with higher average CARs during the event window


                                            29
subsequently to have more entries of new firms on the extensive margin. Similarly, on

the intensive margin, we should also expect that firms with higher CARs during the

event window to expand in their scales after the anti-corruption campaign.

5.5.1. Long-term impact on the extensive margins

        We first provide evidence on the long-term effect of entry of new firms. To

examine the long-term effect on firm entry, we make use of the Chinese Firm

Registration Database that covers the universe of firms registered in China available

for the years 2006 to 2015.10 We consider a generalized difference-in-differences

approach and estimate the following empirical model:

äê%Báñó = Üòè$%ó  ×  /ÉÑñ + Öñ + Öó + öñó                                                                     (6)

where the dependent variable, äê%Báñó , is the total number of newly registered firms

(in natural log) at the industry-year level. Our variable of interest is the interaction

term between a post-anti-corruption (year 2013 and after) dummy and the average

industry-level CAR during the event window. A positive and significant coefficient Ü

would suggest that industries that had higher CARs during the event window indeed

experience more entries of new firms during the post-event period. We also control

for industry fixed effects, Öñ , and year fixed effects, Öó , in our regressions.

        The results are reported in Table 8. Column (1) shows the benchmark results

where we calculate the CARs using the benchmark market model and an eleven-day,

(-5 5), event window. For robustness, we also consider alternative event windows in

Columns (2) ­ (4) and alternative market benchmarks in Columns (5) ­ (7). The

results are quite robust. The estimated coefficients on the interaction term are found to

be positive and significant in all regressions.

                                        [Insert Table 8 around Here]


10
     In China, all firms are required to register with the General Administration of Industry and Commerce.

                                                          30
      In Table 9, we further examine the long-term effects on firm entry at the more

disaggregate province-industry level. We compute using the registration data the total

number of entries at the province-industry-year level (in natural log), äê%BáWñó , and

estimate the following model:

äê%BáWñó = Üòè$%ó ×  /ÉÑWñ + ÖW + Öñ + Öó + öWñó                                                                  (7)

where /ÉÑWñ is the average CAR at the province-industry level, and ÖW is the

province fixed effect. We repeat the exercises in Table 8 using more disaggregate

province-industry level data in Columns (1) ­ (7). In Column (8), we use the more

stringent province-industry fixed effects to replace province fixed effects and industry

fixed effects. The results are quite similar. We continue to find that higher returns

during the event window are associated with more subsequent entries of new firms.11

                                       [Insert Table 9 around Here]

5.5.2. Long-term Impact on the intensive margins

      Since (anti-)corruption affects not only firm entry on the extensive margin but

also leads to smaller scale on the extensive margin, we also examine the long-term

effect of the anti-corruption campaign on firm size of existing firms using a similar

generalized DID approach. Specifically, we estimate the following empirical model

using the Chinese listed firm data for the years 2007 - 2017:

âI%ëè{ç)ó = Üòè$%ó ×  /ÉÑ) + õòè$%ó ×  /èê%Bèú$"ê"ê"%"GúáçGB) + Ö) + Öó +

ö)ó                                                                                                         (8)

The dependent variable is firm size measured by total asset (in natural log). The first

term on the right-hand side is our variable of interest - an interaction term of firm

CAR during the event window and an indicator variable (Post) for years 2013 and


11
  We have also tried to control for the interaction terms between initial year industry characteristics, such as log
employment, log assets, productivity, in (7) and (8) using industry-level data from China Statistical Year Book.
The sample size becomes smaller due to missing industry-level data, but our results hold strongly.

                                                         31
after, which captures the relative change in the outcome variable among firms with

differential exposure to the change in anti-corruption after versus before the event

year. The second term on the right-hand side represents a series of initial (2009) firm

attributes that proxy for investment opportunities and firms' ability to finance future

investments, also interacted with the post anti-corruption dummy.12 These attributes

include current asset, leverage, market-to-book ratio (MTB), cash flow and cash

holding. We also include firm and year fixed effects and cluster the standard errors at

the firm level.

                                        [Insert Table 10 around Here]

        Table 10 shows the estimation results. Column (1) illustrates the benchmark

results using the 11-day event window and the benchmark market model. Robustness

checks based on alternative event windows and market benchmarks are provided in

the rest columns. We find that the estimated coefficients on the interaction term

between the post dummy and the CAR are all positive and statistically significant.

The results suggest that firms with higher event CARs indeed experienced faster

expansion in scales after the anti-corruption campaign. Overall, the long-term effects

obtained from the DID approach are consistent with the theoretical predictions on the

extensive and intensive margins and are also consistent with the event-study results.

5.6. Evidence on the endogenous grits effect

        A key element in our equilibrium analysis of the economic consequences of

anti-corruption is the endogenous grits effect (see Section 3). In our theoretical

framework, the bureaucrats can choose the "grits" of the bureaucracy that affect the

firm's marginal cost of production. For sufficiently strong anti-corruption actions, the

bureaucrats may endogenously choose to switch from a high regulatory regime to a


12
     For firms that enter the sample after 2009, we use their attributes upon entry.

                                                            32
low regulatory regime if taking bribes is too costly. Our findings in Sections 5.2 - 5.5

suggest that a change in the underlying institutional constraints indeed occurred in

China after the strong anti-corruption campaign as proxied by the CCDI

announcement. Here we provide some direct evidence on the endogenous grits effect.

      We present two pieces of direct evidence on institutional changes plausibly

related to regulatory regime of doing business in China. First, we examine the

commonly-used "Ease of Doing Business" index constructed by the World Bank to

present some suggestive graphical evidence. The Ease of Doing Business index

presents quantitative indicators on business regulations and the protection of property

rights that can be compared across 190 economies.13 It ranks countries based on how

the regulatory environment is conducive to business operation and protections of

property rights. A higher rank (a low numerical value) indicates better regulations for

businesses and stronger protections of property rights. Figure 1 shows the global

ranking for China for the years 2008-2019. Its rank was around 90 in the first several

years and reached an all-time high of 99 in 2012. After the anti-corruption campaign,

however, there is a clear pattern that China's rank started to improve. Its rank

improved to 83 in 2014, and in 2019, it reached and a record low of 31.

      Next, we present evidence using the overall marketization index constructed by

the National Economic Research Institute (NERI).14 The overall marketization index

captures the institutional development in China in five areas, including the

relationship       between       governments          and     the     market,       the    development             of

non-state-owned sector, the development of product market, the development of

factor market, and legal protection. A higher index value indicates a better

institutional environment for business. This index is available at the Chinese province


13 See Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2012) for details of the ease of doing business index.
14 See Fan et al. (2010) for details of the overall China marketization index.

                                                        33
level for the years 2008 ­ 2016. A simple before-and-after comparison shows that the

national average value of this index increased from 5.57 in the pre-anti-corruption

(2008­2012) period to 6.48 in the post-anti-corruption (2013­2016) period. Given

that the mean of this index for the whole sample period is only 5.97, this is a fairly

large increase.

     We also use this province-year panel to conduct a regression analysis.

Specifically, we regress the marketization index on a post anti-corruption dummy that

takes the value of 1 for the years 2013 and after, controlling for province fixed effects.

The regression results are reported in Table 11. They are consistent with the evidence

obtained from the Ease of Doing Business index. We find that the estimated

coefficient on the post anti-corruption dummy is positive and statistically significant,

indicating a better business environment in China after the anti-corruption campaign.

Quantitatively, the estimated effect is also substantial. The estimated coefficient on

the post anti-corruption dummy is 0.91, which is 15.2% of the sample mean value of

the marketization index.



6 Conclusion

     China's recent anti-corruption campaign provides a unique opportunity to study

the economic consequences of large-scale government anti-corruption effects in

developing countries where corruption is a central issue. We first provide a simple

theoretical framework to illustrate the four potential channels through which

anti-corruption policy can affect firms: the "grabbing hand" effect, the "grease of the

wheel" effect, the demand effect, and the endogenous grits effect. It predicts an

ambiguous effect of combating corruption on an individual firm's performance

depending on firm characteristics and local institutions.


                                            34
     In the empirical part of our study, we use an event study approach to examine the

market expected effects of the anti-corruption campaign. Specifically, we focus on

market responses to the symbolic event of this campaign, the announcement of

anti-corruption inspections to be conducted by the CCDI of the CCP. We find robust

evidence that stock market responded significantly positively to the announcement.

The estimated cumulative abnormal returns range from 2.4%-5.3% depending on

different event windows or methods.

     Further regression analysis reveals that the effects are heterogeneous across firms.

Consistent with a market demand channel, stock prices of luxury good producers fall

after the announcement. The announcement returns are also found to be significantly

smaller for SOEs, large firms, or firms with established political connections.

Moreover, we show that the return differentials between private firms and SOEs, as

well as those between small and large firms or between connected and non-connected

firms, are smaller in provinces with better legal protections of firm rights and interests

(i.e., weaker grabbing-hand effect), but larger in provinces with more developed and

market-oriented factor markets (i.e., a weaker grease-of-wheel effect). These

regression results along with an overall positive market response are strongly in favor

of the general equilibrium view. They suggest that, for a strong anti-corruption

campaign, the beneficial effect associated with eliminating governments' grabbing

hands on average dominates the potential adverse effect associated the potential loss

of efficiency grease.

     In addition to short-term event study analysis, we also use a generalize

difference-in-differences approach to investigate the long-term effects of the

anti-corruption campaign. Consistent with the event-study results, we find that higher

CARs during the event window are associated with significantly more subsequent


                                            35
entries of new firms and expansions of existing firms. Finally, we also provide direct

evidence on the endogenous grits effect that is crucial to our equilibrium analysis of

anti-corruption.

References
[1] Bardhan, Pranab (1997). "Corruption and Development: A Review of Issues."
    Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 35, No. 3, 1320-1346.
[2] Beck, P. J., and M.W. Maher (1986). "A Comparison of Bribery and Bidding in
    Thin Markets." Economics Letters, 20(1), 1-5.
[3] Berkowitz, Daniel, Chen Lin and Sibo Liu (2015). "De-Politicization and
    Corporate Transformation: Evidence from China's Anti-Corruption Reforms."
    Working Paper, University of Pittsburgh.
[4] Cai, H., Fang, H., Xu, L.C. (2011). "Eat, Drink, Firms and Government: An
    Investigation of Corruption from Entertainment and Travel Costs of Chinese
    Firms." Journal of Law and Economics, 54, 55-78.
[5] Djankov, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-De-Silanes, and Andrei
    Shleifer. (2012) "The Regulation of Entry." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117,
    1-37.
[6] Dollar, D., and S.-J. Wei (2007). "Das (Wasted) Kapital: Firm Ownership and
    Investment Efficiency in China." NBER Working Paper No. 13103.
[7] Du, J., Lu, Y., Tao, Z. (2008). "Economic Institutions and FDI Location Choice:
    Evidence from US Multinationals in China." Journal of Comparative Economics,
    36, 412-429.
[8] Fan, G., Wang, X., Zhu, H. (2010). "NERI Index of Marketization of China's
    Provinces: 2011 Report" (in Chinese). Economic Science Press, Beijing
[9] Fang, Hanming, Quanlin Gu, and Li-An Zhou (2014). "The Gradients of Power:
    Evidence from the Chinese Housing Market." NBER Working Paper No. 20317.
[10] Fisman, Ray and Miram A. Golden (2017). Corruption: What Everyone Needs to
    Know. Oxford University Press.
[11] Fisman, Ray and Jacob Svensson (2007). "Are Corruption and Taxation Really

                                          36
    Harmful to Growth? Firm Level Evidence." Journal of Development Economics,
    83(1), 63-75.
[12] Fisman,   Ray   and   Yongxiang    Wang     (2015).   "Corruption   in    Chinese
    Privatizations." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 31(1), 1-29.
[13] Fisman, R., and Wei, S. J. (2004). "Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence from
    Missing Imports in China." Journal of Political Economy, 112(2): 471-496.
[14] Firth, M., Lin, C., Liu, P., Wong, S.M. (2009). "Inside the Black Box: Bank
    Credit Allocation in China's Private Sector." Journal of Banking and Finance,
    33, 1144-1155.
[15] Huntington, Samuel P. (1968). Political Order in Changing Societies, Yale
    University Press.
[16] Javorcik, B. S., and Wei, S. J. (2009). "Corruption and Cross-Border Investment
    in Emerging Markets: Firm-Level Evidence." Journal of International Money
    and Finance, 28(4), 605-624.
[17] Ji, L., and Wei, S. J. (2014). "Learning from a Puzzle: When Can Stronger Labor
    Protection Improve Productivity." Working Paper.
[18] Kaufmann, D., and Wei, S. J. (1999). "Does `Grease Money' Speed Up the
    Wheels of Commerce?" NBER Working Paper No. 7093.
[19] Klitgaard, R. (1991). "Gifts and Bribes." Strategy and Choice, 419-435.
[20] La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. (1999). "The
    Quality of Government." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization,15(1),
    222-279.
[21] Leff, Nathaniel H. (1964). "Economic Development through Bureaucratic
    Corruption." The American Behavioral Scientist, 8(2), 8-14.
[22] Li, H., Meng, H., Wang, Q. and Zhou L.A. (2008). "Political Connections,
    Financing and Firm Performance: Evidence from Chinese Private Firms."
    Journal of Development Economics, 87(2), 283­299.
[23] Lien, D. H. D. (1986). "A Note on Competitive Bribery Games." Economics
    Letters, 22(4), 337-341.
[24] Lin, Chen, Randall Morck, Bernard Y. Yeung, and Xiaofeng Zhao (2016).

                                          37
    "Anti-Corruption Reforms and Shareholder Valuations: Event Study Evidence
    from China." NBER Working Paper No. 22001, forthcoming, Journal of
    Financial Economics.
[25] Mauro, Paolo (1995). "Corruption and Growth." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    110(3), 681-712.
[26] Méon, P. G., and Sekkat, K. (2005). "Does Corruption Grease or Sand the
    Wheels of Growth?" Public Choice, 122(1-2), 69-97.
[27] Mo, P. H. (2001). "Corruption and Economic Growth." Journal of Comparative
    Economics, 29(1), 66-79.
[28] Qian, Nancy, and Jaya Wen (2015). "The Impact of Xi Jinping's Anti-Corruption
    Campaign on Luxury Imports in China." Preliminary Draft, Yale University.
[29] Shleifer, A., Vishny, R. (1993). "Corruption." Quarterly Journal of Economics,
    108, 599­617.
[30] Song Z, Storesletten K, Zilibotti F. (2011). "Growing Like China." American
    Economic Review, 101(1), 196-233.
[31] Wei, S. J. (2000a). "How Taxing is Corruption on International Investors?"
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(1), 1-11.
[32] Wei, S. J. (2000b). "Local Corruption and Global Capital Flows." Brookings
    Paper on Economic Activities, 2, 303-354.
[33] Wei, S. J. (2001). "Negative Alchemy? Corruption, Composition of Capital
    Flows and Currency Crises." NBER Working Paper No. 8187.




                                         38
      Appendix A. Announcement of Inspection Dates for Various Provinces
 Round of                                                          Number of listed firms
                          Provinces               Effective Date
Inspection                                                         in inspected provinces
                Chongqing, Guizhou, Jiangxi,
   1st                                            May 17, 2013              183
                    Inner Mongolia, Hubei
                      Anhui, Hunan, Jilin,         October 23,
   2nd                                                                      575
                 Yunnan, Shanxi, Guangdong            2013
                 Xinjiang, Liaoning, Beijing,
   3rd           Ningxia, Shandong, Tianjin,      March 15, 2014            677
                Henan, Gansu, Hainan, Fujian
                 Guangxi, Shanghai, Qinghai,
   4th          Tibet, Zhejiang, Hebei, Shanxi,    July 16, 2014            850
                Heilongjiang, Sichuan, Jiangsu




                                             39
Appendix B. Variable Definitions and Data Sources
l   Stock Market Data: Daily comparable closing returns (with cash dividend
    reinvested) and daily aggregated market returns without cash dividend (current
    value weighted) are denoted as stock and market returns, respectively. Data
    Source: CSMAR.
l   Inspected: A dummy variable equals one if the firms are registered in the
    inspected provinces (usually located in the same provinces), and zero otherwise.
    Data Source: CSMAR.
l   Luxury: A dummy variable to indicate luxury products, equals one if the list
    company belongs to jewelry industry, high-end retailing industry, high-end health
    care products industry, high-end liquor industry, etc., and zero otherwise. Data
    Source: CSMAR.
l   SOE: A dummy variable equals one if the firm is ultimately controlled by the
    state government directly or through the equity chain, and zero otherwise. Data
    Source: CSMAR.
l   SOE 2: A dummy variable equals one if a firm is registered as a state-owned
    firm. Data Source: CSMAR.
l   Size: The logarithm of total assets. Data Source: CSMAR.
l   Size_2: The logarithm of number of employees. Data Source: CSMAR.
l   Connected: A dummy variable equals one if a top management team member
    (including CEO) belongs to People's Congress or CPPCC at any level, and zero
    otherwise. Data Source: CSMAR.
l   Connected_2: A count variable that count the number of total political ties
    (membership of PC or CPPCC). Data Source: CSMAR.
l   Tax: The ratio of total tax to the total sales. Data Source: CSMAR.
l   Leverage: The ratio of total debts to total assets. Data Source: CSMAR.
l   PCGDP: The logarithm of GDP of a province. Data Source: National Bureau of
    Statistics of China.
l   Education: The ratio of education expenditures to GDP of a province. Data
    Source: National Bureau of Statistics of China.

                                         40
l   Protection: Protection denotes the protection of producer's legitimate rights and
    interests, which is measured by an index of court's efficiency in resolving legal
    cases (economic disputes). The higher the value, the stronger the legal protection.
    Data Source: National Economic Research Institute (NERI).
l   Factor Market: Factor market represents factor market development, which is
    comprised by the degree of financial sector marketization, the degree of foreign
    capital importation, the degree of labor movement, and the marketization of
    technological achievements. The higher the score, the more developed the factor
    market. Data Source: National Economic Research Institute (NERI).




                                          41
Appendix C. Eight-Point Regulation: December 4, 201215
        The Eight-Point Regulation issued on December 4, 2012, made explicit
requirements on how Political Bureau members should improve their work style in
eight aspects, focusing on rejecting extravagance and reducing bureaucratic visits,
meetings and empty talk. The political bureau, which has 25 members, includes the
top decision-makers, such as State leaders, Party chiefs of several key provincial-level
regions, ministers and top army officials.
1.     (Keep Close Contact with the Grassroots, but Prohibit Inspection Tours)
       Leaders must keep in close contact with the grassroots. They must understand the
       real situation facing society through in-depth inspections at grassroots. Greater
       attention should be focused on places where social problems are more acute, and
       inspection tours must be carried out more thoroughly. Inspection tours as a mere
       formality should be strictly prohibited. Leaders should work and listen to the
       public and officials at the grassroots, and people's practical problems must be
       tackled. There should be no welcome banner, no red carpet, no floral arrangement
       or grand receptions for officials' visits.
2.     (Prohibit Empty Meetings) Meetings and major events should be strictly
       regulated, and efficiency improved. Political Bureau members are not allowed to
       attend ribbon-cutting or cornerstone-laying ceremonies, or celebrations and
       seminars, unless they get approval from the CPC Central Committee. Official
       meetings should get shortened and be specific and to the point, with no empty and
       rigmarole talks.
3.     (Reduce Official Documents) The issuing of official documents should be
       reduced.
4.     (Restrict Official Visits Overseas) Officials' visits abroad should only be
       arranged when needed in terms of foreign affairs with fewer accompanying
       members, and on most of the occasions, there is no need for a reception by
       overseas Chinese people, institutions and students at the airport.


15
     The material in this appendix is from: http://cpcchina.chinadaily.com.cn/2012-12/05/content_15991171.htm

                                                        42
5.   (Leaders' Travel by Car Should Follow Traffic Rules) There should be fewer
     traffic controls when leaders travel by cars to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to
     the public. There should be fewer traffic controls arranged for the leaders'
     security of their trips to avoid unnecessary inconvenience to the public.
6.   (Media Should Report Only Official Events with Real News Value) The
     media must not report on stories about official events unless there is real news
     value. The regulations also ban worthless news reports on senior officials' work
     and activities and said such reports should depend on work needs, news value and
     social effects.
7.   (Leaders Should Not Publish Without the Approval from the Central
     Leadership) Leaders should not publish any works by themselves or issue any
     congratulatory letters unless an arrangement with the central leadership has been
     made. Official documents without substantial contents and realistic importance
     should be withheld. Publications regarding senior officials' work and activities
     are also restricted.
8.   (Leaders Should Live a Thrifty Lifestyle) Leaders must practice thrift and
     strictly follow relevant regulations on accommodation and cars.




                                           43
Figure 1. Ease of doing business in China (Global Ranking)




                                      44
Table 1. Summary Statistics
Variable                           Mean    Std. Dev.      Min      Max
Inspected                         0.0779    0.2681         0         1
Luxury                            0.0120    0.1087         0         1
Leverage                          0.4343    0.2841      0.0110    7.9952
SOE                               0.3716    0.4833         0         1
SOE_2                             0.4141    0.4927         0         1
Connection                        0.2857    0.4518         0         1
Connection_2                      0.2420    0.4072         0      2.4849
FactorMarket                      6.2583    1.3851      2.2800    8.5200
Protection                        5.6533    1.5910     -1.9100    8.9300
Ln_Asset                         21.8237    1.3131     15.7294   28.4052
Tax                               0.0376    0.0468     -0.2333    0.3637
Ln_Labor                          7.5322    1.3402      1.6094   13.2147
CAR (-5, 5)                       0.0282    0.0707     -0.2938    0.4860
CAR (-5,10)                       0.0331    0.0843     -0.3262    0.5457
CAR (-10,10)                      0.0460    0.1020     -0.2976    0.7388
CAR (-10,20)                      0.0543    0.1393     -0.7772    0.8167
3_Factor CAR (-5,5)               0.0332    0.0706     -0.2984    0.4806
Total Value CAR (-5, 5)           0.0243    0.0706     -0.2962    0.4817
Hushen 300 CAR (-5,5)             0.0422    0.0710     -0.2828    0.4998
Ease of Doing Business Ranking   78.6667   20.1284        31        99
Overall marketization index       5.9736    2.0244       -0.23      10




                                     45
Table 2. Most Relevant News in May 2013.
               Big Events                                        Highest Baidu Index
      World Horticultural Exposition                                     506
       Anti-corruption Inspection                                       1607
            South Asia Expo                                              468
        Railway System Reform                                            842
       Regulations of Food Safety                                        181
Notes: Baidu is the most popular local search engine in China. The Baidu Index is an indicator
reflecting the search scale of one specific event within a given period. Here we report the Baidu index
for top political events (top search phrases) in the inspected month (May 2013). The bigger the number,
the larger the search scale of the event.




                                                  46
Table 3. Stock Market Reactions
              Model                      Average CAR              Negative Firms/All Firms
CAR (-5, 5)                               0.0282***                      774/2258
Three factor CAR (-5, 5)                  0.0332***                      648/2258
Total value CAR (-5, 5)                   0.0243***                      850/2258
Hushen300 CAR (-5, 5)                     0.0422***                      516/2258
CAR (-5, 10)                              0.0331***                      723/2258
CAR (-10, 10)                             0.0460***                      707/2258
CAR (-10, 20)                             0.0543***                      828/2258
Notes: *, ** and *** denote the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.




                                                 47
Table 4. Benchmark Regressions
Dep = CARs                         (1)                      (2)                     (3)
Inspected                       -0.0073                  -0.0045
                                (-1.701)                 (-1.324)
Luxury                        -0.0366***               -0.0321**               -0.0334***
                                (-3.305)                (-2.874)                 (-3.371)
SOE                             -0.0085*               -0.0061**                -0.0068**
                                 (-2.003)               (-2.466)                 (-2.347)
Size                          -0.0048***               -0.0034***              -0.0038***
                                (-4.351)                 (-4.185)                (-4.910)
Connected                     -0.0082***               -0.0073***               -0.0061**
                                (-3.272)                 (-3.131)                (-2.709)
Tax                             0.0121                   -0.0210                 -0.0221
                                (0.500)                  (-0.685)                (-0.711)
Leverage                        -0.0086*                -0.0078                  -0.0040
                                 (-1.760)               (-1.660)                 (-1.034)
Constant                       0.1434***               0.1113***                0.1296***
                                 (5.365)                 (6.097)                  (7.468)
Industry F.E.                       No                     Yes                      Yes
Province F.E.                       No                     No                       Yes
Observations                       2257                   2257                     2257
R2                                0.027                   0.057                    0.080
Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level. t-values are reported in the parentheses. *,
** and *** denote the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.




                                                48
       Table 5. Alternative Event Windows and Market Models

                                           Alternative Event Windows                                                             Alternative Market Models
                               (2)                     (3)                           (4)                             (4)                     (5)                          (6)
                                                                                                                                          Weighted
Dep = CARs                CAR (-5,10)               CAR (-10,10)               CAR (-10,20)                    Three Factor              Benchmark                   Hushen300
Luxury                    -0.0274***                 -0.0248***                  -0.0379**                     -0.0317***                 -0.0327***                 -0.0357***
                            (-3.090)                   (-3.298)                   (-2.446)                       (-3.092)                   (-3.327)                   (-3.498)
SOE                       -0.0055***                  -0.0153**                 -0.0204***                       -0.0059*                  -0.0067**                  -0.0068**
                            (-5.921)                   (-2.769)                   (-3.554)                        (-1.982)                  (-2.301)                   (-2.363)
Size                      -0.0051***                 -0.0088***                 -0.0129***                       -0.0011                  -0.0036***                 -0.0040***
                            (-5.921)                   (-9.178)                   (-8.762)                       (-1.439)                   (-4.798)                   (-4.852)
Connected                  -0.0051**                  -0.0059**                   -0.0015                       -0.0057**                  -0.0061**                   -0.0062
                            (-2.815)                   (-2.608)                   (-0.434)                       (-2.544)                   (-2.667)                   (-2.728)
Tax                         -0.0601                    -0.0545                    -0.0596                        -0.0060                    -0.0199                    -0.0300
                            (-1.337)                   (-0.748)                   (-0.543)                       (-0.184)                   (-0.638)                   (-0.946)
Leverage                    -0.0043                  -0.0164***                 -0.0259***                       -0.0044                    -0.0036                    -0.0050
                            (-1.130)                   (-3.395)                   (-3.131)                       (-1.244)                   (-0.924)                   (-1.278)
Constant                   0.1562***                  0.2198***                  0.2942***                      0.0764***                  0.1224***                  0.1480***
                             (7.795)                    (9.999)                   (10.606)                        (4.488)                    (7.149)                    (8.121)
Industry F.E.                  Yes                        Yes                        Yes                            Yes                        Yes                        Yes
Province F.E.                  Yes                        Yes                        Yes                            Yes                        Yes                        Yes
Observations                  2,257                      2,257                      2,257                          2,257                      2,257                      2,257
R2                            0.057                      0.096                      0.111                          0.065                      0.078                      0.082
 Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level. t-values are reported in the parentheses. *, ** and *** denote the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.




                                                                                           49
Table 6. Alternative measures of firm ownership, size, or political connections.
                                   (1)                       (2)                      (3)
Dep = CARs                    Alternative                                        Alternative
                                                     Alternative Size
                              Ownership                                          Connection
Luxury                        -0.0333***                -0.0335***               -0.0328***
                                (-3.288)                  (-3.240)                 (-3.313)
SOE                                                     -0.0074**                 -0.0066**
                                                         (-2.366)                  (-2.308)
SOE_2                          -0.0049**
                                (-2.203)
Size                          -0.0039***                                         -0.0038***
                                (-4.851)                                           (-4.979)
Size_2                                                  -0.0031***
                                                          (-3.502)
Connected                      -0.0060**                -0.0065**
                                (-2.382)                 (-2.944)
Connected_2                                                                        -0.0049*
                                                                                    (-1.774)
Tax                             -0.0219                   -0.0360                  -0.0234
                                (-0.703)                  (-1.147)                 (-0.758)
Leverage                        -0.0044                   -0.0051                  -0.0042
                                (-1.126)                  (-1.606)                 (-1.083)
Constant                       0.1314***                0.0729***                 0.1298***
                                 (7.624)                 (8.8185)                   (7.518)
Industry F.E.                     Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Province F.E.                     Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Observations                     2,257                     2,257                     2,257
R2                               0.079                     0.079                     0.079
Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level. t-values are reported in the parentheses. *,
** and *** denote the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.




                                                50
Table 7. The Role of Local Institutions
Dep = CAR (5, 5)                              (1)                       (2)                      (3)
SOE * Protection                           0.0040*
                                           (1.980)
SOE * FactorMarket                       -0.0086***
                                           (-5.804)
SIZE * Protection                                                   0.0012**
                                                                     (2.159)
SIZE * FactorMarket                                                -0.0026***
                                                                     (-3.076)
Connected * Protection                                                                         0.0043
                                                                                               (1.412)
Connected * FactorMarket                                                                     -0.0067**
                                                                                              (-2.169)
Luxury                                   -0.0329***                -0.0334***               -0.0333***
                                           (-3.321)                  (-3.309)                 (-3.373)
SOE                                        0.0232*                 -0.0069**                  -0.0065*
                                           (1.661)                  (-2.412)                   (-2.145)
Size                                     -0.0037***                  0.0056                 -0.0038***
                                           (-4.933)                  (1.461)                  (-4.920)
Connected                                 -0.0059**                -0.0063**                   0.0112
                                           (-2.632)                 (-2.854)                   (1.531)
Tax                                        -0.0170                   -0.0187                  -0.0227
                                           (-0.550)                  (-0.585)                 (-0.734)
Leverage                                   -0.0039                   -0.0033                  -0.0045
                                           (-1.053)                  (-0.811)                 (-1.116)
Constant                                 0.1230***                   0.0413                  0.1262***
                                           (7.207)                   (1.053)                   (7.236)
Industry F.E.                                Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Province F.E.                                Yes                       Yes                       Yes
Observations                                2,257                     2,257                     2,257
R2                                          0.083                     0.082                     0.081
      Notes: Standard errors are clustered at industry level. t-values are reported in the parentheses. *,
      ** and *** denote the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.




                                                      51
Table 8. Long-term effects on entry of new firms at the industry level
                  Benchmark                   Alternative Event Windows                                            Alternative Market Models
                      (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)                               (5)               (6)             (7)
                  CAR (-5, 5)      CAR (-5,10)       CAR (-10,10)    CAR (-10,20)                       Three Factor        Weighted      Hushen300
CAR*Post          4.8414***         3.0982***          2.7946***       1.9489***                         4.1577***         4.8654***       4.6563***
                    (5.577)           (5.194)            (5.703)         (5.735)                           (4.608)           (5.594)         (5.345)

Industry FE                Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Year FE                    Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes                 Yes                  Yes
Observations               660                  660                 660                  660                  660                 660                  660
R-squared                 0.357                0.353               0.359                0.359                0.347               0.357                0.355
Notes: Each regression includes a constant, industry fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at industry level. t-values are reported in the
parentheses. *, ** and *** denote the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.




                                                                                   52
        Table 9. Long-term effects on entry of new firms at the province-industry level
                       Benchmark                Alternative Event Windows                                           Alternative Market Models                    Alternative FE
                           (1)             (2)              (3)            (4)                               (5)                (6)           (7)                      (8)

                          CAR (-5, 5)         CAR (-5,10)       CAR (-10,10)        CAR (-10,20)        Three Factor         Weighted          Hushen300          Prov-Ind FE
CAR*Post                   0.7745*             1.3778***         1.4343***           0.8376***            0.4982             0.7856*            0.7194*            0.8010***
                           (1.790)               (3.787)           (4.774)             (3.814)            (1.143)             (1.814)           (1.666)              (3.184)

Province FE                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                No
Industry FE                    Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                No
Year FE                        Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes                 Yes                Yes
Province-Industry FE           No                  No                 No                 No                  No                 No                  No                 Yes
Observations                  6,333               6,333              6,333              6,333               6,333              6,333               6,333              6,333
R-squared                     0.504               0.505              0.505              0.504               0.503              0.504               0.504              0.092
        Notes: Regressions in Columns (1) ­ (7) include a constant, province fixed effects, industry fixed effects and year fixed effects. Column (8) replaces province fixed
        effects and industry fixed effects with the more stringent province-industry fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at industry level. t-values are reported in the
        parentheses. *, ** and *** denote the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.




                                                                                           53
Table 10. Long-term effects on scales of on existing firms
                  Benchmark                   Alternative Event Windows                                             Alternative Market Models
                      (1)               (2)                (3)            (4)                                 (5)               (6)              (7)
                  CAR (-5, 5)      CAR (-5,10)       CAR (-10,10)    CAR (-10,20)                         Three Factor       Weighted      Hushen300
CAR*Post           0.2751**          0.2025*            0.1708*        0.1330*                             0.3001**          0.2775**         0.2613*
                    (1.987)           (1.690)           (1.759)         (1.765)                             (2.147)           (2.001)         (1.900)

Controls                    Yes                  Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Firm FE                     Yes                  Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Year FE                     Yes                  Yes                 Yes                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes                  Yes
Observations              15,523               15,523              15,523                15,523              15,523               15,523               15,523
R-squared                  0.927                0.927               0.927                 0.927               0.927                0.927                0.927
Notes: Each regression includes a constant, controls, firm fixed effects, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are clustered at industry level. t-values are reported in
the parentheses. *, ** and *** denote the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.




                                                                                    54
Table 11. Evidence on the endogenous grits effect


                     Dependent Variable=Overall marketization index

                     Post                                 0.9074***
                                                           (10.149)
                     Constant                             5.5703***
                                                          (140.179)
                     Province FE                              Yes
                     Observations                             279
                     Number of Provinces                       31
                     R-squared                               0.529
Notes: Standard errors are clustered at province level. t-values are reported in the parentheses. *,
** and *** denote the 10, 5 and 1 percent significance levels, respectively.




                                                55
