                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           DO FIRM EFFECTS DRIFT?
               EVIDENCE FROM WASHINGTON ADMINISTRATIVE DATA

                                       Marta Lachowska
                                        Alexandre Mas
                                      Raffaele D. Saggio
                                     Stephen A. Woodbury

                                      Working Paper 26653
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26653


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank David Card, Patrick Kline, Christian Moser, Martha Stinson, Mikkel Sølvsten, and
Jenna Stearns for useful comments. We are grateful to the Employment Security Department
(ESD) of Washington State for allowing access to the Washington wage records, and especially
to Jeff Robinson of ESD, whose help was essential to understanding the data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marta Lachowska, Alexandre Mas, Raffaele D. Saggio, and Stephen A. Woodbury.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Firm Effects Drift? Evidence from Washington Administrative Data
Marta Lachowska, Alexandre Mas, Raffaele D. Saggio, and Stephen A. Woodbury
NBER Working Paper No. 26653
January 2020
JEL No. J0,J3

                                         ABSTRACT

We study the time-series properties of firm effects in the two-way fixed effects models
popularized by Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (1999) (AKM) using two approaches. The first--
the rolling AKM approach (R-AKM)--estimates AKM models separately for successive two-
year intervals. The second--the time-varying AKM approach (TV-AKM)--is an extension of the
original AKM model that allows for unrestricted interactions of year and firm indicators. We
apply to both approaches the leave-one-out methodology of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2019) to
correct for biases in the resulting variance components. Using administrative wage records from
Washington State, we find, first, that firm effects for hourly wage rates and earnings are highly
persistent. Specifically, the autocorrelation coefficient between firm effects in 2002 and 2014 is
0.74 for wages and 0.82 for earnings. Second, the R-AKM approach uncovers cyclicality in firm
effects and worker-firm sorting. During the Great Recession the variability in firm effects
increased, while the degree of worker-firm sorting decreased. Third, we document an increase in
wage dispersion between 2002­2003 and 2013­2014. This increase in wage dispersion is driven
by increases in the variance of worker effects and sorting, with an accompanying decrease in the
variance of firm wage effects. Auxiliary analyses suggest that the misspecification of standard
AKM models resulting from restricting firm effects to be fixed over time is a second-order
concern.

Marta Lachowska                                 Raffaele D. Saggio
W.E. Upjohn Institute for                       University of British Columbia
Employment Research                             Vancouver, BC
300 S. Westnedge Avenue                         Canada
Kalamazoo, MI 49007                             rsaggio@mail.ubc.ca
marta@upjohn.org
                                                Stephen A. Woodbury
Alexandre Mas                                   Department of Economics
Industrial Relations Section                    Michigan State University
Simpson International Building                  486 West Circle Drive, Room 110
Princeton University                            East Lansing, MI 48824
Princeton, NJ 08544                             and W.E. Upjohn Institute
and NBER                                        for Employment Research
amas@princeton.edu                              woodbur2@msu.edu
1    Introduction

The variance decomposition method proposed by Abowd, Kramarz, and Margolis (AKM, 1999)
has been the workhorse of a large and growing literature examining earnings differentials and struc-

tural change in labor markets. By decomposing earnings variability into components attributable
to workers, firms, and the sorting of workers to firms, it has produced a wealth of insights re-
garding labor market inequality (Card, Heining and Kline, 2013; Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom

and von Wachter, 2019), gender wage differences (Card, Cardoso and Kline, 2015), compensating
differentials for firm characteristics (Sorkin, 2018), the influence of outsourcing on earnings (Gold-
schmidt and Schmieder, 2017), and the sources of displaced workers' earnings losses (Schmieder,

von Wachter and Heining, 2018; Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury, 2019).
    The standard AKM model imposes the assumption that firm effects--the contribution of a given
firm's pay policies to workers' earnings--are time invariant. This assumption allows researchers to

pool multiple years of data to estimate the model parameters. Pooling is helpful because it is known
that the simple "plug-in" estimator commonly used to obtain the AKM variance components is
biased and inconsistent due to sampling error in the estimated worker and firm effects, as originally

noted by Krueger and Summers (1988) and Abowd et al. (2004). This bias is particularly severe
in datasets with few worker transitions--Andrews, Gill, Schank and Upward (2008) refer to this

as limited mobility bias. The assumption of time-invariant firm effects justifies pooling multiple
years of data to increase the number of observed worker transitions, reducing sampling error and
alleviating the bias in estimating variance components.

    However, the literature on rent sharing provides evidence that firm pay policies may change
over time. For example, Van Reenen (1996) and Kline et al. (2019) document that pay is related
to time-varying patent activity, and a growing literature has estimated the co-movement of firm

performance and compensation (Guiso, Pistaferri and Schivardi, 2005; Card, Devicienti and Maida,
2014; Card, Cardoso, Heining and Kline, 2018). By assuming that firm pay policies are time
invariant and pooling many time periods, we risk understating the true variability of firm pay

policies.

                                                  2
   In this paper, our primary goal is to examine the stability of firm effects and the role of time-

varying firm effects in decompositions of the variance of earnings and wages. We consider two
approaches. The first--the rolling AKM approach (R-AKM)--was popularized by Card, Heining
and Kline (2013) and estimates AKM models separately for successive two-year time intervals.

The second--the time-varying AKM approach (TV-AKM)--is based on an extension of the origi-
nal AKM model where we allow for unrestricted interactions of year and firm indicators. We apply
both methods to Washington State administrative wage records, which are particularly attractive

because they allow us to observe hourly wage rates as well as quarterly earnings and are available
over the most recent business cycle--from 2002 through 2014.
   A second goal of the paper is to appraise the importance of the limited mobility bias using

the "leave-one-out" bias correction proposed by Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2019) (KSS). We
apply this correction to the variance components estimated in both the R-AKM and TV-AKM
models, and compare these estimates to the uncorrected ones based on a simple plug-in approach,

commonly used in the literature.
   The main findings are as follows. First, we find that firm wage and earnings effects show a
remarkable degree of stability. Specifically, in a balanced panel of firms observed in every year

during 2002­2014, the autocorrelation coefficient between firm effects in 2002 and 2014 is 0.74
for wages and 0.82 for earnings. We find that firm effects for both earnings and wages are well
approximated by a persistent AR(1) process. The stability of firm effects provides evidence that,

by and large, firm effects represent permanent differences in firm compensation policies.
   Second, we find that variance components estimates are similar when comparing two-way
models based on time-invariant or time-varying firm effects. Specifically, we find the KSS bias-

corrected variance of time-varying firm effects explain 13% of the variance of wages and 21% of
the variance of earnings. These estimated variance components are very similar to those obtained
in an AKM model with time-invariant firm effects (12% for wages and 20% for earnings). Interest-

ingly, we find that bias-corrected variance components estimates are very close to those obtained
via a simple plug-in approach when pooling multiple years of data. This suggests a small incidence


                                                3
of limited mobility biases when working with relatively longer time-series.

   Third, we find that, for the 2002­2014 balanced panel of firms, the dispersion of firm effects
changed over time. Specifically, the variances of firm effects for both wage rates and earnings fell
in the years leading up to the Great Recession (2002­2007), increased during the Great Reces-

sion, then decreased dramatically in the post-recession years. This counter-cyclical pattern in the
dispersion of firm effects appears to be a novel finding.
   Finally, we examine how firm effects, worker effects, and worker-firm sorting each contribute

to the observed increases in inequality of earnings and wages in Washington during 2002­2014.
The variance decompositions obtained from both the AKM plug-in method and the KSS bias-
correction estimator suggest those increases are attributable almost entirely to increases in the vari-

ation of worker-specific effects and increased sorting of "good" workers to "good" firms. Changes
in firm-specific wage and earnings policies account for less than 10 percent of the increase in in-
equality over the years we observe. For worker-firm sorting, we observe an interesting pattern.

Before the Great Recession, the degree of sorting, as measured by the KSS adjusted correlation in
worker and firm fixed effects, increased, then fell during the recession, and finally reached a new
high after the recession.

   We conclude the analysis with two simple applications that provide evidence about the degree
of misspecification stemming from restricting firm effects to be fixed over time. We first show
that regressing TV-AKM firm wage effects on time-invariant AKM firm wage effects results in

a projection slope close to unity, and the associated scatter plot is tightly concentrated around
the 45-degree line. Second, we find that regressing separation rates on time-invariant AKM firm
wage effects results in virtually the same estimated relationship as regressing separation rates on

TV-AKM firm wage effects. These results lead us to conclude that the degree of misspecification
derived from imposing time invariance of firm effects is likely to be a second order concern.
   The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the econometric framework, reviewing

both the KSS bias-correction estimator and the methods of estimating time-varying firm effects.
Section 3 discusses the data and describes differences between the largest connected set used to ob-


                                                  4
tain the AKM estimates and the leave-one-out connected set generated for the KSS bias-correction.

Section 4 describes the empirical findings. We compare the simple AKM plug-in and KSS bias-
corrected variance decompositions for two intervals (2002­2003 and 2013­2014), examine the
implications of these decompositions for the growth of wage and earnings inequality, and discuss

the autocovariance structure of firm fixed effects. Section 5 discusses the findings and offers some
concluding remarks. To keep the discussion as direct as possible, we relegate a more detailed
description of the data to a data appendix.


2     Econometric Framework

Our baseline econometric specification is the two-way fixed effects model popularized by AKM.

In this model, the log earnings or log hourly wage of worker g at time t , ygt , is decomposed into
the sum of a worker component, ag , a firm component, y j , and an error component egt :


                                          ygt = ag + y j(g,t ) + egt .                                   (1)


The function j(·, ·) : {1, . . . , N }  {1, . . . , maxg Tg } ! {0, . . . , J } allocates each of n = ÂN
                                                                                                       g=1 Tg

worker-year observations to one of J + 1 firms, where Tg denotes the total number of years in
which we observe worker g. In equation (1), ag is a worker effect that captures a combination of
time-invariant skills and other factors of a given worker that are rewarded equally across different

firms. The term y j represents a firm-specific relative pay premium that is paid equally by firm j
to all its employees. Finally, egt represents an unobserved time-varying error that captures random
match effects, shocks to human capital, and other unobserved factors.

    The AKM model is a useful tool to assess the influence of firms in setting wages. According
to equation (1), the variance of, say, log wages can be decomposed as


                   var(ygt ) = var(ag ) + var(y j(g,t ) ) + 2cov(y j(g,t ) , ag ) + var(egt ).           (2)


This decomposition highlights that, if firms have significant latitude in setting wages, wage in-


                                                       5
equality will be affected through two terms: var(y j(g,t ) ) and cov(y j(g,t ) , ag ), where the latter cap-
tures the extent to which workers with a higher fixed wage component tend to be sorted into firms

paying a higher wage premium. The growing availability of large administrative datasets and im-
provements in computational methods has allowed economists to provide new evidence on the
contribution of firms and worker-firm sorting to wage inequality--e.g., Card, Heining and Kline

(2013) for Germany; Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom and von Wachter (2019) for the US.
    Two challenges arise when interpreting the results from these recent studies. First, current
evidence on the importance of firms and worker-firm assortativity in setting wages is based on a

simple "plug-in" approach, where each variance component in (2) is calculated as the variance
of OLS estimates of (a , y ) from equation (1). However, as initially pointed out by Krueger and

Summers (1988) and Abowd et al. (2004), sampling error in the estimates of (a , y ) will impart bias
in the estimated variance components, a phenomenon often referred to as "limited mobility bias."
These biases can be particularly severe when the number of workers transitioning between different

employers is relatively low compared to the overall dimensionality of the model (Andrews, Gill,
Schank and Upward, 2008; Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten, 2019).
    Second, the original AKM model assumes the firm-specific effects y j(g,t ) to be time invari-

ant. This assumption might be problematic if, in an attempt to minimize limited mobility bias,
researchers estimate the original AKM model by pooling a long panel (10 or more years) (Gold-
schmidt and Schmieder, 2017; Bana, Bedard and Rossin-Slater, 2018; Lachowska, Mas and Wood-

bury, 2019). However, it is unclear why firm wage or earnings policies should remain fixed over
such long horizons. In fact, recent evidence suggests firm wage policies are sensitive to within-
firm idiosyncratic shocks (Kline, Petkova, Williams and Zidar, 2019; Garin, Silv´
                                                                                erio et al., 2019).

A more realistic representation of the wage-setting process is therefore one where firm effects are
allowed to vary over time. However, this in turn can magnify issues due to limited mobility bias.
    The rest of this section is organized as follows. Section 2.1 describes a method for correcting

the biases in estimated variance components of the AKM model. Section 2.2 then discusses two
approaches to allowing for time-varying firm heterogeneity. The first is the rolling AKM model


                                                     6
(R-AKM), which estimates separate AKM models for successive two-year intervals. The second

is the time-varying AKM model (TV-AKM), a simple extension of the AKM model in which firm
effects are allowed to vary over time and are estimated in a dataset that pools all available time
intervals.


2.1        Correcting for Bias: The Leave-One-Out-Correction

It is useful to rewrite model (1) as follows


                                        yi = di0 a + fi0 y + ei = xi
                                                                   0
                                                                     b + ei                                       (3)


where i indexes a particular worker-year observation (g, t ); di and fi denote worker and firm
identifiers respectively and we have xi = (di0 , fi0 )0 , b = (a 0 , y 0 )0 with a = (a1 , . . . , aN ) and y =
(0, . . . , yJ ).1

     Each variance decomposition parameter in (2) can be written as a simple quadratic form in b .
For instance, the variance of firm effects is given by


                                               var(y j(g,t ) ) = b 0 Ab                                           (4)
                                                                 !
                                                       0 0
where A is a known matrix equal to A =                              , with A f f = 1  n
                                                                                   n Âi=1 ( f i    f¯)( fi   f¯)0 and
                                                       0 Af f
f¯ = 1  n
     n Âi=1 f i .

     Most available estimates of var(y j(g,t ) ) are based on a plug-in approach, that is


                                               var(d             ^ 0 Ab
                                                   y j(g,t ) ) = b    ^                                           (5)

      ^ is the usual OLS estimate of b : b
where b                                  ^ = S 1 Ân x0 yi , where Sxx = Ân xi x0 .
                                              xx  i=1 i                  i =1  i

     Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2019) showed formally that variance decompositions based on

the plug-in approach are finite sample biased and inconsistent. To show this simple but important
    1 Asnoted by AKM, estimation of equation (3) requires one normalization of the vector y within a particular
connected set of firms and workers. We therefore normalize the firm effect of the first firm to be zero and assume for
simplicity that all firms present in the data are connected so that only one normalization is required.



                                                          7
result, we start by assuming that the unobserved error terms {ei } are mutually independent with
heteroskedatic variances si2 . Then, the expectation of the plug-in estimator of the variance of firm

effects is given by
                                                                            n
                                        y j(g,t ) )] = var(y j(g,t ) ) + Â Bii si2
                                  E[var(d                                                             (6)
                                                                           i =1
             0 S 1 AS 1 x . The plug-in bias, n B s 2 , can be particularly severe in situations
where Bii = xi  xx   xx i                    Âi=1 ii i
where the number of firms is large compared to the total number of workers transitioning between

different firms, see the discussion in KSS.
    Andrews, Gill, Schank and Upward (2008) propose to correct for limited mobility bias by
assuming a homoskedastic error structure: si2 = s 2 , 8i. Bonhomme, Lamadon and Manresa (2019)

provide a framework that delivers consistent estimates of variance components by restricting the
support of the unobserved firm heterogeneity to a finite number of group types and by relying on
an asymptotic framework where firm sizes diverge in the limit. Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2019)

propose a solution based on a "leave-one-out" correction that delivers unbiased and consistent
estimates of variance components under an asymptotic framework that allows the number of firms
to grow in the limit while allowing unrestricted patterns of heteroskedasticity in ei .

    The methodology of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2019) (KSS) is based on introducing "cross-
fit" estimates of si2 , that is
                                                     n
                                            ^ i2 = Â yi (yi
                                            s                     0^
                                                                 xi b i)                              (7)
                                                   i =1

      ^
where b    i   is the OLS estimator of b in (5) after leaving observation i out. It is easy to verify that
  ^ i2 ] = si2 . One can then bias-correct the original plug-in estimator to deliver unbiased estimation
E[s

of any quadratic form in b . For instance, going back to the variance of firm effects, the leave-one-
out bias corrected estimate of this quantity is

                                                                        n
                                   var(g
                                       y j(g,t ) ) = var(d
                                                         y j(g,t ) )   Â Biis
                                                                            ^ i2                      (8)
                                                                       i=1




                                                                                      ^
Remark 1: Leave-One-Out Connectedness. A key requirement of the KSS estimator is that b                  i



                                                          8
                                           0 S 1 x < 1. This requirement on the statistical leverage
exists, which is satisfied whenever Pii = xi  xx i

of the AKM model effectively requires dropping any firm associated with only one mover.2 For

estimation, KSS therefore rely on the so-called "leave-one-out connected set," which corresponds
to a bipartite network of workers and firms such that removing any one worker from the graph does
not break its connectivity.

Remark 2: Two Time Periods When fitting the model with two time periods [max(Tg ) = 2], KSS
show that one can construct an unbiased estimator of both var(y j(g,t ) ) and cov(y j(g,t ) ) not only
under unrestricted heteroskedasticity, but also when eg2 and eg1 are arbitrarily serially correlated.

Remark 3: Clustering. When max(Tg ) > 2, it may be important to allow for dependence in the
error terms in {eg }. One can easily extend the framework presented above from leaving out a
single observation to leaving out a particular cluster--see Remark 2 in KSS. In the empirical

exercise below, we will verify the importance of allowing for arbitrary dependence of the error
term within a worker-firm match when working with a stacked dataset that spans the time frame
2002­2014.3

Remark 4: Computation. The KSS methodology relies on computation of both {Bii , Pii }. Finding,
say, Pii requires solving a system of n equation in k = N + J unknowns--i.e., solving for Z in
Sxx Z = X 0 , where X stacks the different xi in (3). This is computationally infeasible with the
k k k n    kn
Washington data, which involves millions of worker effects and hundreds of thousands of firm
effects. We therefore rely on a variation of the Johnson-Lindestrauss approximation developed by
KSS. In particular, we consider solutions of p systems of k linear equations, ZJLA = RP X 0 , where
                                                                                           k n      k p
RP is a n  p matrix composed by mutually independent Rademacher random variables. KSS
show that the Johnson-Lindestrauss approximation allows recovery of extremely accurate variance
decompositions while cutting computation time by a factor of roughly 100.
    2 We define a mover as a worker who moved between different firms at least once during the observed sample

period.
    3 Note that when leaving out a worker-firm match, the worker effects of workers who are observed with only one

firm are not identified.




                                                        9
2.2    Time-Varying Firm Heterogeneity

An important assumption of the AKM model is that unobserved firm heterogeneity, as captured by

{y j } in (1), is time-invariant. It is natural to question the validity of this assumption, especially
in light of two facts. First, economists are gaining access to ever longer panels of administrative
data. Fitting AKM models to these longer panels is sometimes viewed as a way to reduce limited

mobility bias (Goldschmidt and Schmieder, 2017; Bana, Bedard and Rossin-Slater, 2018). But the
longer is T , the harder it becomes to justify the assumption that firm effects are fixed over time.
   Second, recent work has suggested that the firm effects {y j } in (1) capture primarily het-

erogeneity across firms in available surplus per worker (Card, Cardoso and Kline, 2015; Card,
Cardoso, Heining and Kline, 2018). Clearly, surplus per worker can vary within a firm over time
for several firm-specific reasons. Kline, Petkova, Williams and Zidar (2019) use plausibly exoge-

nous variation in firms' patent allowances to gauge how firm-level idiosyncratic shocks affect the
wages of both incumbent workers and new hires within the firm. Lamadon, Mogstad and Setzler
(2019) develop a model where standard AKM firm effects vary over time whenever pass-through

rent sharing elasticities differ from zero and a given firm experiences an idiosyncratic change to its
value added.
   How can one capture this firm-by-year heterogeneity when modeling the wage process? A

straightforward approach used by Card, Heining and Kline (2013) is to estimate the AKM sep-
arately for different time-intervals. Using this "rolling"AKM approach (R-AKM), we fit AKM
models to successive two-year (T = 2) intervals (2002­2003, 2003­2004, ..., 2013­2014) and cor-

rect the associated variance decompositions for each time interval using the KSS approach. These
estimates can be used to gauge how the magnitude and relative importance of the AKM variance
components changed over the 2002­2014 period and in particular during the Great Recession.

   The key advantage of the R-AKM approach is its simplicity and transparency. The main draw-
back is that, by taking advantage of mobility patterns only within two-year intervals, the number
of identified firm effects can be significantly reduced due to a smaller mobility network.

   Accordingly, in the next subsection we introduce the time-varying AKM model (TV-AKM), a


                                                  10
simple extension of the AKM model in which firm effects are allowed to vary across time. This

model is estimated by pooling all the available time periods, which greatly increases the number
of identified firm-by-year effects.

2.2.1   The Time-Varying AKM Model

A natural extension of the original AKM model that allows one to control flexibly for firm-by-year
unobserved heterogeneity is the following



                                         ygt = ag + y j(g,t ),t + egt .                                 (9)

where {y j,t } represents a vector of firm-by-year indicators. Our interest focusses on the variance

decomposition parameters var(y j(g,t ),t ) and cov(y j(g,t ),t , ag ) and on their contrast with the esti-
mates one would obtain from the time-invariant model of equation (1). Relatedly, we are interested
in the extent of the "drift" in {y j(g,t ),t } for a given firm over time.

    By the logic described in the previous section, the naive plug-in approach is biased for var(y j(g,t ),t ),
cov(y j(g,t ),t , ag ), and in addition for the autocovariance function {y j(g,t ),t }. Fortunately, the KSS
framework extends to any quadratic form constructed from the coefficients of a linear regression

model. We therefore rely on the KSS leave-one-out approach to correct the variance decomposi-
tion and autocovariance estimates resulting from the TV-AKM model of equation (9).
Remark 5: Connected Set. Identification of the firm-by-year fixed effects poses a challenge similar

to the one originally faced by AKM. A useful starting point is to consider the bipartite network
formed by workers and firm-by-year identifiers, as opposed to firm-only identifiers as in the orig-
inal AKM formulation. By treating each firm-year combination as a single vertex in this graph, it

follows that identification of {ag , y j(g,t ),t } requires (i) the associated bipartite network to be con-
nected and (ii) normalizing one firm-by-year combination within this connected set to ensure that
Sxx is full rank.

Remark 6: Never-movers. By treating each firm-year combination as a single vertex in the cor-
responding bipartite network of firms and workers, it follows that "never-movers"--workers who


                                                      11
remain with the same employer during the entire sample period--play an active role in identifi-

cation of {y j,t }. This is in contrast with the standard AKM model where firm effects are solely
identified via workers moving between employers. To see the importance of never-movers in driv-
ing identification of y j,t , consider the following moment condition based on the TV-AKM model:


         E[yit |i is a firm j never-mover]   E[yit   1 |i   is a firm j never-mover] = y j,t   y j,t   1.   (10)


The expectations above condition on the worker being employed only by firm j, and y denotes
the wage rate. This implies that the average wage change of never-movers within firm j is a key
source of identification of {y j,t }. Relatedly, the same source of variation is typically used to iden-

tify rent sharing elasticities--see for instance equation (15) in Card, Cardoso and Kline (2015)
and the discussion in Card et al. (2018). That never-movers contribute to identification of {y j,t }
is important when contrasting the TV-AKM and the R-AKM approaches described previously. In

R-AKM, identification of firm effects within a given time interval relies solely on inter-firm tran-
sitions made by workers in that particular interval. This restricts the set of identified firm effects
within and across intervals to a significant degree. On the other hand, the TV-AKM model draws

on a pooled mobility network that exploits observations associated with never-movers. As a con-
sequence, we should expect the TV-AKM model to have significantly higher number of identified
firm-by-year effects than the R-AKM approach.

   Remark 6: Leave-One-Out Connected Set in the TV-AKM Model. As discussed in Remark 1,
the KSS approach requires the associated connected bipartite network to remain connected after
removing a single worker. Allowing for time-varying firm heterogeneity implies some additional

refinements in the leave-one-out connected set introduced in Remark 1 for the standard AKM
model. Figure 2 illustrates this latter point using a simplified example. It shows a bipartite graph
that satisfies the definition of leave-one-out connectedness when estimating a model with time-

invariant firm heterogeneity. However, if we were to estimate the full set of firm-by-year effects in
this example, the associated definition of leave-one-out connectedness would no longer be satisfied.




                                                      12
3     Estimation Sample and Descriptive Statistics

The estimation sample is based on quarterly earnings records from all employers covered by unem-
ployment insurance (UI) in Washington from 2002:I through 2014:IV. A more detailed description

of the data is in the data appendix.
    We construct a linked employer-employee panel using a procedure similar to that developed
by Sorkin (2018). We first identify each worker's primary employer in a quarter as the employer

from which the worker had the largest share of earnings in that quarter. We then define an em-
ployment spell as at least five consecutive quarters during which a worker had earnings from the
same primary employer. For each spell, we drop the first quarter (to avoid making inferences about

earnings based on partial quarters of employment) and the last two quarters (to avoid making infer-
ences based on earnings in the quarter before and the quarter of a separation). We then annualize
the remaining quarterly data on earnings and hours within each calendar year, conditional on the

calendar year including at least two consecutive quarters of earnings from the same primary em-
ployer. Finally, we adjust earnings by the CPI-U (indexed to 2005) and calculate the real hourly
wage rate by dividing adjusted annualized earnings from the primary employer by annualized hours

worked with that employer.
    Figure 3 illustrates the procedure and gives some examples, described in the figure notes. The

unit of observation is the worker-year, with a focus on the primary employer in a year.


3.1    Descriptive Statistics

Figure 1, Panel (a) displays the trends we analyze for our variance decomposition exercise--the

variances of real log hourly wages and log earnings in Washington from 2002 to 2014. Wage and
earnings inequality both increased between 2002 and 2014 with a similar trend: the variance of log
wages increased by roughly 19%, and the variance of log earnings increased by about 16%. This

suggests that increased inequality of wages and earnings was particularly pronounced in Washing-
ton during this period. For example, using tax data, Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom and von Wachter

(2019) find the variance of log annual earnings increased by about 4% in the United States overall

                                                13
during 2001­2013.4

    Panels (b) and (c) of Figure 1 show the time series evolution of different percentiles of the
log wage and log earnings distributions underlying the trends shown in Panel (a). Over the 2002­
2014 period, the gap between the 90th and 10th percentiles expanded by about 15 log points for

wages, and by about 20 log points for earnings; however, this expansion occurred in three phases.
Between 2002 and 2007, the increased inequality seen in Panel (a) was driven mainly by increases
in the top quartile, but from 2007 to 2010 inequality accelerated, driven by a fanning out of the

percentiles. After 2010, wages and earnings continued to grow for the highest quartile, and the
lowest percentiles regained some of their lost ground. This was especially true for the 10th and
25th percentiles for earnings and the 5th and 10th percentiles for wages, although only the 5th wage

percentile returned to its 2002 level. The relative improvement of the lower percentiles post-2010
is consistent with the relatively modest growth of inequality from 2010 to 2014 shown in Panel (a).
    Table 1 displays summary statistics that are useful in assessing the econometric strategies de-

scribed in Section 2. Panel (a) focuses on three intervals: 2002­2003, 2013­2014, and the full
2002­2014 period. For each interval, we report descriptive statistics concerning the largest con-
nected set and the leave-one-out connected set. The former represents the largest connected set

formed by worker-employer links and is the sample typically used to fit AKM wage decompositions--
see for instance Card, Heining and Kline (2013). The leave-one-out connected set is the sample
used for the bias correction approach of KSS discussed in Remark 1 of Section 2.1.

    The largest connected set for the 2002­2003 interval includes about 3.4 million worker-year ob-
servations, with approximately 142,000 workers who move between employers leading to 41,000
identified firm effects. This implies that the average number of movers is approximately 3.4 movers
   4 Because   the data underlying our estimates and those of Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom and von Wachter (2019)
differ, this comparison could overstate differences between Washington and the United States as a whole; however,
it stands to reason that earnings inequality would increase more in Washington than in the United States generally
because the Washington economy includes the Seattle metropolitan area, which is one of a handful of innovation hubs
where wage growth has been unusually high (Moretti, 2012). Appendix A in Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury (2019)
compares labor market conditions in Washington to those in the United States as a whole during 2002­2014 and
concludes that the level and dynamics of the Washington unemployment rate was very similar to the national average.
See also the discussion in Abowd, McKinney and Zhao (2018) regarding differences between samples based on UI
wage records and nationally representative samples.



                                                        14
per firm, and that a potentially large fraction of firms is associated with only one mover. The

largest connected set for the 2013­2014 interval is somewhat larger than for 2002­2003--about 4
million worker-year observations, 170,000 movers, and 50,000 firms, implying on average about
3.5 movers per firm. For the full 2002­2014 period (Column 5), the largest connected set includes

more than 27 million worker-year observations, nearly 2 million movers, and 218,000 firms. The
longer time horizon associated with these data implies a larger mobility network and therefore a
larger ratio of movers to firms, roughly 9.1.

    The KSS bias correction requires each firm to remain connected to all others in the data after
removing any particular worker, and the leave-one-out sample ensures that this requirement is
satisfied. The two-year interval samples (2002­2003 and 2013­2014) retain about half of the firms

from the original largest connected set (Columns 2 and 4). Despite this, the leave-one-out samples
still include about 80% of the original worker-year observations and 85% of the movers. This
suggests that firms associated with only one mover tend to be rather small in size. Consistent with

this observation and the evidence on premia paid by large firms (Oi and Idson, 1999), average log
wages and average log earnings in the leave-one-out sample are higher than those in the original
largest connected set by 6% and 9%. Also, in the leave-one-out samples the variances of log

wages are smaller by 2% to 5% (depending on the time interval) and the variances of log earnings
are smaller by about 10%.5
    Although the levels of the first and second moments of log wages and log earnings are different

in the leave-one-out samples than in the largest connected sets, their trends are well-preserved in
the leave-one-out samples. Also, the leave-one-out connected set for the full 2002­2014 period
retains 96% of the worker-year observations, 97% of the movers, and 76% of the employers. Com-

pared with the two-year intervals, the full observation window substantially reduces the amount of
pruning needed to ensure leave-one-out connectivity.
    Table 1, Panel (b) reports descriptive statistics for the sample used to fit the TV-AKM model,

which allows firm effects to vary over time. As discussed in Remark 5 of Section 2.2.1, when the
  5 Note also that, while average log wages increased by 3% between 2002­2003 and 2013­2014, the variance of log

wages increased by more than 17%, consistent with the raw evidence presented in Figure 1.


                                                      15
underlying model incorporates firm-by-year effects, the relevant bipartite network is one where

vertices are formed by worker and firm-by-year identifiers, as opposed to firm-only identifiers.
This implies a potential change in the definitions of the largest connected sets and the leave-one-
out connected sets shown in Columns 1­4. Ultimately, though, this change appears trivial: a

comparison of Columns 5 and 7 shows the two samples closely overlap, and a similar conclusion
can be drawn for the associated leave-one-out samples (Columns 6 and 8). Finally, each firm is
observed on average for about 5.7 years in the largest connected set, and for about 6.4 years in the

leave-one-out connected set, suggesting a fair degree of attrition at the firm level.


4    Results

This section presents the main results of the analysis. In Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we fit AKM mod-
els to successive two-year intervals and construct the associated variance decomposition within

each interval. This R-AKM approach reveals the extent to which the rising inequality documented
in Figure 1 can be attributed to worker-specific effects, firm-specific wage-setting policies, and
worker-firm sorting. Within the R-AKM framework, we focus on two contrasts. The first is be-

tween variance decompositions based on the standard plug-in approach and the KSS leave-one-out
approach. The second is between variance decompositions of log hourly wages (a unique fea-
ture of the Washington data) and variance decompositions of log earnings--the outcome usually

examined in AKM models for the US (Song, Price, Guvenen, Bloom and von Wachter, 2019).
    Sections 4.3 and 4.4 present results from the TV-AKM approach where we pool all available
data and fit an AKM model with firm-by-year indicators. We then contrast variance decomposi-

tions based on the TV-AKM with those based on standard AKM models. Relatedly, we investigate
the extent to which firm effects "drift" over time. Finally, we provide informal evidence that can
be used to gauge the degree of misspecification that may occur when fitting models that restrict

firm effects to be time invariant.




                                                  16
4.1    Rolling Specification: Log Wages

Table 2 displays the variance decompositions obtained by fitting the AKM model from equation (1)

for log wages in the first (2002­2003) and last (2013­2014) of the two-year intervals we observe.
Focusing first on 2002­2003, the plug-in method suggests that variation in worker-specific factors
explains by far the largest share (86%) of the overall variance in log wages in 2002­2003, whereas

firm effects explain only about 14%. The plug-in estimate of the covariance between worker
and firm effects is negative, raising the question whether there is in fact negative sorting in the
Washington labor market, or if this negative estimated covariance results from the limited mobility

bias discussed in Section 2.1.
   The KSS leave-one-out bias correction yields a positive estimated covariance between worker
and firm effects for 2002­2003, which suggests the negative correlation estimated by the plug-in

approach is indeed due to sampling error in the estimated worker and firm effects. As expected,
the KSS correction also shrinks the estimated variances of worker and firm effects: for 2002­2003,
the explained variation in wages attributable to firm effects falls from about 14% with the plug-in

estimator to about 9% with the leave-one-out bias correction.
   The plug-in and KSS-corrected decompositions for the 2013­2014 interval are similar to 2002­
2003, except that firm effects are even less important, and the covariance between worker and firm

effects is positive even when estimated by the plug-in method. The covariance term explains a
larger share of wage variation in the 2013­2014 interval than in 2002­2003: the KSS-corrected
estimates suggest the covariance between worker and firm effects explains 12% of overall wage

variation.
   The rightmost two columns in Table 2 show changes in the estimated variance components
between 2002­2003 and 2013­2014. Estimates based on the plug-in method suggest the variance

of worker effects increased by 14% (= 0.0444/0.3109), the variance of firm effects decreased by
nearly 20% (= ­0.0095/0.0488), and the covariance of worker and firm effects increased by 386%
(= 0.0324/0.0085). Qualitatively, the estimates using the KSS correction show similar patterns:

Wage inequality increased between 2002­2003 and 2013­2014 because of increases in the variance


                                                17
of worker effects and the covariance between worker and firm effects. But quantitatively, the

KSS correction yields somewhat different implications than the plug-in estimator: under the KSS
approach, the increased variance of worker effects from 2002­2003 to 2013­2014 explains nearly
72% of the overall increase in wage inequality from 2002­2003 to 2013­2014 (rather than 67%

under the plug-in approach), and the covariance of worker and firm effects explains only 41%
(rather than nearly 49% under the plug-in approach). Also, the variance of firm effects decreased
between 2002­2003 and 2013­2014 under both the plug-in and KSS estimators, but the decrease

was somewhat less under the KSS approach (about 10% rather than 14%).
   To summarize, Table 2 shows that between 2002­2003 and 2013­2014, wage inequality in
Washington increased substantially. This increase was due to increases in the variation of worker-

specific factors and the degree of worker-firm sorting, rather than an increase in the variation
of fixed employer wage policies. This pattern is broadly consistent with the one in Song et al.
(2019) who fit AKM models to log earnings for seven-year time intervals using 1980­2013 US

administrative tax data.
   But how did the components of wage inequality evolve year-by-year over 2002­2014, a period
covering the second most severe recession in US history? To address this question we move from

the static comparison of Table 2 to the dynamic representation in Figure 4. This figure reports the
variance decomposition represented by equation (2) for each two-year time interval. We consider
variance decompositions under both the plug-in method (Panels a and c) and the KSS method

(Panels b and d).
   The KSS-corrected estimates displayed in Panels (b) and (d), suggest that worker effects varied
little during 2002­2006, but with the onset of the Great Recession the variability of worker effects

started to increase, then plateaued around 2010. This pattern appears to track relatively well the
overall trend in the variance of log wages shown in Panel (a) of Figure 1, reflecting the dominant
role of worker effects in explaining the growth of wage inequality between 2002­2003 and 2013­

2014.
   The variability of firm effects followed a clear counter-cyclical pattern, declining by almost


                                                18
20% between 2002­2003 and 2007­2008, increasing by about 40% during the Great Recession,

then decreasing by 47% in the post-recession years (2010­2014). In contrast, the covariance be-
tween worker and firm effects was pro-cyclical, growing by about 50% in the years leading up to
the Great Recession, decreasing during the recession, then increasing by 95% in the post-recession

years. The variability of firm effects and the importance of worker-firm sorting, then, had opposite
cyclical patterns in Washington between 2002 and 2014.
   Figure 4 highlights two important differences between the KSS-corrected estimates and those

obtained by the plug-in method. First, the levels of all three variance components are shifted by
the KSS correction: the variances of the firm and worker effects both shrink, while the covariance
between worker and firm effects increases. Second, although the plug-in method reproduces the

qualitative dynamics of each component (for example, the pro-cyclicality of worker-firm sorting),
Figure 4 shows that changes over time in each component are clearly highly contaminated by
sampling error when using the plug-in method. This is true particularly for the covariance of

worker and firm effects.


4.2   Rolling Specification: Log Earnings

The ability to observe hourly wage rates in the Washington data allows us to evaluate whether the
conclusions from a variance decomposition based on log hourly wages differ from those based on
log earnings, the outcome usually examined in the literature.

   Table 3 shows plug-in variance decompositions for log earnings for the 2002­2003 and 2013­
2014 intervals. In 2002­2003, variation in worker effects accounted for roughly 77% of the vari-
ance of log earnings, variation in firm effects accounted for about 16%, and the covariance between

worker and firm effects accounted for about 5%. The KSS correction shrinks the shares of earnings
variation explained by worker effects (to 70%) and firm effects (to 11%), but more than doubles
the share explained by the covariance between worker and firm effects (to 13%). A similar pattern

can be seen for the 2013­2014 interval: compared with the plug-in method, the KSS-corrected
estimates suggest that variation in worker and firm effects were less important in explaining the


                                                19
variance of log earnings, but variation in the covariance of worker and firm effects was more im-

portant (explaining 18%, compared with 12% under the plug-in approach).
   How did these components change between 2002­2003 and 2013­2014? Earnings inequality,
as estimated by the variance of log earnings, increased by around 17% during 2002­2014 (from

0.49 to 0.57). The KSS estimates show that most of this increase was due to increases in the
covariance of worker and firm effects (which accounts for almost 47% of the overall increase
in the variance of log earnings) and in the variance of worker effects (which accounts for about

45% of the overall increase). In contrast to the findings in Table 2, which showed a decrease in
the variability of firm wage rate effects during 2002­2014, the variability of firm earnings effects
increased, although this increase is relatively small and accounts for only about 9% of the overall

increase in earnings inequality.
   The year-by-year evolution of variance decompositions for log earnings is shown in Figure 5.
Most of the patterns found in Figure 4 for log wages can also be seen for earnings. The variance of

worker effects for earnings increased during the Great Recession and remained high in the reces-
sion's aftermath. The variability of firm effects for earnings was again countercyclical but, unlike
the variability of firm effects for wages, remained above its initial (2002­2003) pre-recession level.

The covariance between worker and firm effects for earnings was again countercyclical, although
its relationship to the business cycle appears somewhat less pronounced than the covariance be-
tween worker and firm effects for wages.

   Figure 4 again highlights two differences between the plug-in estimates and the KSS-corrected
estimates. First, the levels of all three variance components of the earnings decomposition are
shifted by the KSS correction--downward for the worker and firm components, upward for the

covariance of worker and firm effects. Second, although the plug-in method and the leave-one-out
approach highlight similar qualitative trends, the plug-in estimates appear to be contaminated by
limited mobility bias. For example, the plug-in estimates suggest a large pre-recession drop in the

covariance of worker and firm effects for earnings, but the KSS-corrected estimates suggests this
drop reflects mainly different degrees of limited mobility bias across years.


                                                 20
    Figure 6 brings together the findings on the correlations of worker and firm effects for wages

and earnings, showing the correlations over time for the two alternative estimation methods. The
figures highlight the substantial increase in positive sorting between workers and firms that oc-
curred during 2002­2014 in the Washington economy, interrupted only by the Great Recession.

The KSS-corrected estimates suggest the correlation between worker and firm effects for wages
grew from 0.12 to about 0.28, and for earnings from 0.24 to 0.33. The figure highlights the coun-
tercyclical pattern of worker-firm sorting.


4.3     Time-Varying Firm Heterogeneity

We now turn to the results obtained from fitting the TV-AKM model on the pooled 2002­2014 data.

Table 4 shows the resulting variance decompositions for log wages and earnings after estimating
equation (9) using the leave-one-out connected set described in Table 1, Panel (b). In this pooled
dataset, the KSS-corrected estimates with fixed firm effects suggest that firm effects explain 11.6%

of the total variance of log wages. When firm effects are allowed to vary over time using the
TV-AKM estimator, they explain 13.5% of the total variance of wages, an increase of about 16%.
The TV-AKM model also reduces the contribution of assortativity from 16.9% to 14.8% (a 12%

decrease) but has no discernible effect on the variance of worker effects.
    The patterns for earnings are somewhat different. Allowing firm effects to vary over time
increases the contribution of firm effects somewhat (from 19.7% to 20.8%, or about 5%), increases

the contribution of worker effects very slightly (from 52.8% to 54.8%, or about 2%), and reduces
the importance of the covariance between worker and firm effects from 16.2% to 14.5% (just under
10%). The small differences between the AKM and TV-AKM estimates in the variance of firm

effects for log earnings are consistent with the findings of Lamadon, Mogstad and Setzler (2019),
who decompose the variance of log earnings after removing variation induced by time-varying
firm-level changes in value added per worker (rescaled by an estimated pass-through coefficient).6
    6 Lamadon, Mogstad and Setzler (2019) find that the AKM variance decomposition of their adjusted measure

of log earnings gives estimates that are virtually identical to those based on log earnings that are not pre-adjusted,
after restricting the support of unobserved heterogeneity for both workers and firms using the approach developed by
Bonhomme, Lamadon and Manresa (2019).


                                                         21
   We conclude that allowing firm effects to vary over time increases the shares of wage and

earnings variation that can be attributed to firm effects (particularly for wages); however, these
increases do not appear large enough to alter the basic conclusions about the relative importance of
the variance components that one would draw from the standard AKM model with time-invariant

firm effects.
   The analysis in Table 4 offers two additional points. First, the KSS correction leads to relatively
modest changes in the variance decompositions produced by both the AKM and TV-AKM models.

This suggests that mobility in the Washington pooled data is substantial and sufficient to make
limited mobility bias a second-order concern. Still, as pointed out by KSS and in Remark 3, it is
important to allow for serial correlation in the error term when working with a panel with more than

two time periods. To address this, Table A1 in the Appendix displays the variance of firm effects
and the covariance of worker and firm effects for both the AKM and the TV-AKM models under
two different leave-one-out strategies: one where we leave out a single worker-year observation as

in Table 4, and another where we leave out an entire worker-firm match. These alternative leave-
one-out strategies produce few changes for either model, particularly when looking at the overall
variance of firm effects. All in all, this suggests again that mobility in the pooled data is adequate

to make limited mobility bias a minor concern, even after allowing firm effects to drift over time
and the error term to be serially correlated within a match.
   Second, when pooling the data over 2002­2014, firm effects explain a significantly higher

share of the variance of wages and earnings than in the rolling analysis. For example, firm effects
explain about 6­9% of the variation in wages for the 2002­2003 and 2013­2014 intervals shown
in Table 2, whereas they explain about 11.6% in the comparable pooled analysis in Table 4. This

pattern suggests differences in the composition of firms over time. In particular, the wage and
earnings policies of firms that exist in 2002 appear to differ from those in 2014; see also the
discussion in the data appendix regarding new firms. The important role played by new firms in

driving heterogeneity in firm-specific wage policies was also highlighted by Card, Heining and
Kline (2013) in Germany and represents an interesting avenue for future research.


                                                 22
4.4   Autocorrelation of Firm Effects

We now analyze the time-series properties of the estimated firm effects. Computing the covariance

between the "fixed" effects of firm j in years t and s requires a bias correction of the associated
plug-in quadratic form. We therefore extend the KSS-framework to bias-correct all the autocovari-
ance and autocorrelation functions of the associated firm effects. These parameters are estimated

on a balanced subsample of firms for which we can identify firm effects in each year from 2002 to
2014. Each autocovariance is then weighted by average firm employment across 2002­2014.
   Table 5 reports autocovariance and autocorrelation matrices of firm effects for log wages in this

balanced subsample of firms. The table confirms a pattern that was already emerging from Table
4: firm effects for log wages exhibit some degree of "drift", but they remain highly correlated
even 13 years apart (the correlation between firm effects for 2002 and 2014 is 0.74, see Table 5B).

Moreover, the diagonal of Table 5A suggests that y j,t does not represent a stationary process: the
variance of firm effects in the balanced subsample of firms increases over time, which indicates the
presence of a non-stationary component in y j,t . Specifically, during 2002­2014, the variance of

firm effects for wages increased from 0.0446 to 0.0582 (more than 30%). This suggests intertem-
poral variation in firm-specific wage effects, and moreover this variation increases over a firm's
life cycle (Babina, Ma, Moser, Ouimet and Zarutskie, 2019).

   Table 6 suggests that the time-series properties of the firm effects for log earnings are broadly
similar to those for wages. Again, firm effects are highly correlated even 13 years apart (the
correlation between firm effects for 2002 and 2014 is 0.82, see Table 6B), and again the variance

of the corresponding firm effects does not appear to be stable over time. In particular, consistent
with the evidence in Figure 5, this variance actually decreased by about one log point in the years
preceding the Great Recession (2002­2007). During 2009­2014, the trend reversed, and variability

of firm effects for earnings increased by about 2.5 log points.
   Figures 7 and 8 depict the autocorrelation plots of firm effects for log wages and log earn-
ings, respectively. In each figure we overlay the autocorrelation function of the AR(1) process

that best fits the empirical autocorrelations. For log wages the best-fitting autoregressive parame-


                                                 23
ter is 0.9765, and for log earnings it is 0.9832.7 Hence, the empirical autocorrelations suggest a

persistent AR(1) process for firm effects. Figure 7 shows that, for log wages, the empirical auto-
correlations are somewhat higher than would be predicted by an AR(1) process at lower lags (in
particular, lag 1) but closely track the predicted values at higher lags. Figure 8 shows that, for log

earnings, the empirical autocorrelations are slightly lower than the predicted values at lower lags
(for example, lags 1 through 5), but are essentially the same for higher lags.


4.5     Does Allowing for Time-Varying Firm Heterogeneity Matter?

In the previous subsections, we documented that firm effects are highly autocorrelated and that
the variance decompositions resulting from the standard AKM model and the TV-AKM model

are quite similar. Nevertheless, by restricting firm effects to be fixed over time, the standard
AKM model may still be misspecified. A formal specification test is challenging due to the high-
dimensionality of the AKM and TV-AKM models. Still, it may be possible to provide suggestive

evidence to inform applied researchers about the degree of misspecification stemming from re-
stricting firm effects to be fixed over time.
    We offer two types of such evidence. The first is to project the firm effects for log wages

estimated by the TV-AKM model on the firm effects estimated by the AKM model. Assuming
the AKM model represents the true data generating process, we would expect the slope of this
projection to be unity, and the associated scatter plot to be highly concentrated around the 45-

degree line. Panel (a) of Figure 9 shows such a projection, where the observations are worker-year
weighted averages of the KSS-corrected TV-AKM and AKM firm effects within each centile bin
of the AKM firm effects. The resulting slope is 0.99, and the centile bins are tightly concentrated

around the associated 45-degree line, consistent with the AKM model being correctly specified.
    Second, several researchers have examined the relationships between firm effects and other out-
    7 Given an AR(1) process y =d + n y                                                                   k
                                t          t 1 + ut , the autocorrelation between yt and yt k is r (k) = n . The estimate
of the autoregressive parameter n can be obtained by fitting the model ln(r (k)) = b · k + e (k), where k is the lag order,
r (k) is the kth-order autocorrelation, and e is the regression error term. The estimate of b can be interpreted as an
estimate of ln(n ). To fit this model, the analysis uses autocorrelations reported in Tables 5 (for wages) and 6 (for
earnings). We interpret the antilog of b^ as an estimate of n .



                                                           24
comes. For example, Bana, Bedard and Rossin-Slater (2018) use California administrative records

from 2000 to 2014 to estimate an AKM model for log earnings. They then use the estimated firm
fixed effects for log earnings to gauge the importance of firm-specific earnings premia in predict-
ing the propensity of individuals to use public leave-taking benefits. Goldschmidt and Schmieder

(2017) take a similar approach in estimating the relationship between firm effects and the wage
penalty associated with outsourcing. The question is whether these estimated relationships are
similar whether the firm effects are estimated conventionally or by TV-AKM.

    We address this question by estimating the relationship between separation rates and firm ef-
fects, as in Card, Heining and Kline (2012). In particular, we consider a worker-year weighted
OLS regression of the following type


                                  Separationit = a + by
                                                      ^ j(i,t ),t + e                            (11)


where Separationit equals one if the worker is employed in year t with a primary employer j and is
employed with a different primary employer in year t + 1; y
                                                          ^ j(i,t ),t is a firm effect estimated using

the TV-AKM model; and e is a regression error term.

    Figure 9, Panel (b) shows the results of estimating equation (11) where we compute the worker-
year weighted average of the separation rates, TV-AKM firm effects, and AKM firm effects within
each centile bin of the AKM firm effects. The figure suggests a minimal degree of misspecification

in the AKM model, as the overall relationship between separation rates and firm effects are similar
for both fixed and time-varying firm effects. The sign of the estimate of b is negative, consistent
with the evidence provided by Card, Heining and Kline (2012) for Germany and by Bassier, Dube

and Naidu (2019) for the state of Oregon.


5    Discussion and Conclusion

We have addressed two main questions. First, do firm effects "drift" over time? Surprisingly
perhaps, our analysis suggests that by and large, firm effects are quite stable. This conclusion



                                                  25
is based on three pieces of evidence from Washington State administrative wage records: First,

when estimated over 13 years, fixed and time-varying firm effects explain similar shares of vari-
ance decompositions. This implies a high degree of correlation between fixed and time-varying
firm effects--see section 4.3. Second, the autocorrelation function of firm effects for wages and

earnings appears to be generated by a process resembling a highly persistent AR(1) (specifically,
with an autoregressive parameter equal to about 0.98)--see section 4.4. The implication is that,
even 13 years apart, firm effects for both wages and earnings remain highly autocorrelated. Third,

when using estimated firm effects as explanatory variables, as in several recent papers, fixed and
time-varying firm effects generate nearly identical predictions--see section 4.5.
   Knowing that firm effects exhibit little drift is a useful finding for applied researchers because

estimating time-varying AKM firm effects is clearly computationally more burdensome than es-
timating an AKM model with fixed firm-effects. Hence, finding that firm effects are relatively
stable provides a justification for pooling multiple years of data to estimate AKM firm effects.

The observed stability of firm effects also has broader implications: The time-invariance of firm
pay policies suggests that firm effects for pay reflect permanent differences in compensation poli-
cies. Whether these differences arise from inter-firm differences in value-added per worker and

associated rent sharing, from differences in worker preferences for the nonwage characteristics of
employers, or other reasons remains an open question.
   The second main finding is that correcting for limited mobility bias is important when esti-

mating the AKM model over short time intervals. Specifically, without the KSS bias correction,
AKM variance decompositions calculated over two-year intervals attribute too much importance
to worker and firm effects and too little to worker-firm sorting. Conversely, AKM variance de-

compositions calculated over relatively long time intervals (10 years or more) are similar with and
without the KSS bias correction. This similarity holds whether or not firm effects are fixed or
allowed to vary over time.

   Our results suggest avenues for future work. One is to reconcile economic models that give
rise to firm wage and earnings premia with the stochastic process of the time-varying firm effects


                                                26
reported here. For example, one could extend the static model in Card et al. (2018) to allow for

richer dynamics. A second avenue could be to examine the generality of the pattern of firm effects
over the business cycle in Washington State, and to better understand the mechanism behind this
pattern within existing or new macroeconomic models.




                                               27
References

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz and David N. Margolis. 1999. "High Wage Workers and High
  Wage Firms." Econometrica 67(2):251­333.

Abowd, John M., Francis Kramarz, Paul Lengermann and S´
                                                      ebastien P´
                                                                erez-Duarte. 2004. Are

  Good Workers Employed by Good Firms? A Test of a Simple Assortative Mating Model for
  France and the United States. Unpublished manuscript.

Abowd, John M., Kevin L. McKinney and Nellie L. Zhao. 2018. "Earnings Inequality and Mobility
  Trends in the United States: Nationally Representative Estimates from Longitudinally Linked

  Employer-Employee Data." Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1):S183­S300.

Andrews, Martyn J., Len Gill, Thorsten Schank and Richard Upward. 2008. "High Wage Workers
  and Low Wage Firms: Negative Assortative Matching or Limited Mobility Bias?" Journal of

  the Royal Statistical Society: Series A (Statistics in Society) 171(3):673­697.

Babina, Tania, Wenting Ma, Christian Moser, Paige P. Ouimet and Rebecca Zarutskie. 2019. Pay,
  Employment, and Dynamics of Young Firms. Working Paper 21 Federal Reserve Bank of Min-
  neapolis, Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute.

Bana, Sarah, Kelly Bedard and Maya Rossin-Slater. 2018. The Impacts of Paid Family Leave

  Benefits: Regression Kink Evidence from California Administrative Data. Working Paper 24438
  National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bassier, Ihsaan, Arindrajit Dube and Suresh Naidu. 2019. Monopsony in Movers: The Elasticity
  of Labor Supply to Firm Wage Policies. Unpublished manuscript.

Benedetto, Gary, John Haltiwanger, Julia Lane and Kevin McKinney. 2007. "Using Worker Flows

  to Measure Firm Dynamics." Journal of Business & Economic Statistics 25:299­313.

Bonhomme, St´
            ephane, Thibaut Lamadon and Elena Manresa. 2019. "A Distributional Framework
  for Matched Employer Employee Data." Econometrica 87(3):699­739.

                                                28
Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso, J¨
                                org Heining and Patrick Kline. 2018. "Firms and Labor Market
  Inequality: Evidence and Some Theory." Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1):S13­S70.

Card, David, Ana Rute Cardoso and Patrick Kline. 2015. "Bargaining, Sorting, and the Gender
  Wage Gap: Quantifying the Impact of Firms on the Relative Pay of Women." Quarterly Journal
  of Economics 131(2):633­686.

Card, David, Francesco Devicienti and Agata Maida. 2014. "Rent-sharing, Holdup, and Wages:

  Evidence from Matched Panel Data." Review of Economic Studies 81(1):84­111.

Card, David, J¨
              org Heining and Patrick Kline. 2012. Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of West
  German Wage Inequality. Working Paper 18522 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Card, David, J¨
              org Heining and Patrick Kline. 2013. "Workplace Heterogeneity and the Rise of
  West German Wage Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(3):967­1015.

Garin, Andrew, Filipe Silv´
                          erio et al. 2019. How Responsive are Wages to Demand within the

  Firm? Evidence from Idiosyncratic Export Demand Shocks. Working paper.

Goldschmidt, Deborah and Johannes F. Schmieder. 2017. "The Rise of Domestic Outsourcing and
  the Evolution of the German Wage Structure." Quarterly Journal of Economics 132(3):1165­
  1217.

Guiso, Luigi, Luigi Pistaferri and Fabiano Schivardi. 2005. "Insurance within the Firm." Journal
  of Political Economy 113(5):1054­1087.

Kline, Patrick, Neviana Petkova, Heidi Williams and Owen Zidar. 2019. "Who Profits from
  Patents? Rent-sharing at Innovative Firms." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(3):1343­1404.

Kline, Patrick, Raffaele Saggio and Mikkel Sølvsten. 2019. Leave-Out Estimation of Variance

  Components. Working Paper 26244 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1988. "Efficiency Wages and the Inter-industry
  Wage Structure." Econometrica 56(2):259­293.

                                              29
Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas and Stephen A. Woodbury. 2018. How Reliable Are Adminis-

  trative Reports of Paid Work Hours? Unpublished manuscript.

Lachowska, Marta, Alexandre Mas and Stephen A. Woodbury. 2019. Sources of Displaced Work-

  ers' Long-Term Earnings Losses. Working Paper 24217 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lamadon, Thibaut, Magne Mogstad and Bradley Setzler. 2019. Imperfect Competition, Compen-
  sating Differentials and Rent Sharing in the US Labor Market. Working Paper 25954 National
  Bureau of Economic Research.

Moretti, Enrico. 2012. The New Geography of Jobs. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

Oi, Walter Y. and Todd L. Idson. 1999. "Firm Size and Wages." Handbook of Labor Economics

  3:2165­2214.

Schmieder, Johannes F., Till von Wachter and Joerg Heining. 2018. The Costs of Job Displace-
  ment Over the Business Cycle and Its Sources: Evidence from Germany. Working paper Boston
  University: Mimeo.

Song, Jae, David J. Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom and Till von Wachter. 2015. Firming

  Up Inequality. Working Paper 21199 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Song, Jae, David J. Price, Fatih Guvenen, Nicholas Bloom and Till von Wachter. 2019. "Firming
  Up Inequality." Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1):1­50.

Sorkin, Isaac. 2018. "Ranking Firms using Revealed Preference." Quarterly Journal of Economics
  133(3):1331­1393.

Van Reenen, John. 1996. "The Creation and Capture of Rents: Wages and Innovation in a Panel

  of UK Companies." Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1):195­226.




                                             30
6   Figures and Tables
                                                                                                                               Figure 1: Trends in Wage and Earnings Inequality
                                                                                                                                              (a) Variance of Log Wages, Earnings

                                                                                                         .7
                                                                                                                        Log Hourly Wages
                                                                                                                        Log Earnings



                                                                                                         .6




                                                                                                         .5




                                                                                              Variance
                                                                                                         .4




                                                                                                         .3
                                                                                                              2002      2003    2004         2005      2006       2007        2008                                                               2009     2010       2011   2012       2013           2014
                                                                                                                                                                               Year



                                                                                    (b) Trends in Percentiles ­ Log Wages                                                                                                                                      (c) Trends in Percentiles ­ Log Earnings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Note:

                                                              20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           20

                                                              15                                                                                                                                                                           15


                                                              10                                                                                                                                                                           10


                                                               5                                                                                                                                                                            5


                                                               0                                                                                                                                                                            0


                                                               -5                                                                                                                                                                           -5


                                                              -10                                                                                                                                                                          -10


                                                              -15                                                                                                                                                                          -15




   Value of Percentile - Value of Percentile in 2002 (x100)
                                                                                                                                                                                Value of Percentile - Value of Percentile in 2002 (x100)




                                                                           5th Percentile     10th Percentile              25th Percentile           50th Percentile                                                                                    5th Percentile       10th Percentile            25th Percentile    50th Percentile
                                                                           75th Percentile    90th Percentile              95th Percentile                                                                                                              75th Percentile      90th Percentile            95th Percentile
                                                              -20                                                                                                                                                                          -20
                                                                    2002         2004        2006                2008            2010               2012               2014                                                                      2002         2004          2006               2008           2010        2012               2014
                                                                                                                 Year                                                                                                                                                                          Year



Panel (a) plots the unconditional variance of log earnings and log wages in the Washington administrative data. Panel (b) and Panel (c) plots the evolution of the log wages and log earnings percentiles, where each percentile has been deviated from the value of the same

                                                                                                                                                                  percentile in 2002.
         Figure 2: Leave-One-Out Connected Set with Time-Varying Firm Heterogeneity




Note: The figure depicts a connected bipartite graph where vertices are given by firm-by-year
combinations--e.g. firm A in year 2003--and edges are formed whenever a given worker (id1 , id2 , id3 )
transition from one vertex to another. The above graph does not satisfy the condition of leave-one-out con-
nected set as dropping one worker disconnects the graph. If one defines vertices as a single firm instead of a
firm-by-year combination, the resulting graph would satisfy the condition of a leave-one-out connected set.
Figure 3: Construction of the Analysis Sample
                                                                                                                Figure 4: Rolling Variance Decomposition: Log Wages
                                                                                            (a) Levels ­ Plug-In                                                                                                                                                    (b) Levels ­ KSS

                                                 .4                                                                                                                                                                   .4




                                                 .3                                                                                                                                                                   .3




                                                                                                                          Variance of Person Effects                                                                                                                                                              Variance of Person Effects
                                                 .2                                                                       Variance of Firm Effects                                                                    .2                                                                                          Variance of Firm Effects
                                                                                                                          2*Covariance of Firm, Person Effects                                                                                                                                                    2*Covariance of Firm, Person Effects




 Variance Component
                                                                                                                                                                      Variance Component
                                                 .1                                                                                                                                                                   .1




                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                 2002-2003          2004-2005               2006-2007     2008-2009    2010-2011             2012-2013                                                                2002-2003          2004-2005               2006-2007          2008-2009               2010-2011                2012-2013
                                                                                                         Year                                                                                                                                                                     Year




                                                                                          (c) Changes ­ Plug-In                                                                                                                                                   (d) Changes ­ KSS
                                                 400                                                                                                                                                                  400
                                                             Variance of Person Effects                                                                                                                                           Variance of Person Effects
                                                             Variance of Firm Effects                                                                                                                                             Variance of Firm Effects
                                                             2*Covariance of Firm, Person Effects                                                                                                                                 2*Covariance of Firm, Person Effects



                                                 300                                                                                                                                                                  300




                                                 200                                                                                                                                                                  200




                                                 100                                                                                                                                                                  100




 Percent Change relative to interval 2002-2003
                                                                                                                                                                      Percent Change relative to interval 2002-2003




                                                  50                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                  25                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                    0
                                                 -20                                                                                                                                                                  -20
                                                 2002-2003          2004-2005                2006-2007     2008-2009    2010-2011               2012-2013                                                             2002-2003          2004-2005                2006-2007          2008-2009                  2010-2011               2012-2013
                                                                                                         Year                                                                                                                                                                      Year



                           Note: Panel (a)-(b) reports the results obtained from a "rolling" variance decomposition of an AKM model. In particular, we fit AKM models separately for each T = 2 adjacent interval (2002                                                       2003, 2003   2004, . . . , 2013    2014). Panel (a) reports variance

decomposition estimates based on the plug-in approach, while Panel (c) reports estimates based on the leave-one-out approach of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2019). Panel (b) and Panel (d) report the changes over time for a given variance component relative to its

                                                                                                                              corresponding initial value estimated in the first interval, 2002-2003.
                                                                                                                         Figure 5: Rolling Variance Decomposition: Log Earnings
                                                                                               (a) Levels ­ Plug-In                                                                                                                                                                (b) Levels ­ KSS

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .4
                                                 .4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    .3
                                                 .3



                                                                                                                                        Variance of Person Effects                                                                                                                                                                 Variance of Person Effects
                                                                                                                                        Variance of Firm Effects                                                                    .2                                                                                             Variance of Firm Effects
                                                 .2
                                                                                                                                        2*Covariance of Firm, Person Effects                                                                                                                                                       2*Covariance of Firm, Person Effects




 Variance Component
                                                                                                                                                                                    Variance Component
                                                 .1                                                                                                                                                                                 .1




                                                 0                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                      2002   2003       2004            2005     2006      2007      2008      2009    2010        2011        2012        2013                                                          2002   2003       2004            2005     2006      2007      2008        2009          2010        2011        2012        2013
                                                                                                              Year                                                                                                                                                                                Year




                                                                                           (c) Changes ­ Plug-In                                                                                                                                                                  (d) Changes ­ KSS
                                                 400                                                                                                                                                                                400
                                                             Variance of Person Effects                                                                                                                                                         Variance of Person Effects
                                                             Variance of Firm Effects                                                                                                                                                           Variance of Firm Effects
                                                             2*Covariance of Firm, Person Effects                                                                                                                                               2*Covariance of Firm, Person Effects



                                                 300                                                                                                                                                                                300




                                                 200                                                                                                                                                                                200




                                                 100                                                                                                                                                                                100




 Percent Change relative to interval 2002-2003
                                                                                                                                                                                    Percent Change relative to interval 2002-2003




                                                  50                                                                                                                                                                                 50
                                                  25                                                                                                                                                                                 25
                                                   0                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                 -20                                                                                                                                                                                -20
                                                 2002-2003          2004-2005                  2006-2007           2008-2009          2010-2011               2012-2013                                                             2002-2003          2004-2005                  2006-2007           2008-2009                  2010-2011               2012-2013
                                                                                                                  Year                                                                                                                                                                               Year



                           Note: Panel (a)-(b) reports the results obtained from a "rolling" variance decomposition of an AKM model. In particular, we fit AKM models separately for each T = 2 adjacent interval (2002                                                                       2003, 2003    2004, . . . , 2013    2014). Panel (a) reports variance

decomposition estimates based on the plug-in approach, while Panel (c) reports estimates based on the leave-one-out approach of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2019). Panel (b) and Panel (d) report the changes over time for a given variance component relative to its

                                                                                                                                            corresponding initial value estimated in the first interval, 2002-2003.
                                                                               Figure 6: Sorting over Time
                                                                                                    (a) AKM

                           .5


                           .4


                           .3
             Correlation




                           .2


                           .1


                            0


                           -.1
                           2002-2003                     2004-2005                   2006-2007                   2008-2009                   2010-2011                   2012-2013
                                                                                                               Year

                                                                               Correlation of Person, Firm Effects - Log Wages
                                                                               Correlation of Person, Firm Effects - Log Earnings



                                                                                                     (b) KSS

                           .5


                           .4


                           .3
             Correlation




                           .2


                           .1


                            0


                           -.1
                           2002-2003                     2004-2005                   2006-2007                   2008-2009                   2010-2011                   2012-2013
                                                                                                               Year

                                                                               Correlation of Person, Firm Effects - Log Wages
                                                                               Correlation of Person, Firm Effects - Log Earnings



        Note: Both panels display the estimated correlation between worker and firm effects. This correlation is obtained by fitting AKM models separately for each T = 2 adjacent interval

(2002    2003, 2003          2004, . . . , 2013   2014). Panel (a) reports the estimated correlation obtained via the plug-in approach. Panel (b) reports the estimated correlation based on the leave-one-out

                                                                                   approach of Kline, Saggio and Sølvsten (2019).
                           Figure 7: Autocorrelation of Firm Effects for Wages




Note: The figure plots the estimated autocorrelations in Table 5B (blue dots) and the autocorrelation function of the
AR(1) process y j,t = 0.9765y j,t 1 + z jt .
                         Figure 8: Autocorrelation of Firm Effects for Earnings




Note: The figure plots the estimated autocorrelations in Table 6B (blue dots) and the autocorrelation function of the
AR(1) process y j,t = 0.9832y j,t 1 + z jt .
                                   Figure 9: Does Allowing for Time-Varying Firm Heterogeneity Actually Matter?
                                                                              (a) TV-AKM vs. AKM

                                                                                  Plug-in slope: .98
                                                                                  KSS adjusted slope: .99

                                            .5
            Time-Varying AKM Firm Effects




                                             0




                                            -.5


                                                  -.5                                                 0                                                               .5
                                                                                         AKM Firm Effects


                                                                                           (b) KSS

                                                                      Regression slope AKM: -.13
                                                                      Regression slope for TV-AKM: -.11
                                                                      KSS adjusted slope AKM: -.13
                                                                      KSS adjusted slope for TV-AKM: -.1
                                             .3



                                            .25
            Separation Rates




                                             .2



                                            .15



                                             .1



                                            .05
                                                   -.5                                                 0                                                               .5
                                                                                               Firm Effects

                                                                         AKM Firm effects                     TV-AKM Firm effects



 Note: Panel (a) reports the worker-year averages of the AKM firm effects and the TV-AKM firm effects within each centile bin of the AKM effects, see the text for further details. Both set of

effects are estimated in a pooled dataset which stacks together all available years from 2002 to 2014. In Panel (b) we report worker-year averages of separation rates within each centile bin of the

                                                                                   AKM and TV-AKM effects.
                                                                             Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                                                     Panel (a): AKM Model                                                       Panel (b): TV-AKM Model

                                   Interval: 2002-2003                  Interval: 2013-2014                 Interval: 2002-2014                      Interval: 2002-2014
                                Largest       Leave-One-Out         Largest    Leave-One-Out            Largest    Leave-One-Out           Largest              Leave-One-Out
                             Connected Set    Connected Set      Connected Set Connected Set         Connected Set Connected Set        Connected Set           Connected Set
                                  [1]               [2]               [3]            [4]                  [5]            [6]                 [7]                      [8]
# of Worker-Year Obs           3,435,285         2,667,196         4,071,696          3,224,108        27,484,072       26,308,782        27,452,303             25,000,763

# of Movers                     142,085           119,890           172,740           148,239          1,945,791         1,893,651         1,944,954              1,745,732

# of Firms                       41,483           20,795             49,107            25,986              219,006        165,979           218,310                123,081

# of Firms by year                                                                                                                         1,247,620               788,548


Mean Log Wages                    3.03              3.09              3.06              3.12                3.02            3.03              3.02                   3.04
Variance of Log Wages             0.38              0.36              0.44              0.43                0.41            0.41              0.41                   0.41

Mean Log Earnings                10.50             10.59              10.54             10.63               10.48          10.50             10.48                  10.52
Variance of Log Earnings         0.55              0.49               0.63              0.57                0.60           0.59              0.60                   0.58
Note: This table reports the descriptive statistics on the different samples used in the analysis. Panel (a) summarizes the samples used when fitting standard AKM models where
firm effects are not allowed to vary over time. Panel (b) describes samples used to fit an AKM model where firm effects are allowed to vary over time. The largest connected set
in Panel (a) is defined as the largest sample where all the firms are connected to each other via workers' moves. The largest connected set in Panel (b) is defined as the largest
sample where all the firm-by-year combinations are connected to each other by workers' moves. The leave-one-out connected set is largest sample where all firms (or all firms-
by-year combinations, for Panel b) remain connected to each other even after one has dropped any one worker from the sample. A mover is defined in both Panel (a) and Panel
(b) as an individual that switched employers within a given period. All statistics on wages and earnings are worker-year weighted. See the text for details.
                                                  Table 2: Variance Decomposition - Log Wages
                                          Interval 2002-2003                    Interval 2013-2014           Change from 2002-2003 to 2013-2014
                                       Variance        Share of Total       Variance        Share of Total        Variance         Share of Total
                                      Component             (%)            Component             (%)             Component              (%)
Variance of Log Wages                   0.3598           100.00%             0.4264           100.00%              0.0666            100.00%

Variance Decomposition: Plug-In
Variance of Worker Effects              0.3109           86.40%              0.3553            83.33%              0.0444             66.73%

Variance of Firm Effects                0.0488           13.57%              0.0393            9.22%               -0.0095           -14.27%

2*Cov of Worker, Firm Effects          -0.0085            -2.36%             0.0240            5.62%               0.0324             48.69%

Variance Decomposition: KSS
Variance of Worker Effects              0.2852           79.28%              0.3330            78.10%              0.0478             71.73%

Variance of Firm Effects                0.0316            8.79%              0.0248            5.81%               -0.0069           -10.32%
                                        0.0000                               0.0000
2*Cov of Worker, Firm Effects           0.0246             6.83%             0.0518            12.14%               0.0272            40.84%
Note: All variance decomposition parameters are calculated in the corresponding leave-one-out connected set described in Table 1, Panel (a) and
are worker-year weighted. Plug-in reports the variance components without adjusting for sampling error in the estimated worker and firm effects.
KSS adjusts each variance component using the leave-one-out approach detailed by Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten (2019). The residual share of total
variance is not reported. The last two columns report the change in a corresponding row over time. That change is then scaled by the change in the
variance of log wages reported in first row. Source: WA administrative records.
                                                   Table 3: Variance Decomposition - Log Earnings
                                           Interval 2002-2003                    Interval 2013-2014            Change from 2002-2003 to 2013-2014
                                        Variance        Share of Total       Variance        Share of Total        Variance
                                                                                                                                   Share of Total (%)
                                       Component             (%)            Component             (%)             Component
Variance of Log Earnings                 0.4921           100.00%              0.5738          100.00%               0.0817             100.00%

Variance Decomposition: Plug-In
Variance of Worker Effects               0.3808            77.38%              0.4138           72.11%               0.0330             40.36%

Variance of Firm Effects                 0.0766            15.56%              0.0801           13.96%               0.0035              4.33%

2*Cov of Worker, Firm Effects            0.0226             4.59%              0.0684           11.92%               0.0458             56.03%

Variance Decomposition: KSS
Variance of Worker Effects               0.3462            70.35%              0.3833           66.79%               0.0371             45.40%

Variance of Firm Effects                 0.0541            10.98%              0.0613           10.69%               0.0073              8.89%
                                         0.0000                                0.0000
2*Cov of Worker, Firm Effects            0.0662             13.45%             0.1045           18.20%               0.0383              46.81%
Note: All variance decomposition parameters are calculated in the corresponding leave-one-out connected set described in Table 1, Panel (a) and are
worker-year weighted. Plug-in reports the variance components without adjusting for sampling error in the estimated worker and firm effects. KSS
adjusts each variance component using the leave-one-out approach detailed by Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten (2019). The residual share of total variance
is not reported. The last two columns report the change in a corresponding row over time. That change is then scaled by the change in the variance of
log earnings reported in first row. Source: WA administrative records.
                                                Table 4: Variance Decomposition - Pooled Data 2002-2014
                                                         Log Wages                                                     Log Earnings
                                               AKM                        TV-AKM                             AKM                        TV-AKM
                                     Variance        Share of       Variance       Share of        Variance        Share of     Variance       Share of
                                    Component        Total (%)     Component       Total (%)      Component        Total (%)   Component       Total (%)
Variance of Log Wages                 0.4074         100.00%         0.4074       100.00%           0.5821         100.00%        0.5821       100.00%

Variance Decomposition: Plug-In
Variance of Worker Effects            0.2567         63.01%          0.2596        63.72%           0.3136         53.86%         0.3190        54.80%

Variance of Firm Effects              0.0480         11.77%          0.0570        13.99%           0.1111         19.09%         0.1190        20.44%

2*Cov of Worker, Firm Effects         0.0679         16.67%          0.0591        14.51%           0.1014         17.42%         0.0920        15.81%

Variance Decomposition: KSS
Variance of Worker Effects            0.2502         61.40%          0.2534        62.20%           0.3071         52.75%         0.3131        53.79%

Variance of Firm Effects              0.0473         11.60%          0.0549        13.47%           0.1147         19.70%         0.1209        20.76%

2*Cov of Worker, Firm Effects           0.0687        16.87%          0.0604       14.81%            0.0944        16.21%         0.0845         14.52%
Note: All variance decomposition parameters are calculated in the corresponding leave-one-out connected set described in Table 1, Panel (b) and are
worker-year weighted. TV-AKM corresponds to an AKM model where firm effects are allowed to vary over time. The AKM model includes a set of year fixed
effects. Plug-in reports the variance components without adjusting for sampling error in the estimated worker and firm effects. The residual share of total
variance is not reported. KSS adjusts each variance component using the leave-one-out approach detailed by Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten (2019) by leaving a
worker-year observation out. Source: WA administrative records.
                                        Table 5A: Autocovariance of Firm Effects - Log Wages
         2002      2003     2004      2005      2006     2007      2008      2009      2010     2011       2012        2013     2014
2002   0.0446 0.0427 0.0399 0.0377 0.0380 0.0369 0.0370 0.0361 0.0363 0.0367 0.0365 0.0364 0.0378
2003   0.0000 0.0428 0.0412 0.0388 0.0389 0.0378 0.0380 0.0372 0.0374 0.0380 0.0379 0.0378 0.0394
2004   0.0000 0.0000 0.0403 0.0393 0.0390 0.0378 0.0380 0.0369 0.0372 0.0379 0.0376 0.0374 0.0389
2005   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0393 0.0401 0.0386 0.0388 0.0375 0.0374 0.0378 0.0375 0.0372 0.0387
2006   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0414 0.0407 0.0407 0.0391 0.0394 0.0400 0.0398 0.0397 0.0414
2007   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0409 0.0415 0.0396 0.0394 0.0401 0.0401 0.0401 0.0418
2008   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0431 0.0421 0.0417 0.0425 0.0425 0.0422 0.0441
2009   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0426 0.0426 0.0432 0.0431 0.0430 0.0447
2010   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0447 0.0459 0.0458 0.0457 0.0476
2011   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0483 0.0491 0.0488 0.0507
2012   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0516 0.0511 0.0528
2013   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0523 0.0547
2014   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0582
                                        Table 5B: Autocorrelation of Firm Effects - Log Wages
         2002      2003     2004      2005      2006     2007      2008      2009      2010     2011       2012        2013     2014
2002     1.00     0.98      0.94      0.90     0.88      0.86      0.84      0.83     0.81      0.79       0.76       0.75      0.74
2003     0.00     1.00      0.99      0.95     0.92      0.90      0.88      0.87     0.86      0.84       0.81       0.80      0.79
2004     0.00     0.00      1.00      0.99     0.96      0.93      0.91      0.89     0.88      0.86       0.83       0.82      0.80
2005     0.00     0.00      0.00      1.00     0.99      0.96      0.94      0.92     0.89      0.87       0.83       0.82      0.81
2006     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     1.00      0.99      0.96      0.93     0.92      0.89       0.86       0.85      0.84
2007     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      1.00      0.99      0.95     0.92      0.90       0.87       0.87      0.86
2008     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      1.00      0.98     0.95      0.93       0.90       0.89      0.88
2009     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00      1.00     0.98      0.95       0.92       0.91      0.90
2010     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00     1.00      0.99       0.96       0.95      0.93
2011     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      1.00       0.98       0.97      0.96
2012     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00       1.00       0.98      0.96
2013     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00       0.00       1.00      0.99
 2014 0.00          0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00                                          0.00        0.00 1.00
Note: This table computes the autocovariance and autocorrelation function of the firm effects for log wages, correcting using the leave-
one-out approach of Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten (2019). All autocovariance and autocorrelation parameters reported are computed for
the sample of firms that are present in each year from 2002­2014 and are weighted using the average number of workers associated
with a given firm from 2002 to 2014.
                                       Table 6A: Autocovariance of Firm Effects - Log Earnings
         2002      2003     2004      2005      2006     2007      2008      2009     2010      2011       2012       2013      2014
2002   0.1101 0.1031 0.0972 0.0971 0.0979 0.0963 0.0953 0.0949 0.0945 0.0973 0.0965 0.0949 0.0958
2003   0.0000 0.1059 0.0975 0.0973 0.0979 0.0964 0.0955 0.0953 0.0951 0.0979 0.0973 0.0957 0.0966
2004   0.0000 0.0000 0.0973 0.0950 0.0955 0.0938 0.0926 0.0920 0.0919 0.0945 0.0935 0.0921 0.0928
2005   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0980 0.0974 0.0958 0.0945 0.0935 0.0933 0.0962 0.0953 0.0939 0.0949
2006   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.1016 0.0985 0.0969 0.0959 0.0962 0.0994 0.0987 0.0973 0.0987
2007   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.1001 0.0976 0.0964 0.0961 0.0994 0.0989 0.0976 0.0990
2008   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.1004 0.0982 0.0976 0.1009 0.1004 0.0991 0.1004
2009   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.1036 0.1010 0.1041 0.1035 0.1019 0.1034
2010   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.1059 0.1073 0.1067 0.1051 0.1067
2011   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.1152 0.1127 0.1110 0.1131
2012   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.1169 0.1131 0.1151
2013   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.1175 0.1159
2014   0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.1247
                                       Table 6B: Autocorrelation of Firm Effects - Log Earnings
         2002      2003     2004      2005      2006     2007      2008      2009     2010      2011       2012       2013      2014
2002     1.00     0.96      0.94      0.93     0.93      0.92      0.91     0.89      0.88      0.86       0.85       0.83      0.82
2003     0.00     1.00      0.96      0.96     0.94      0.94      0.93     0.91      0.90      0.89       0.87       0.86      0.84
2004     0.00     0.00      1.00      0.97     0.96      0.95      0.94     0.92      0.91      0.89       0.88       0.86      0.84
2005     0.00     0.00      0.00      1.00     0.98      0.97      0.95     0.93      0.92      0.91       0.89       0.88      0.86
2006     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     1.00      0.98      0.96     0.94      0.93      0.92       0.91       0.89      0.88
2007     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      1.00      0.97     0.95      0.93      0.93       0.91       0.90      0.89
2008     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      1.00     0.96      0.95      0.94       0.93       0.91      0.90
2009     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     1.00      0.96      0.95       0.94       0.92      0.91
2010     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      1.00      0.97       0.96       0.94      0.93
2011     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      1.00       0.97       0.95      0.94
2012     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00       1.00       0.97      0.95
2013     0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00     0.00      0.00      0.00       0.00       1.00      0.96
 2014 0.00         0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00                                           0.00        0.00 1.00
Note: This table computes the autocovariance and autocorrelation function of the firm effects for log wages, correcting using the leave
out approach of Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten (2019). All autocovariance and autocorrelation parameters reported are computed for the
sample of firms that are present in each year from 2002-2014 and are weighted using the average number of workers associated with a
given firm from 2002 to 2014.
                                                        Table A1: Comparing Leave Out Strategies
                                                        Log Wages                                                      Log Earnings
                                              AKM                         TV-AKM                             AKM                         TV-AKM
                                    Variance        Share of        Variance       Share of        Variance        Share of      Variance       Share of
                                   Component        Total (%)      Component       Total (%)      Component        Total (%)    Component       Total (%)
Variance of Log Wages                0.3850         100.00%          0.3850       100.00%           0.5520         100.00%        0.5520        100.00%

KSS-Leave Person-Year out
Variance of Firm Effects             0.0468         12.16%           0.0548        14.23%           0.1101         19.95%         0.1183        21.43%

2*Cov of Worker, Firm Effects        0.0680         17.67%           0.0599        15.56%           0.0974         17.65%         0.0885        16.04%

KSS-Leave Match out
Variance of Firm Effects             0.0445         11.55%           0.0578        15.02%           0.1067         19.33%         0.1177        21.33%

2*Cov of Worker, Firm Effects           0.0697        18.11%         0.0589        15.31%            0.0983       17.81%         0.1267         22.96%
Note: All variance components are calculated for the sample of movers belonging to the leave-one-out connected set of the TV-AKM model and are
worker-year weighted.TV-AKM corresponds to an AKM model where firm effects are allowed to vary over time. The AKM model includes a set of year
fixed effects. Plug-in reports the variance components without adjusting for sampling error in the estimated worker and firm effects. The residual share of
total variance is not reported. KSS adjusts each variance component using the leave-one-out approach detailed by Kline, Saggio, and Sølvsten (2019) by
leaving a worker-year observation out. Source: WA administrative records.
A     Data Appendix

This appendix first describes the data used in the estimation of firm effects for earnings and hourly
wages used in the main text. It then describes the sample restrictions imposed on the estimation

sample. Finally, we highlight some considerations specific to working with single-state adminis-
trative wage records.


A.1    Further Description of the Data

The data used in this paper are based on quarterly administrative wage records maintained by the
Employment Security Department of Washington State to administer the state's unemployment

insurance (UI) system. The available quarterly data provide information on earnings and work
hours of all workers employed by UI-covered employers in the state between 2002­2014. Workers
who drop out of the labor force, become self-employed, work in the underground economy, or

move out of state will not appear in the records. This is because self-employed workers are not
covered by UI, underground earnings are not reported, and out-of-state earnings will be picked up
in the earnings records of another state; see also the discussion below.

    UI-covered employers in Washington are required to report each worker's quarterly earnings
and work hours, which allows us to construct an hourly wage rate in each quarter for most workers
in Washington's formal labor market. Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury (2018) examine the relia-

bility of the Washington hours data and conclude they are of high quality. Each worker's quarterly
record also includes an employer identifier and the employer's four-digit North American Industry
Classification System (NAICS) code, making it possible to construct employment at both the em-

ployer and industry level; see also Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury (2019) for further discussion
of Washington administrative wage records.


A.2    Sample Restrictions

As in Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury (2019), we impose several restrictions on the estimation
sample, dropping the following:
    · Workers with more than 9 employers in a year

    · Workers with annual earnings less than $2,850 (in 2005 dollars) and workers with calculated
       hourly wage rates $2.00/hour (in 2005 dollars) (following Card, Heining and Kline 2013;

       Sorkin 2018)

    · Workers who worked fewer than 400 hours in the year

    · Employer-year observations with fewer than 5 employees in the year (following Song, Price,
       Guvenen, Bloom and von Wachter, 2015)


A.3     Additional Considerations

First, although we use the terms "employer" and "firm" interchangeably, they are not always the
same. The employer is the entity from which UI payroll taxes are collected and is the unit of

observation in the wage records. For firms with a single establishment, and for firms with mul-
tiple establishments all located in Washington, the employer is also the firm. (In some cases, a
multi-establishment firm may be divided into more than one employer.) For firms with multiple

establishments some of which are located outside Washington, the employer covers only the firms'
establishments located in Washington.
    Second, an employer identification (ID) number may disappear if the employer becomes inac-

tive or reorganizes in some way--through merger, acquisition, spinoff, breakout, or other reason.
The available data do not include an employer "successor file," so we cannot distinguish among
these cases with certainty,8 but like Card, Heining and Kline (2013), we take the view that a new

employer ID likely implies reorganization and new employment policies, so it makes sense to treat
an employer ID change as the creation of a new entity and to estimate a separate (new) employer
fixed effect. As Card, Heining, and Kline (2013) point out, treating assignment of a new ID to an

existing employer leads to a loss of efficiency but no bias.
   8 Using  information on worker flows, Benedetto et al. (2007) develop probabilistic approach to identifying employ-
ers that have undergone an employer identification number change due to merger, acquisition, spin off, or breakout.
   Third, we cannot follow workers who move out of Washington. To examine how such attri-

tion might influence the estimated AKM employer fixed effects, Lachowska, Mas and Woodbury
(2019) reestimate the AKM model after dropping random subsamples of 30 percent and 50 percent
of employers from the full AKM sample described above. The resulting firm effects are highly cor-

related with those obtained in the full AKM analysis, suggesting that interstate migration is not a
substantial source of bias in estimating the AKM fixed effects.
