                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               MICROENTREPRENEURSHIP IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

                                     Seema Jayachandran

                                      Working Paper 26661
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26661


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




I thank Akhila Kovvuri and Jamie Daubenspeck for excellent research assistance. I also thank the
Private Enterprise Development in Low Income Countries research initiative for financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Seema Jayachandran. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Microentrepreneurship in Developing Countries
Seema Jayachandran
NBER Working Paper No. 26661
January 2020
JEL No. M13,O10,O17

                                          ABSTRACT

This article reviews the recent literature in economics on small-scale entrepreneurship
("microentrepreneurship") in low-income countries. Major themes in the literature include the
determinants and consequences of joining the formal sector; the impacts of access to credit and
other financial services; the impacts of business training; barriers to hiring; and the distinction
between self-employment by necessity and self-employment as a calling. The article devotes
special attention to unique issues that arise with female entrepreneurship.


Seema Jayachandran
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2211 Campus Dr
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
seema@northwestern.edu
1        Introduction
        A third of workers in low- and middle-income countries are self-employed, compared
to fewer than a tenth in high-income countries (Gindling and Newhouse, 2014). In the
poorest countries, those classified as low-income by the World Bank, half of workers are self-
employed. Many of the self-employed work in agriculture, but this alone does not explain
the differences between rich and poor countries: Thirty percent of non-agricultural workers
in low- and middle-income countries are self-employed.
        Most of these businesses are small. In nine out of ten cases, the business has no em-
ployees besides the owner (Gindling and Newhouse, 2014). This review focuses on very
small, or "micro" businesses, which I define loosely as those with no employees or fewer than
five employees. Following the literature, I refer to these businesses as microenterprises and
their owners as microentrepreneurs. While the term "entrepreneur" often connotes a highly
ambitious, growth-oriented business owner, in the context of this review, the term is more
neutral. Indeed, one of the key questions in the literature is what proportion of microen-
trepreneurs are self-employed out of necessity and would prefer working for someone else as
a paid employee.
        This article reviews the recent literature on microentrepreneurship in developing coun-
tries, with the scope restricted to the non-agricultural sector. Many studies I discuss use
a sample of firms with varying sizes, but my aim is to focus on firms with fewer than 5
employees -- and often no employees besides the business owner.1 I focus mostly on im-
pact evaluations that use policy interventions to better understand the inner workings of
microenterprises or to identify ways of increasing their profitability and growth rates. Some
of the main topics discussed are formalization, business training, access to credit, barriers to
hiring, and the degree to which the poor become microentrepreneurs by necessity. A special
emphasis throughout is gender and microentrepreneurship, or the differences in patterns for
male and female-run microenterprises.
    1
    For a complementary review, see Quinn and Woodruff (2019), who review the literature on randomized
experiments used to understand entrepreneurship in developing countries.




                                                  1
2        Formalization
        Most microenterprises in developing countries are not formally registered with the gov-
ernment. La Porta and Shleifer (2014) estimate that among the poorest countries (bottom
quartile based on GDP per capita), the informal sector accounts for 35% to 40% of the
economy, compared to less than 20% in the richest quartile of countries.2
        One view is that small firms generally do not need or want the benefits that come
with formalization, such as access to credit or to wider markets. This "dual economy" view
posits that microenterprises and larger firms operate in different spheres. According to this
view, informal firms tend to have low productivity, so when they skirt taxes and regulation,
they do not gain an undue advantage over formal firms, as they cannot or do not compete
with higher productivity formal firms. La Porta and Shleifer (2014) argue that most informal
firms would not thrive in the formal sector, and so encouraging informal firms to register will
not promote economic growth. Rather, they argue that the growth of formal sector firms
naturally causes the informal sector to shrink over the course of economic development.
Consistent with this viewpoint, Ulyssea (2018) analyzes Brazilian firms and concludes that
the vast majority of informal firms are not being held back by their informality.
        Another view, championed by de Soto (1989, 2000), is that informality is holding back
the growth of microenterprises. With formalization, they would have better access to cap-
ital and product markets, fueling growth. In this view, firms would prefer to be formally
registered, but are deterred by the financial costs and red tape of the application process or
because they lack accurate information about the benefits of formalization. De Soto's ideas
have influenced many governments and aid agencies to streamline their business registration
processes.
        Several studies have analyzed interventions that provide assistance with the formal-
ization process or information on the benefits of formalization.3 Other interventions to
encourage formalization that have been studied include cash incentives to formalize, threats
of inspections and fines for being unregistered, and reducing the extra tax burden that a
firm incurs when it becoming formal. These studies typically have a two-fold goal of first,
understanding what microentrepreneurs perceive to be the costs and benefits of formalizing
    2
     These statistics include agriculture, but the pattern of more informality in poor than rich countries holds
for non-agricultural sectors too.
   3
     See Bruhn (2014) for a review of the literature on formalization of firms in developing countries.


                                                       2
and, second, assessing how becoming formalized affects firm performance. The first goal is
achieved by analyzing impacts on formalization, and the second goal is achieved by using
the interventions as a "first stage" and analyzing the resulting impacts on access to capital,
profits, and so forth.
     While most of studies that examine efforts to assist firms with the registration process
find that doing so increases formalization (Jaramillo, 2009; McKenzie and Sakho, 2010;
Campos et al., 2018), in other cases assistance is ineffective (and thus there is no first stage
to assess downstream impacts). For example, de Andrade et al. (2013) find that giving
information and covering fees for registration does not increase registration in Brazil, and
Rothenberg et al. (2016) similarly find no impact of an Indonesian initiative that set up
one-stop shops for business registration. Galiani et al. (2017) report that information on
registration has only a short-run impact on formalization in Bogota, Colombia, with firms
letting their registration lapse after a year. One pattern that emerges across the multiple
studies is that information conveyed in person through trained staff is more effective than
just brochures (de Andrade et al., 2013; de Mel et al., 2013; Benhassine et al., 2018).
     A few studies in this literature restrict their attention to the first goal of examining how
an intervention affects firms' likelihood of formalizing. For example, de Mel et al. (2013)
trace out the demand curve for formalization in Sri Lanka among urban firms with at least
one employee (and no more than 14 employees) by providing information on registration and
covering the small 5 USD fee, with additional treatment arms offering cash incentives to reg-
ister, set at 88, 175, or 350 USD. The highest cash incentive represents two months of profits
for the average firm. While two thirds of the firms already had municipal-level registration,
they lacked the division-level registration that allows a firm to sell to the government and to
larger firms and to get commercial bank loans. Providing information and covering the small
registration fee did not increase formalization, but the cash incentives did prompt firms to
formalize. At the two lower payment levels, about 20% of firms registered, while with the
highest (350 USD) amount, 48% of firms did so.
     While de Andrade et al. (2013) find no effect on formalization of providing information
on the process, or of providing information combined with paying for registration fees and
offering accounting services, another treatment arm in their study had inspectors visit firms,
giving them 30 to 45 days to register before another visit; if the firm was not registered by
this follow-up visit, it would be fined and shut down. This arm increased registration by 4


                                               3
percentage points (from a base of 7.5% in the control group).
      Turning to studies that also analyzed effects of formalization, Benhassine et al. (2018)
provided information on a new registration status and how to apply for it in Benin. Benin
was one of over a dozen African countries that jointly introduced the registration status of
"entreprenant," which was aimed at microenterprises. Unlike standard registration, there is
no monetary cost to obtain this registration status and the process takes just one day, with
interaction with only one government office. The new status confers many of the benefits
of standard registration such as access to business banking services and eligibility for some
government contracts, but excludes others such as access to large government contracts
and the right to export. One arm of the Benhassine et al. (2018) study provided basic
information on the registration status and process, another arm added in information on
potential benefits of formalization, and a third treatment arm paired the basic information
with assistance with tax compliance. Registration increased by 10 percentage points in
the basic information treatment, by 13 percentage points when the benefits of formalization
were emphasized, and 16 percentage points when information on tax compliance was included
(from a base that was close to 0).4 However, formalization did not lead to any measured
increases in sales, profits, or number of employees. Because the cost of formalization is over
1,000 USD, the authors estimate that it would take the government many decades to recoup
its costs, even if the newly registered firms paid 100% of their tax obligation.
      Campos et al. (2018) conducted a randomized evaluation among 3,000 unregistered
microenterprises in urban Malawi. The main intervention was to assist with business regis-
tration by covering the monetary costs of registration and helping reduce the non-monetary
costs by filling out the paperwork and transporting the forms to submit them. The monetary
costs included a 1.3 USD registration fee, transportation costs to submit the forms, and fees
to middlemen to facilitate faster processing. Among these treated firms, one subset also
received assistance opening a business bank account, for which registration is a prerequisite,
and another subset received assistance with tax registration. Note that in Malawi, as in
many countries in Africa, business registration and tax registration are distinct processes.
      When just offered help with business registration, 75% of the firms registered their
business. This was somewhat higher when paired with the banking session and somewhat
  4
    Impacts on formalization were smaller for female-owned firms (63% of the sample), which could be due
to these firms being smaller rather than female-owned per se.



                                                   4
lower when paired with tax registration assistance. Meanwhile, take-up of tax registration
was only 4%. The authors find no significant impact on firm productivity from business
registration alone, but when paired with banking information, it led to 20% higher sales and
15% higher profits. Consistent with the channel being access to banking services, these firms
report being less credit constrained.
    The take-up of business registration between male- and female-owned firms was similar.
The effect on sales and profits was also similar in levels, but female-owned firms experienced
a larger proportional improvement, as they had lower sales and profits under the status quo.
    The quite different propensity of firms to pursue business registration and tax registra-
tion found by Campos et al. (2018) highlights a key cost and benefit of de-linking these two
activities. On the one hand, allowing firms to register and take advantage of, for example,
business loans without the automatic need to pay taxes reduces tax compliance. On the
other hand, linking the two activities would mean that firms would not see the increase in
profits that business registration might unleash.
    Fajnzylber et al. (2011) examine whether reducing the tax burden for small firms en-
courages them to formalize. The study takes advantage of a 1996 policy change in Brazil
that offered a simplified tax system for small firms, called SIMPLES, which lowered their
tax liability by 8%. One specific component was to reduce social security payments for
employees, which might have deterred hiring. The study uses an interrupted time series
design around the introduction of SIMPLES, classifying firms based on their creation date.
The fairly strong assumptions the analysis makes are that the composition of firms that are
created is unaffected by the policy change and that there was no anticipation of the policy
change that shifted when firms were established. With that caveat, the paper finds that firms
that started after SIMPLES was in place were 30% more likely to be registered, from a base
of 11%. These firms also report higher revenues, profits, and employment levels, but these
impacts might not be due just to formalization. To interpret them as due to formalization
requires the exclusion restriction that firms were not affected by the policy change unless it
was pivotal in their decision to formalize. However, the policy lowered firms' tax burden,
including for firms that would have formalized without SIMPLES.
    Monteiro and Assun¸
                      c~
                       ao (2012) use a difference-in-differences design to analyze the SIM-
PLES reform, finding quite different results. Their study compares firms before and after
the reform, across sectors eligible and ineligible for the reform. The study finds no overall


                                              5
impact on registration. Breaking down the results by sector, there is no effect in construc-
tion, manufacturing, transportation, or services, but a sizeable increase in formalization in
the retail sector (13 percentage points from a base of 27%).
    Running counter to evidence described above that many firms avoid tax registration,
McKenzie and Sakho (2010) find that registering with the tax authority seems to increase
small firms' profits in Bolivia. Their analysis instruments for tax registration with distance
to the tax authority. The reasoning behind the instrument is that closeness to the office
increases the firms' knowledge of the tax office (and thus how to register) and increases tax
officials' likelihood of inspecting the firm. Distance is indeed negatively correlated with tax
registration among small firms. The second-stage results suggest that tax registration leads
to 88% higher profits, driven by firms with 2-5 workers, with no such benefits and perhaps
lower profits for firms with fewer than 2 or more than 5 employees. The authors argue
that smaller firms do not have the capacity to expand to wider markets, which is the main
advantage of tax registration, while larger firms have higher-quality management and can
do so even without registration.
    Demenet et al. (2016) use panel data collected in 2007 and 2009 in Vietnam to exam-
ine the impacts of formalization. The identification comes from comparing the 147 initially
informal firms who became formal over the two-year window between waves to the 1,317
firms that remained informal. That is, the study examines the effect of formalization, con-
trolling for firm and time fixed effects. The decision to become formal could be endogenous
to expansion plans and expected profits -- the correlation with observables indicates that
the decision is not random -- so to improve the identification, the analysis uses matching
techniques to make the treated and control firms more similar on observables. The study
finds that becoming formal is associated with a 20% increase in value added. Other measures
of performance such as profits show positive impacts when the sample is restricted to firms
with at least one employee.
    A closely related study is Rand and Torm (2012), which uses the same panel data. They
find that becoming formal is associated with a 9% increase in profits. In addition, formal-
ization is associated with increased investment, improved access to credit, and a decrease in
the share of workers who are casual.




                                              6
Gender
    Gender differences is not a major theme in the literature on formalization, but some
studies find heterogeneous effects by gender. Benhassine et al. (2018) find that female-owned
firms are less responsive to interventions that encourage registration in Benin. As reported
by Demenet et al. (2016), the rate of formalization in Vietnam is lower for female-owned
firms. An open question is whether the differences are due to firm characteristics such as
female-owned firms being smaller, or to factors more deeply intertwined with gender norms,
such as aspirations to grow. For example, in a descriptive study of 141 microentrepreneurs in
Indonesia, Babbitt et al. (2015) speculate that cultural norms restrict how female owners can
interact with business associations, and family obligations constrain some of their business
activities. An interesting direction for future research would be to explore how these norms
affect female microentrepreneurs' ambitions and whether a gender gap in the desire to expand
the firm leads to lower demand to formalize for female microentrepreneurs.

Recap
    Overall, the evidence from studies that encouraged firms to formalize does not provide
much support for the optimistic view that formalization unleashes growth for microenter-
prises. Most randomized evaluations do not find impacts of formalization on firm profits.
Quasi-experimental studies tend to find larger impacts; while these estimates should be in-
terpreted with caution due to potential omitted variable bias, they suggest that more work
is needed to settle the debate on how much, and for which types of firms, formalization
improves business performance.
    Another area where more evidence is needed is on which specific benefits of formaliza-
tion, such as access to wider markets or access to finance, convince firms to formalize and
help their performance. Such evidence would help policymakers as they decide which rights
and opportunities to withhold from informal firms. Similarly, governments have latitude to
decide which obligations are tied to registration. Some consequences of formalizing, such as
greater tax liability and regulatory scrutiny, are downsides from the firm's perspective but
upsides from other perspectives. How much effort to put into encouraging formalization and
whether to remove some of its obligations depend on the weight put on helping small firms
versus raising tax revenue, ensuring labor standards, and other societal goals.
    For policymakers that want to encourage formalization, there is extensive research on

                                             7
which interventions are effective in doing so. Besides the levers of changing the rights and
obligations of formalization, assistance with the application process and cash incentives have
been shown to increase formalization, for example. Help with the application process, in
particular, seems like a win-win opportunity: Some firms want to formalize but are deterred
by the complicated process. However, the most effective type of help is high-touch and
therefore expensive, while the proportion of firms that want to formalize is modest. Thus,
successfully identifying and targeting the subset of firms who would formalize but for the
hassle costs is key to making this type of intervention more cost effective. How to identify
such firms warrants further work.


3    Business training
    Several recent studies examine business training of microentrepreneurs. Many of them
find no significant positive effects of training on business performance (Karlan and Valdivia,
2011; Drexler et al., 2014; Fiala, 2018). But others find that business training increases
profits, survival, or growth in the long- (Blattman et al., 2016; McKenzie and Puerto, 2017)
or short-term (Mano et al., 2012; de Mel et al., 2014; Field et al., 2016).
    As one example, Karlan and Valdivia (2011) study the impact of including business
training in mandatory group-lending meetings for women-only village banks, working with
FINCA in Peru. As in several other studies, the training material was based on the non-
profit Freedom from Hunger's business training material. Despite high attendance, there is
limited evidence of any positive impacts of the training.
    McKenzie and Woodruff (2014) summarize the literature on business training in develop-
ing countries and cite small sample sizes and sample attrition as limitations of the literature.
McKenzie and Puerto (2017) conduct a study in rural Kenya with market-level random-
ization, which improves on power. The key study aim is to measure whether gains from
training just constitute zero-sum business stealing from the un-trained microentrepreneurs.
Detecting spillover effects requires a large sample size: They offer a four-day training to a
subset of female-owned businesses (1,172 women) in 93 treated markets, and conduct no
interventions in 64 control markets. An additional benefit of the large sample size is that
the study is powered to detect smaller effects on profits than much of the literature.
    The study finds that, three years after the training, firms whose owners were offered
business training were 3 percentage points more likely to survive than control firms (which

                                               8
had an 85% survival rate), and they had 18% higher sales and 15% higher profits. Moreover,
the treated women reported better mental health and subjective living standards. A subset
of those assigned to receive training were also offered personalized mentoring and followup
training, which appeared to have no impact.
    The study finds more positive and persistent impacts of standard business training than
much of the literature. The training cost about $200 per person, so given the increase in
profits of about $2.60 a day, the costs would be recouped after about 1.5 years. The study
detects some negative spillover effects on untreated firms in treated markets at the one year
mark, but three years after treatment, the spillovers are negligible. Thus, the gains to the
treated women appear to be net gains for the market.
    Klinger and Sch¨
                   undeln (2011) examine the impacts of the non-profit TechnoServe's busi-
ness training activities in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Nicaragua using a quasi-experimental
design. TechnoServe holds business plan competitions and provides training to entrants
throughout the several rounds of the competition. Those who make it past an initial screen-
ing are invited to training, and then they submit a business plan. Judges rate the business
plan and select a subset to advance to the next round; these individuals are given further
business development support to complete a final business plan. The top plans among these
final versions are awarded 6,000 to 15,000 USD to invest in their business.
    The study uses data from four years of the competition and a regression discontinuity
design around the cutoff scores for different years and phases of the competition. For the first
phase, those who make the cutoff ­ and thus receive training ­ have a 16 to 18 percentage
point higher likelihood of starting or expanding a business. The treatment effects for the
first round are particularly large in El Salvador, which is the only country among the three
to do an additional 7-day training on technical skills. Being above the second phase cut-off
(and thus being offered the second round of training) is associated with a 40 percentage point
increase in the likelihood of starting a business or expanding one's current business. The
study also examines the final round, in which the winners receive a grant rather than further
training: Winning the competition and receiving a monetary prize increases the likelihood
of starting a business by 34 percentage points.
    Related to the the business training literature are studies on the impacts of management
consulting. Management consulting has been found to increase the return to capital, labor
employed, and entrepreneurial spirit, primarily through improvements in marketing, financial


                                               9
accounting and longer-term planning (Bruhn et al., 2018). Similarly, Lafortune et al. (2018)
find some positive impacts of personalized advice for microentrepreneurs in Chile. At odds
with these results is that technical assistance tailored to business needs was not found to
be more effective than basic business training (marketing strategies, self-esteem and social
skills) in a study in Peru (Valdivia, 2015).
    Brooks et al. (2018) study a different approach to training, which is mentorship from
experienced entrepreneurs from one's own community. They do so in rural Kenya, pairing
a mentor with inexperienced female entrepreneurs. The study also has a treatment arm
with business classes, as a benchmark. A very important caveat is that the study has high
attrition, which appears to be differential between the treatment groups and the control
group. Take-up was high for mentorship; all mentees met with their mentor at least once
during treatment; 85% reported meeting their mentor during the previous week. For the
business classes, 40% attended all four classes. Thus, the mentorship has higher dosage once
one takes into account take-up. Mentorship seems to increase profits, whereas the business
classes do not. The main channel for improved profits seems to be reductions in supply costs
due to changing suppliers. In contrast, personalized mentoring had no additional benefits
over standard business training in the experiment analyzed in McKenzie and Puerto (2017).
    Besides transferring knowledge, a mentor might provide moral support and inspiration,
and boost participants' confidence. The psychological determinants of success is an emerging
theme in the literature on training. In some cases, psychological attributes are studied as
a mechanism through which standard business training has impacts. For example, in the
Field et al. (2016) and Lafortune et al. (2018) studies described in the subsection on gender
below, higher aspirations seems to be a mechanism through which women improved their
business outcomes.
    Recent studies have also examined psychological trainings. Campos et al. (2017) eval-
uate "personal initiative" training for microentrepreneurs in Togo. The curriculum, taught
through 12 half-day sessions, covers how to have the mindset of a successful entrepreneur,
proactiveness, goal setting, overcoming obstacles, finding opportunities, etc. The study also
included a treatment arm offering standard business training. The personal initiative training
led to 30% higher profits, averaged over the two and a half years following the intervention.
The program seems to have been equally beneficial for female and male participants. The
authors calculate that the training cost about 760 USD per participant and raised profits


                                               10
by 60 USD per month on average; thus the training costs would be recouped through higher
profits within about a year. In contrast, traditional business training did not increase profits
or sales in this setting.
     While the initial study on personal initiative (PI) training in Togo had very encour-
aging findings, follow-on work has found more disappointing impacts. Alibhai et al. (2019)
evaluate the same PI curriculum in Ethiopia, focused on female microentrepreneurs. Their
study also evaluates a second variant of psychological training, focused on self-esteem and
entrepreneurial spirit. Neither the PI training nor the alternative psychological curriculum
improved business outcomes or had lasting effects on psychological outcomes. The null re-
sults for PI training might have been due to poor implementation, according to the authors.
Ubfal et al. (2019) evaluate the PI program in Jamaica. The study design includes two
treatment arms in which standard PI curriculum is bundled with one of two add-ons, five
additional days of PI/soft skills training or five days of standard business skills training.
These treatment arms are compared to a control group. The study finds that in the short
run, the high-dosage PI training leads to higher sales and profits, but just for male-run
businesses. The regular-dosage PI training paired with business training has no impact on
business outcomes. In addition, even for the high-dosage PI training, the impacts on business
outcomes fade out within a year, although there are persistent impacts on soft skills.

Gender
     Business training is a particularly popular intervention for female microentrepreneurs,
based on the view that one disadvantage women have in running a business is less access to
formal education.
     However, providing business know-how might not be sufficient to improve business suc-
cess, especially for women whose opportunities are constrained by restrictive social norms
(Jayachandran, 2019). In a study in Pakistan, Gin´
                                                 e and Mansuri (2019) find that both male
and female participants gain knowledge from business training, but women do not then enjoy
the same improvements in business outcomes as men do. The authors' interpretation is that
women lack the agency to put the knowledge into practice because their husbands often de
facto run the businesses. In such a setting, in order to be effective, interventions might need
to be designed to address women's limited agency.
     Field et al. (2010) and Field et al. (2016) report on a business training experiment in


                                              11
Ahmedabad, India, a setting in which women have limited agency and freedom of movement.
The study aimed to unpack why women are disadvantaged as entrepreneurs and also to ex-
plore the importance of psychological factors in mediating the impacts of business training.
The study offered a two-day business counseling program that taught basic financial literacy
and business skills and showed participants a film showcasing successful role models in their
community. The participants, trained in groups of about 12 women, were female microen-
trepreneurs who were members of the Self-Employed Women's Association (SEWA) Bank.
Participants ran small businesses such as vegetable stands or did home-based piecework such
as embroidery and making incense sticks.
    The new twist in this study is that in the study arm that offered training, half of the
women were randomly selected to be able to name a female friend or family member to be
invited to the training too. The hypotheses were that having the ability to invite a friend
might increase take-up, lead to more engagement during training, and facilitate reinforcement
of the learnings after the training was over.
    Women invited to training were more likely to take out loans than women in the control
group, and what women did with the loans differed significantly based on whether they
came with a friend. Those invited without a friend mostly used their loans for home repairs
unrelated to their businesses. Women who were asked to bring a friend along, in contrast,
were more likely to use their loans for business purposes. Moreover, the women who brought
friends reported having a higher volume of business, as well as higher household income, four
months after the program ended, compared to the control group. They were also less likely
to report their occupation as housewife, suggestive that being a microentrepreneur became a
stronger part of their identity. Those invited to training without a friend saw no such gains.
    Being invited with a friend did not increase attendance at the training or knowledge
gained. What then was the mechanism? Some suggestive evidence comes from the fact that
women invited to the sessions with a friend set more ambitious goals for themselves during
a class activity in which participants set concrete business goals. Having a friend around
seemed to raise women's aspirations for their businesses.
    The improvement in business outcomes was especially large for women belonging to
castes or religious groups that impose more restrictions on whether women can move about
the community and interact with others unaccompanied. Socially restricted women who
attended the training with a friend were four times as likely to take out a loan than similar


                                                12
women in the control group. Highly restricted women face barriers to building strong profes-
sional networks with other female entrepreneurs. Thus, attending training with a friend or
acquaintance may have helped build up this peer network. One direction for further research
is to explore this idea that limited interactions with others in business contributes to the
gap in entrepreneurship between men and women. Moreover, some of the gap may be in
aspirations, so interventions that encourage women to set more ambitious goals might be
useful complements to those that provide them with the skills to reach their goals.
     In a similar vein, Lafortune et al. (2018) test the impacts of two separate add-ons to
business training in Chile -- either a one-hour visit by a previous participant of the program
who became successful in her business or tailored consulting -- and find that the visit by the
role model increases business profits. Another related study is the one by Brooks et al. (2018)
described above, which found that being mentored improved women's business outcomes in
Kenya.

Recap
     Business training is a widely used intervention to help microentrepreneurs in developing
countries. The evidence on its impacts is mixed. Many studies fail to find significant impacts
on revenues or profits. However, McKenzie and Woodruff (2014) argue that weak statistical
power hamstrings this literature. If the effect size that would render a training cost-effective is
too small to be detectable, then a null result does not imply the intervention was unsuccessful.
Conducting larger studies and meta-analyses is one way forward. Another is to improve the
measurement of profits and revenues. These outcomes are volatile and also challenging to
measure with precision. Methodological studies that find innovative ways to improve data
quality or validate best practices for measurement of revenues and profits (see Garlick et al.
(2019), for example) would have high returns for all studies focused on microenterprises,
including those on business training.
     A growing focus in the business training literature is on the psychological determinants
of success. Add-ons to traditional training that offer mentorship, provide exposure to role
models, or strengthen ties among self-employed individuals have shown promising results. In
addition, trainings designed to instill personal initiative or other soft skills are an intriguing
approach on which more work is needed. While psychologically-focused interventions have
been found to be valuable for both men and women, this line of research might shed light


                                                13
on the gender profit gap, given that girls grow up expecting fewer career opportunities than
boys in many societies.


4    Returns to capital and access to credit
    In an influential paper, de Mel et al. (2008a) use the straightforward approach of provid-
ing cash grants to microenterprises in Sri Lanka to estimate their returns to capital. Treated
firms received either an in-kind or cash grant, in the amount of 100 or 200 USD. Participants
were told that it was not required that the cash grants be spent for business purposes. All
types of grants significantly raised the capital stock of microenterprises compared to the
control group. Pooled together, the treated arms enjoy a significant increase in profits: A
grant of 100 USD raised profits by 5 USD per month, which corresponds to a return of 60%
per year. Note that this estimate is not exactly the marginal return to capital, as recipients
might not have invested all of the money in their firm, or they might have complemented the
grant with additional capital from other sources. One of the striking findings in the study
is that the return to capital for female microentrepreneurs, who make up half the sample,
is not statistically different from zero. I discuss this further in the subsection on gender
below. Follow-up data collection shows that the benefits of relaxing capital constraints were
persistent up to five years later (de Mel et al., 2012). The same type of intervention among
small, male-owned businesses in Mexico also seemed to lead to large but imprecisely esti-
mated increases in profits, with suggestive evidence of larger effects for the in-kind grants
(McKenzie and Woodruff, 2008).
    Fiala (2018) offers loans or grants to microentrepreneurs in Uganda, cross-randomized
with business training. Surprisingly, loans have larger effects than grants; they increase
profits by 50%. The author speculates that receiving a loan may have pushed men to make
more productive investments due to having the responsibility of repayment, which a grant
does not entail. This interpretation requires some other friction or behavioral bias, as the
same options were in recipients' choice sets under grants. None of the treatments have
positive impacts for female microentrepreneurs.
    Fafchamps et al. (2014) vary whether grants offered to small businesses in Ghana are
given as cash or in-kind. For the in-kind treatment, the business owner specified what capital
he or she wanted (typically inventory) and the research team delivered it. Overall the in-kind
capital has a larger impact on profits than cash. Another result, echoing other studies, is

                                             14
that the impacts of the cash treatment are larger for men than women.
    Bianchi and Bobbba (2013) use variation in receipt of Progresa conditional cash transfers
in Mexico to study how cash transfers affect the extensive margin of entrepreneurship. They
find that entrepreneurship increases by 1 percentage point off of a base of 3 to 4 percent
with the cash transfer. Through further analysis, the authors argue that the impacts are
due to the program providing steady income and thus reducing risk aversion, rather than to
the easing of credit constraints.
    Another intervention that, like Progresa, was not focused on entrepreneurship yet could
have affected it is analyzed in Haushofer and Shapiro (2016). This study examines impacts
on an array of outcomes from one-time cash transfers to poor individuals in Kenya from the
non-profit GiveDirectly. The authors report a 33% increase in revenue from self-employment
and a 50% increase in business expenditure, but no changes in profits or the likelihood of
being a business owner.
    Blattman et al. (2014) use cash grants to promote entrepreneurship among young men
and women in a post-war northern Uganda. Groups of around 20 to 30 people, most of them
mixed gender, submitted applications to the government's Youth Opportunities Program,
in which they wrote up a plan for how they would use the grant to acquire skills in trades
such as tailoring, hairdressing, or carpentry. Funding was provided to 265 groups, randomly
chosen from the 535 eligible groups. Groups received about 7,500 USD on average, or around
400 USD per person. The grants were successful in promoting non-agricultural employment
among recipients. The treated group also had higher earnings, worked more hours, and
accumulated more capital than the control group. Receiving the grant caused the treated
group to adopt formal business practices such as record keeping and paying business taxes.
Women benefited more from receiving the grant, and their earnings grew much faster than
control women's. The authors speculate that this heterogeneity by gender is due to women
facing more stringent credit constraints. Despite these impressive initial results, a follow-up
nine years after baseline found that the treatment group no longer had significantly higher
income than the control group. However, those in the treatment group, particularly women,
were still more likely to be engaged in a skilled trade at the time of the nine-year follow-up
survey.
    Blattman et al. (2016) study how a large cash grant affects the entrepreneurial activities
of marginalized women in war-torn northern Uganda. The intervention provides 150 USD


                                              15
in cash, equivalent to two years' income, plus 5 days of business training. Each of the 120
study villages was asked to provide a list of marginalized individuals; from these lists 10
to 20 were selected to participate in the study. Randomization was at the village level.
Half of the treated villages also received group dynamics training. The treatment doubled
entrepreneurial activity and income compared to the control group. The group dynamics
training, which consisted of advice on how to collaborate in business ventures and instruction
on how to form a ROSCA savings group, led to significant increases in income.
     Another study of cash grants is by Klinger and Sch¨
                                                       undeln (2011), described in the pre-
vious section, which analyzed TechnoServe's business plan competitions in Central America.
That study found that receiving a large grant as one of the winners of a business plan
competition had a large impact on the likelihood of starting a business.
     The studies above suggest that in many settings, giving grants to microentrepreneurs
can have large returns. This evidence that small firms are capital constrained provides
prima facie support for the hypothesis that, if the capital were in the form of loans rather
than grants, recipients could expand their businesses and pay back the loans through higher
profits.
     Inspired by Muhammed Yunus's Grameen Bank in Bangladesh, many organizations
around the world specialize in providing loans to microentrepreneurs. The microcredit lend-
ing model varies across microfinance institutions, but often has elements aimed at encour-
aging repayment and achieving a broader social mission. For example, the loan structure
often requires repayment to begin almost immediately. Several organizations also focus on
female clients and use a group lending model with liability for the loan jointly shared by
group members.
     Several studies examine how expanded access to microcredit affects microenterprises.
The thrust of the recent literature is that microcredit helps some microenterprises, but access
to credit is not a silver bullet to transform most of them into thriving, fast-growing busi-
nesses. The title of a prominent recent study, "The Miracle of Microfinance? Evidence from
a Randomized Evaluation" exemplifies the tamping down of excitement about microcredit
associated with this recent literature (Banerjee et al., 2015a). That study uses the random-
ized roll-out of Spandana, a for-profit microfinance lender in India, across neighborhoods in
Hyderabad, India that began in 2007. Spandana lends to female microentrepreneurs using
a group lending model. Take-up of the loans is fairly low, at 18% in the treatment group


                                              16
(compared to 5% in the control group); demand for microcredit is not universal. The authors
find no statistically significant increase in business profits, but they do find improvements
for households with preexisting businesses.
    Six other randomized evaluations of microcredit published at the same time as Banerjee
et al. (2015a) find broadly similar results that access to credit helps a subset of firms but
does not help all of them and is not transformative (Banerjee et al., 2015b). For example,
Angelucci et al. (2015) worked with Credito Mujer, which offers group-lending joint liability
loans to women in Mexico. The study uses an encouragement design, randomizing in-person
marketing of Credito Mujer. Take-up of the loan product is 19% in the treatment group,
compared to 6% in the control group. The study finds an increase in revenue but not profits or
household income. Attanasio et al. (2015) randomly offer microcredit to women in Mongolia
and find that it increases self-employment. There is no impact on self-reported income or
profits, with the loans mostly going towards consumption. Meager (2019) presents quantile
estimates that pool the seven studies that were published in tandem, using a Bayesian
framework. She shows that the impacts are quite precisely zero for most of the distribution,
with imprecise estimates pointing to positive impacts for the right tail.
    Several papers on microcredit examine how the contract structure of microloans influ-
ences their impacts. Field et al. (2013) use a randomized experiment in Kolkata, India to
study whether the requirement of high repayment amounts early in the loan period dis-
courages profitable opportunities that entail a high upfront outlay but returns in the longer
run. They find that adding a grace period during which no interest payments are due to
individually-liable microfinance loans increases business investment and profits and decreases
non-business loan use. The trade-off is that the loan default rate was three times as high
in the treatment group as in the control group. Fischer (2013) points out that the joint
liability structure that is common in microcredit could lead to inefficiently low risk-taking.
The paper's theoretical insight is that because fellow group members bear the downside risk
but do not share in the upside risk, they might block entrepreneurs from taking advantage
of high-risk, high-return opportunities. Other work compares group lending to individual
lending (Gin´
            e and Karlan, 2014; Attanasio et al., 2015).




                                              17
Gender
Explaining gender differences in returns to capital
    A follow-up paper to de Mel et al. (2008a) further probes the gender differences in
returns to grants in Sri Lanka (de Mel et al., 2009). The authors argue that women's grants
were "captured" by other household members, but that larger grants were more difficult to
capture. This interpretation is related to the more general point that there is often no rigid
separation between business and family for microentrepreneurs. One way this materializes
is that pressure from family to share income can lead to income hiding and decrease the
likelihood of starting a business or investing in an existing business (de Mel et al., 2009;
Jakiela and Ozier, 2016). This challenge might be especially large for women, who typically
have less power in the family than men. Another way home and business are entangled is
that, with access to capital, an individual faces a choice to spend on household expenses or
the business, and women might put more weight on or have more responsibility for spending
for the household.
    Consistent with this conjecture, Fafchamps et al. (2014) find that in-kind transfers are
more effective than cash transfers in increasing profits for female business owners. Women
are more likely to use cash transfers for household expenses and to make transfers outside the
household. Friedson-Ridenour and Pierotti (2019) find that spousal and societal pressure can
push female entrepreneurs to invest less in their business and to save more for the household
and hide income so as to not have to pay for their spouse's share of expenses. However, not
all studies find support for this idea that pressure from others explains the gender patterns:
Fafchamps et al. (2014) find that external pressure does not play a role in women's lower
business profits.
    Bernhardt et al. (2017) systematically examine whether the pattern that women have
a lower return to capital than men can be explained by these intrahousehold dynamics.
They re-analyze data from prominent studies and find that returns to capital are lower for
women in households with other entrepreneurs than for men who live in households with
other entrepreneurs, but household-level profits do not differ. That is, when women receive
grants or loans, the husband's or other family members' profits increase, pointing to the
money being used for an enterprise other than the woman's own enterprise. Consistent with
this story, women in single-enterprise households have high returns to capital.


                                             18
    Klapper (2011) offers a different explanation, which is that the divergent returns to
loans between men and women is due to the industries they work in, and that adjusting
for the different industry composition, returns to loans do not differ by gender. Industry
can explain much of the raw difference because women tend to work in industries that have
smaller, less efficient firms, with lower potential for growth. An area for further work is to
better understand why women work in industries with lower growth potential or, as suggested
by Hardy and Kagy (2019), more competition.

Impacts of access to credit on women's empowerment
    Another gender-related question in the literature is whether business success improves
women's empowerment and, in turn, children's outcomes. One motivation for microcredit
being focused on women is that women are excluded from other credit channels. But an
additional motivation is that helping women, and specifically giving them earning power,
might increase their decision-making power. Women having a greater say in household
decisions is a desirable end in itself for equity reasons if decision-making is dominated by
men, and is also hypothesized to lead to better outcomes for children, for example if mothers
put more weight on children's health and education than fathers do. Thus, the literature
on microcredit has examined if one of the downstream effects of access to credit is greater
women's empowerment. Many studies such as Banerjee et al. (2015a) find no evidence that
access to microcredit improves women's empowerment. An exception is Angelucci et al.
(2015) who find some impact on women's decision-making in the household.

Recap
    Several studies that offer grants to small businesses find tantalizingly large impacts on
profits. This suggests that, at a minimum, this type of philanthropic intervention could be
helpful to many small firms. The high returns also suggest that this intervention could pay
for itself if the capital could be given in the form of loans, with a high enough repayment rate
and low enough administrative costs. The microfinance industry aims to do this, but several
studies reach a similar conclusion: Microcredit only has meaningful impacts on business
performance for a small share of recipients.
    There are several potential ways to reconcile the findings on grants versus microloans.
The firms targeted in the cash grant studies tend to be somewhat larger and more established



                                               19
than the typical firms receiving microcredit loans. This is consistent with the finding that
microcredit increases profits for only a subset of recipients and being an established firm is
a predictor of being in this subset. In addition, the term structure and other requirements
of microcredit might inhibit the sort of investment that led grants to have large impacts.
These potential reasons suggest that more research on how to identify high-potential mi-
croentrepreneurs (as discussed in section 6) and on how loan terms influence how the capital
is invested would be fruitful.
        A stark pattern across several studies is that grants often improve business outcomes
exclusively for male-run businesses. Recent work identifies one important reason: Money
given to female entrepreneurs is often not invested in their businesses, whether by their
choice or not. In light of this explanation, more work is needed testing if grant and loan
programs can be redesigned to enable women to invest capital they receive in their businesses.


5       Barriers to hiring
        The vast majority of businesses have no employees outside the owner's family. One
potential reason is information frictions combined with firing costs, whereby firms are unsure
of a worker's ability and if they realize after hiring that a worker is low productivity, they
might have legal difficulty firing him. Carranza et al. (2019) find that providing workers
a way to certify their skills to firms can increase employment rates among youth in South
Africa, with part of the mechanism being more information for the firms on the applicants'
skills. They find in their setting that risk aversion about hiring a worker with unknown
skills is an especially salient concern for microentrepreneurs, who are also least able to afford
the fixed cost of setting up a system to assess workers' skills during the application process.
Donovan et al. (2019) find that wages rise more sharply with tenure in developing countries
than developed ones. They interpret this pattern as reflecting a selection effect: Firms have
imperfect information at the time of hiring, and they shed lower-performing workers as these
workers' low ability becomes apparent to the firm.5
        Bassi and Nansamba (2017) examine information frictions about workers' soft skills in
the job search and hiring process. They assess applicants' soft skills and provide the as-
sessment information to applicants and firms in Uganda. They find that doing so increases
    5
    A paper similar in flavor examines how wages vary with age (rather than job tenure), and finds that the
age-wage profile is less steep in developing than developed countries (Lagakos et al., 2018).


                                                    20
the low-but-not-lowest skill workers' likelihood of being hired and also causes low skill ap-
plicants to seek more training. These findings are consistent with both workers and firms
having imperfect information about applicants' skills.
      In contrast, de Mel et al. (2019) do not find evidence that points to hiring frictions. They
offer (male-owned) microenterprises in Sri Lanka a temporary wage subsidy that covers half
the wage for a newly hired employee for six months (34 USD), plus an additional 17 USD
for 2 extra months after that. At baseline 81% of firms has no employees.6 The study
finds 24% take-up of the wage subsidy, with 68% of these firms using it for six months or
more. About half of the take-up is on the extensive margin: the likelihood of having at least
one paid worker increased by 14 percentage points. Most of the hires were known to the
business owner (though hiring a family member was not allowed). However, the effect on
employment does not extend beyond the subsidy period, suggesting that the intervention
was not overcoming a market imperfection but rather just temporarily transferring surplus
to participating firms. The treatment increases firm survival by 8 percentage points after
two years (from a base of 85%), presumably because of the extra surplus the owner received
during the wage subsidy period. Conditional on the business still being in operation, treated
firms do not have higher profits or sales at the two-year mark.
      Alfonsi et al. (2017) highlight another barrier to hiring, which is that an employee's
productivity might be initially low, and a credit-constrained small firm might not be able to
bear this initial period of losses during which wages exceed productivity. This study worked
with a set of unemployed youth and a set of firms in Uganda. One of the interventions
offered firms a wage subsidy to offer on-the-job training to new workers that the researchers
matched to the firm. The study also had a treatment arm that offered workers vocational
training. Many workers in the on-the-job training arm were not successfully matched to
a firm and thus never received the training. Thus, from the workers' perspective, being
offered vocational training was most valuable in increasing skills and initial employment.
Nonetheless, those in the on-the-job training arm also enjoyed an earnings boost compared
to the control group. From the firms' perspective, being matched to a worker for on-the-job
training increased profits, primarily because the trained workers had a longer tenure on the
job. Because on-the-job training is not as visible to outside firms as a credentialed vocational
  6
    The study also had two supplementary interventions, a savings account with matched deposits and
business training.



                                                21
course and because it is firm-specific human capital, it offers the benefit of less competition
for the workers from other firms. Firms trade off this benefit against the benefit of hiring
already-trained workers, who have sector-specific but lack firm-specific skills, and for whom
the firm faces more competition. This suggests that a firm with access to credit that can
offer training can then keep more of the surplus due to having some monopsonistic power
over that worker.
     Another potential constraint on hiring is moral hazard if non-family members put in
less effort and cannot be adequately monitored. This issue is prominent in the development
economics literature in the context of agriculture (Benjamin, 1992), but is likely also rele-
vant in non-agricultural firms. A recent study by Kelley et al. (2019) offers an interesting
case study of how new monitoring technologies can help firms. Privately-run matatus, or
minibuses, are the cornerstone of the transportation system in Nairobi, Kenya. Owners of
matatus employ drivers to operate the vehicles but are limited in their ability to monitor
how much revenue the matatu driver takes in or whether he drives safely; unsafe driving
puts passengers at risk and can increase car repair costs from wear-and-tear or accidents.
     The intervention in Kelley et al. (2019) is a monitoring device installed in the matatu
that tracks the matatu's distance traveled, location, and vertical motion. The distance data
allows the owner to guesstimate the number of trips completed and, hence, the number of
fares collected. Data on location and vertical acceleration inform the owner if the driver has
taken shortcuts on bumpy dirt roads that damage the vehicle.
     Treated drivers engaged in less risky and off-route driving, and repair costs declined by
almost a half. In addition, drivers increased their hours worked per day by about 10% and
seemed to be less likely to under-report revenue. As a result, the owners' profits increased.
During the initial months, owners reprimanded drivers more often, but over time they also
seemed to decrease the target revenue they set for the driver, which is suggestive that owners
learned over time that they had been too distrustful of drivers, who were not shirking as
much as they thought. Because drivers reduced the under-reported earnings and worked
more hours, it is not clear that they benefited, however. As new technologies are developed,
the topic of using technology to monitor employees studied by Kelley et al. (2019) is likely to
be an active area of research. More work is needed on not just the efficiency gains from new
technologies, but also on the distributional consequences, or how workers and firms share
the efficiency gains.


                                              22
Recap
    Only a minority of businesses in developing countries have non-family employees. Stud-
ies have investigated various potential barriers to adding employees such as incomplete infor-
mation about job applicants' attributes, the need to invest in training new hires, and moral
hazard leading to low productivity of hires. These factors do not seem to be the binding con-
straint on expansion for most firms. However, as other frictions such as credit constraints are
eased, labor market frictions could become increasingly important for understanding busi-
ness expansion. In addition, given high youth unemployment in many developing countries,
providing skills training and certification and re-calibrating employment expectations are
and will continue to be important topics from the point of view of the workers' welfare. Fi-
nally, there is a gender angle to this topic that, to my knowledge, has not received extensive
attention in the literature: Being able to hire and delegate certain roles to an employee might
be especially valuable to women micro-entrepreneurs because of the competing demand on
their time from child care and household responsibilities.


6    Microentrepreneurship by choice versus necessity
    While in popular imagination entrepreneurs start businesses because they want to be
their own boss, or to create and build something, or to become rich, the persistent small size
of most microenterprises belies this image. A large literature has studied whether people start
businesses because of these perks of entrepreneurship or as the fallback when they cannot
find adequate paid employment. This dichotomy is over-simplified in that the vast majority
of people would prefer self-employment over sufficiently unattractive paid employment and
would prefer a sufficiently attractive job over self-employment. Nonetheless, several studies
have shed light on whether microentrepreneurs start businesses because of their ambitions
to run large successful companies.
    This literature generally finds that most microentrepreneurs start businesses out of
necessity. Some of the evidence for this is that, when asked, people say the would prefer
jobs with steady wages (G¨
                         unther and Launov, 2012; Calderon et al., 2016). Donovan et al.
(2019) use data on employment transitions to investigate this issue. They use panel data on
employment for several developed and developing countries and show that transitions from
self-employment to being an employee are much more common in poor countries than rich


                                              23
ones, suggestive that self-employment is not an "absorbing state" in developing countries,
but what many people do until they find paid employment. Nonetheless, other studies
find that some individuals prefer entrepreneurial jobs to paid employment, with high ability
individuals selecting into entrepreneurship (Falco and Haywood, 2016; Blattman and Dercon,
2018).
      Another set of studies examines the characteristics of microentrepreneurs and shows
that they more closely resemble people in paid employment than people who run larger
firms. For example, de Mel et al. (2008b) compare traits of microentrepreneurs in Sri Lanka
to two other groups, people running small and medium enterprises with employees and those
employed by someone else. They find that microentrepreneurs resemble wage workers more
than they resemble more successful entrepreneurs.
      In a similar vein, Gindling and Newhouse (2014) use data for several countries and
document that people who run businesses with no employees have less education, on av-
erage, than those in paid employment. While low education speaks to their absolute, not
comparative, (dis)advantage in paid employment, this fact is suggestive of poor employment
prospects leading to self-employment. This study also finds that, among business owners,
education is the strongest predictor of having at least one employee. Interestingly, they find
no gender differences between male and female entrepreneurs in the likelihood of having an
employee.
      Another piece of evidence that people are pushed rather than pulled into entrepreneur-
ship is that negative shocks can trigger self-employment. Adhvaryu and Nyshadham (2017)
document that people sometimes start businesses due to a prolonged illness, switching away
from farm labor, which presumably is more physically taxing than their new occupation.

6.1      Finding the "constrained gazelles" or "gung-ho entrepreneurs"
      One upshot of this strand of the literature is that, while most microentrepreneurs do
not seem poised to run highly profitable, fast growing firms, an important subset of them are
but are held back by policy-fixable constraints, such as imperfect capital markets. Higher
social (and financial) returns could be achieved by targeted lending to this group with a high
return to capital.
      Grimm et al. (2012) use the term "constrained gazelles" for this group and identify
them based on their resembling high-performing small businesses on observable traits yet


                                             24
not being high-performing. Banerjee et al. (2019) use the data from Banerjee et al. (2015a)
to distinguish between "gung-ho entrepreneurs" (those whose target business size is large)
and "reluctant entrepreneurs" (those whose target business size is small).
    Hussam et al. (2018) crowdsource information from the community on which potential
borrowers have a high marginal return to capital within villages in Maharashtra, India.
They ask individuals to rank their peers in terms of the likely increase in profits from extra
capital. By providing 100 USD cash grants to randomly selected individuals who vary in
how the community rated them, the researchers show that the peer rankings have quite
strong predictive power. This result suggests that eliciting the community's views could be
a feasible way to identify high-return micro-lending opportunities. There is also evidence of
incentive problems when people know that their ratings will determine who receives grants,
but the study suggests that it might be possible to ameliorate these problems by using an
incentive compatible elicitation mechanism.
    McKenzie (2017) uses a business plan competition to identify potential gazelles. In
2011, Nigeria conducted a national entrepreneurial incentive scheme named YouWiN! in
which firms or people with ideas for firms competed to receive 50,000 USD in entrepreneurial
grants. This amounts to 25 times GDP per capita. About 24,000 applications were received,
and 6,000 were selected for a 4-day business plan course. The very top applicants were
awarded grants, and then from among the 1,841 firms that submitted good-but-not-great
applications that fell just below that top group, half were randomly assigned to receive the
grant. The grants increased the likelihood of firm entry and survival and boosted sales,
profits, and number of employees.

Recap
    The literature makes a distinction between entrepreneurs by necessity, who might have
modest growth ambitions and skills, and the potential gazelles. With this in mind, a re-
cent line of research has aimed to classify microenterprises into these different categories
in order to target policies accordingly. For example, microcredit or assistance with formal-
ization could then be targeted toward the potential gazelles. Meanwhile, for many other
microentrepreneurs, running a business is not a calling but, rather, the fallback when paid
employment is unavailable. But interventions are often designed with a grander vision of
microentrepreneurship. There may be scope for research that thinks creatively about the


                                              25
needs of this group and how to redesign interventions to best improve their lives.


7        Miscellaneous topics
        This section briefly discusses a few of other themes that arise in the literature on mi-
croenterprises in developing countries.

Access to financial services other than credit
        Many people in developing countries lack access to reliable ways to save. Dupas and
Robinson (2013) offer zero-interest bank accounts to microentrepreneurs in Kenya and find
that for women but not men, bank accounts increase savings and investment (as well as
personal expenditures).
        Uncertainty can be a major deterrent to firm investment (Bloom, 2009). In developing
countries, macroeconomic and political instability are major risks to firms, including mi-
croenterprises. Groh and McKenzie (2016) study Egypt from 2011 to 2013, the tumultuous
period after the "Arab Spring" movement. Many firm owners in this context want to delay
investments until the turmoil is over. The researchers worked with a microfinance institution
and enrolled in their study existing clients who were at a decision point about whether to
renew their loans. The randomized intervention entailed offering insurance against macroe-
conomic/political risk through a product called economic protection plan, or EPP. EPP was
an add-on to a standard 12 month loan from the MFI: In case of an economic/political shock
to the business, EPP pays out 16.7% of loan value; in the case of two shocks, the payment
becomes 25% of the loan value. Events that qualified as a shock were the stock exchange
being suspended for more than 5 days, a curfew being imposed for more than 5 days, a large
increase in inflation, and a specified increase in fuel prices.
        Among the 1,481 clients in the treatment group (those offered EPP), 67% renewed
their loan and 37% purchased EPP. Loan renewal was not significantly different between
the treatment and control groups, so EPP did not make borrowing more attractive, despite
the fact that half of the treated group who took up the loan chose to purchase the EPP
add-on. The study finds no significant effects on investments, either major physical capital
investment or working capital investment such as inventory.7 The authors argue that basis
    7
     A puzzling finding is that the treatment group experiences a 13% decrease in revenue but no significant
effect on profits, suggesting that some component of costs decreased.


                                                    26
risk is unlikely to be the explanation, as past shocks seem to matter for firm performance.
The insurance payout is large and the firms have a relationship with the MFI so trust in the
payout should be high. The firms also seem to understand the product. Thus the authors
interpret the null result as indicating that economic and political risk were not deterring
these firms from investing, contrary to the hypothesis.

Inter-firm relationships
        Several studies examine peer effects and interlinkages among firms. Firm owners' inter-
actions with peers seem to facilitate their adoption of business practices related to formal-
ization and banking (Fafchamps and Quinn, 2018), and to influence their firms' performance
(Fajnzylber et al., 2009). While geographical clustering could facilitate knowledge spillovers
and is associated with higher profits (Ali and Peerlings, 2011), some studies find that ge-
ographic clustering is not enough; business connections are also needed for firm networks
to translate into knowledge flows and innovation (Gebreeyesus and Mohnen, 2013). These
benefits might not be as large for microenterprises, however. Small firms do not benefit, at
least not as much, from formal and informal meetings between owners (Cai and Szeidl, 2018;
Fafchamps and Quinn, 2018). Microenterprises also do not seem to interact with each other
enough for there to be spillover effects on other firms when one firm receives an inspection
visit to verify that it is registered (de Andrade et al., 2013).


8        Gender and entrepreneurship
        An important difference between entrepreneurship in developing and developed coun-
tries is that women run the majority of microenterprises in developing countries, unlike
in developed ones (Klapper, 2011). And on many indicators, female-run microenterprises
underperform their male-run counterparts. Bruhn (2009) analyzes data from several Latin
American countries and finds that women-run firms have lower sales, assets, and profits.
They also are more likely to be home-based. Nix et al. (2015) find lower earnings for self-
employed women compared to men across several sub-Saharan African countries, while Hardy
and Kagy (2018) find a profit gap favoring men among microenterprises in Ghana; in both
cases, adjusting for observable characteristics leaves much of the gender gap unexplained.8
    8
    Hardy and Kagy (2019) provide demand shocks to male and female microentrepreneurs in the garment
industry in Ghana and find that women's businesses have more slack. This research points to another


                                                27
     The prevalence of female-owned businesses and the gender gaps in performance help
explain why many interventions aimed at helping microenterprises, notably microcredit and
business training, focus mostly on female entrepreneurs. The hypothesis that at least im-
plicitly underlies this focus on women is that women are more constrained in their access to
traditional financing and to education. Another reason many organizations focus on helping
female-owned businesses is that their objective is not just to boost household income, but
to also increase women's share of that household income. The rationale is that increasing
women's economic position will increase their personal autonomy and give them more say
in households, with perhaps better outcomes for children as a downstream benefit.
     However, whether these hypotheses are in fact correct is unclear. For business train-
ing, there is limited evidence on how impacts vary by gender. For microcredit, while most
studies are underpowered to examine heterogeneous effects by gender or they focus on one
gender, influential results reported in de Mel et al. (2008a) and companion papers find that
directing capital to men rather than women would generate higher returns. This suggests
that if increasing firm growth and profitability is the main goal, then a focus on just female
entrepreneurs might be misguided. As for broader benefits of helping female businesses, the
current evidence on female-focused programs improving women's empowerment and chil-
dren's outcomes is also scarce.
     At the same time, there is mounting evidence that women do face unique challenges in
running successful businesses, ones that might be amenable to policy fixes. For example,
the lower return to grants given to women is at least partly because the money is less
likely to be invested in her business than when a man receives a grant (Bernhardt et al.,
2017). That suggests a different course correction than redirecting programming toward
men, namely finding ways to ensure that women maintain control over grants or loans given
to them (perhaps by making more of them in-kind). The policy solutions that can address
frictions and power imbalances within households will likely need to be more subtle and
context-specific than current policies.
     More generally, to understand the performance of female-owned businesses, one needs
to understand how intertwined women's business and family lives are. Bruhn (2009) finds
that commitments at home seem to explain part of the gender gap in firm performance, and
Fafchamps et al. (2014) find that a sizable portion of grants given to female business owners
potential source of the gender profit gap, namely demand constraints.


                                                   28
are spent on household expenses. Delecourt and Fitzpatrick (2019) send "mystery shoppers"
to small, owner-run drug stores in Uganda and find that 38% of women and 0% of men bring
their small children to work, and that doing so is associated with lower profits.
    Arguably for all microenterprises, but most certainly for female-owned ones in develop-
ing countries, the separation theorem rarely holds: people cannot or do not decouple their
business from the rest of their lives and maximize the business's profits. Further research
on women's interconnected decisions about their business's and family's finances and their
business and family obligations is an important priority for understanding and narrowing
the gender gap in microenterprise performance.




                                             29
Literature cited
Adhvaryu, A. and A. Nyshadham (2017): "Health, Enterprise, and Labor Complemen-
 tarity in the Household," Journal of Development Economics, 126, 91­111.

Alfonsi, L., O. Bandiera, V. Bassi, R. Burgess, I. Rasul, M. Sulaiman, and
 A. Vitali (2017): "Tackling Youth Unemployment: Evidence from a Labour Market
 Experiment in Uganda," STICERD - Development Economics Papers.

Ali, M. and J. Peerlings (2011): "Value Added of Cluster Membership for Micro En-
 terprises of the Handloom Sector in Ethiopia," World Development, 39, 363­374.

Alibhai, S., N. Buehren, M. Frese, M. Goldstein, S. Papineni, and K. Wolf
 (2019): "Full Esteem Ahead? Mindset-Oriented Business Training In Ethiopia," Policy
 Research Working Paper Series 8892, World Bank.

Angelucci, M., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015): "Microcredit Impacts: Evi-
 dence from a Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos
 Banco," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 151­82.

Attanasio, O., B. Augsburg, R. De Haas, E. Fitzsimons, and H. Harmgart
 (2015): "The Impacts of Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending in Mongo-
 lia," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7, 90­122.

Babbitt, L. G., D. Brown, and N. Mazaheri (2015): "Gender, Entrepreneurship,
 and the Formal-Informal Dilemma: Evidence from Indonesia," World Development, 72,
 163­174.

Banerjee, A., E. Breza, E. Duflo, and C. Kinnan (2019): "Do Credit Constraints
 Limit Entrepreneurship? Heterogeniety in the Retuns to Microfinance," Working Paper.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster, and C. Kinnan (2015a): "The Miracle of
 Microfinance? Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation," American Economic Journal:
 Applied Economics, 7, 22­53.

Banerjee, A., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman (2015b): "Six Randomized Evaluations
 of Microcredit: Introduction and Further Steps," American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 7, 1­21.

Bassi, V. and A. Nansamba (2017): "Tackling Youth Unemployment: Evidence from a
 Labour Market Experiment in Uganda," GLMLIC Working Paper No. 29.

Benhassine, N., D. McKenzie, V. Pouliquen, and M. Santini (2018): "Does In-
 ducing Informal Firms to Formalize Make Sense? Experimental Evidence from Benin,"
 Journal of Public Economics, 157, 1­14.

Benjamin, D. (1992): "Household Composition, Labor Markets, and Labor Demand: Test-
 ing for Separation in Agricultural Models," Econometrica, 60, 287­322.


                                         30
Bernhardt, A., E. Field, R. Pande, and N. Rigol (2017): "Household Matters:
 Revisiting the Returns to Capital among Female Micro-Entrepreneurs," Working Paper
 23358, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Bianchi, M. and M. Bobbba (2013): "Liquidity, Risk, and Occupational Choices," Review
  of Economic Studies, 80, 491­511.

Blattman, C. and S. Dercon (2018): "The Impacts of Industrial and Entrepreneurial
 Work on Income and Health: Experimental Evidence from Ethiopia," American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics, 10, 1­38.

Blattman, C., N. Fiala, and S. Martinez (2014): "Generating Skilled Self-
 Employment in Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Uganda," American
 Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 129, 697­752.

Blattman, C., E. P. Green, J. Jamison, M. C. Lehmann, and J. Annan (2016):
 "The Returns to Microenterprise Support among the Ultrapoor: A Field Experiment in
 Postwar Uganda," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8, 35­64.

Bloom, N. (2009): "The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks," Econometrica, 77, 623­685.

Brooks, W., K. Donovan, and T. R. Johnson (2018): "Mentors or Teachers? Mi-
 croenterprise Training in Kenya," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 10,
 196­221.

Bruhn, Miriam McKenzie, D. (2014): "Entry Regulation and the Formalization of Mi-
 croenterprises in Developing Countries," World Bank Research Observer, 29, 186­201.

Bruhn, M. (2009): "Female-Owned Firms in Latin America: Characteristics, Performance,
 and Obstacles to Growth," Policy Research Working Paper Series 5122, World Bank.

Bruhn, M., D. Karlan, and A. Schoar (2018): "The Impact of Consulting Services on
 Small and Medium Enterprises: Evidence from a Randomized Trial in Mexico," Journal
 of Political Economy, 126, 635­687.

Cai, J. and A. Szeidl (2018): "Interfirm Relationships and Business Performance," Quar-
 terly Journal of Economics, 133, 1229­1282.

Calderon, G., L. Iacovone, and L. Juarez (2016): "Opportunity versus Necessity:
 Understanding the Heterogeneity of Female Micro-Entrepreneurs," The World Bank Eco-
 nomic Review, 30, S86­S96.

Campos, F., M. Frese, M. Goldstein, L. Iacovone, H. C. Johnson, D. McKenzie,
 and M. Mensmann (2017): "Teaching Personal Initiative Beats Traditional Training in
 Boosting Small Business in West Africa," Science, 357, 1287­1290.

Campos, F. M. L., M. P. Goldstein, and D. J. Mckenzie (2018): "How Should the
 Government Bring Small Firms into the Formal System? Experimental Evidence from
 Malawi," Impact Evaluation Series, 8601.

                                          31
Carranza, E., R. Garlick, K. Orkin, and N. Rankin (2019): "Job Search and Hiring
 with Two-Sided Limited Information about Workseekers' Skills," Working Paper.

de Andrade, G. H., M. Bruhn, and D. McKenzie (2013): "A Helping Hand or
  the Long Arm of the Law? Experimental Evidence on What Governments Can Do to
  Formalize Firms," World Bank Economic Review, 30, 1­40.

de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2008a): "Returns to Capital in Mi-
  croenterprises: Evidence from a Field Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123,
  1329­1372.

------ (2008b): "Who Are the Microenterprise Owners? Evidence from Sri Lanka on Tok-
  man v. de Soto," IZA Discussion Paper Series 3511.

------ (2009): "Are Women More Credit Constrained? Experimental Evidence on Gender
  and Microenterprise Returns," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1, 1­32.

------ (2012): "One-Time Transfers of Cash or Capital Have Long-Lasting Effects on Mi-
  croenterprises in Sri Lanka," Science, 335, 962­966.

------ (2013): "The Demand for, and Consequences of, Formalization among Informal Firms
  in Sri Lanka," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5, 122­150.

------ (2014): "Business Training and Female Enterprise Start-Up, Growth, and Dynamics:
  Experimental Evidence from Sri Lanka," Journal of Development Economics, 106, 199­
  210.

------ (2019): "Labor Drops: Experimental Evidence on the Return to Additional Labor
  in Microenterprises," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 11, 202­235.

de Soto, H. (1989): The Other Path: The Invisible Revolution in the Third World, New
  York: Harper & Row New York.

------ (2000): The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails
  Everywhere Else, New York: Basic Civitas Books.

Delecourt, S. and Fitzpatrick (2019): "The Baby Profit Gap: How Childcare Duties
 Impact Entrepreneurial Performance," Working paper, Stanford University.

Demenet, A., M. Razafindrakoto, and F. Roubaud (2016): "Do Informal Busi-
 nesses Gain from Registration and How? Panel Data Evidence from Vietnam," World
 Development, 84, 326­341.

Donovan, K., W. J. Lu, and T. Schoellman (2019): "Labor Market Flows and De-
 velopment," Working Paper.

Drexler, A., G. Fischer, and A. Schoar (2014): "Keeping It Simple: Financial
 Literacy and Rules of Thumb," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6, 1­
 31.

                                           32
Dupas, P. and J. Robinson (2013): "Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Develop-
 ment: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya," American Economic Journal: Applied
 Economics, 5, 163­192.

Fafchamps, M., D. McKenzie, S. Quinn, and C. Woodruff (2014): "Microenterprise
  Growth and the Flypaper Effect: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment in Ghana,"
  Journal of Development Economics, 106, 211­226.

Fafchamps, M. and S. Quinn (2018): "Networks and Manufacturing Firms in Africa:
  Results from a Randomized Field Experiment," The World Bank Economic Review, 32,
  656­675.

Fajnzylber, P., W. F. Maloney, and G. V. Montes-Rojas (2009): "Releasing
  Constraints to Growth or Pushing on a String? Policies and Performance of Mexican
  Micro-Firms," Journal of Development Studies, 45, 1027­1047.

------ (2011): "Does Formality Improve Micro-Firm Performance? Evidence from the
  Brazilian SIMPLES Program," Journal of Development Economics, 94, 262­276.

Falco, P. and L. Haywood (2016): "Entrepreneurship versus Joblessness: Explaining
  the Rise in Self-Employment," Journal of Development Economics, 118, 245­265.

Fiala, N. (2018): "Returns to Microcredit, Cash Grants and Training for Male and Female
  Microentrepreneurs in Uganda," World Development, 105, 189­200.

Field, E., S. Jayachandran, and R. Pande (2010): "Do Traditional Institutions Con-
  strain Female Entrepreneurship? A Field Experiment on Business Training in India,"
  American Economic Review, 100, 125­129.

Field, E., S. Jayachandran, R. Pande, and N. Rigol (2016): "Friendship at Work:
  Can Peer Effects Catalyze Female Entrepreneurship?" American Economic Journal: Eco-
  nomic Policy, 8, 125­153.

Field, E., R. Pande, J. Papp, and N. Rigol (2013): "Does the Classic Microfinance
  Model Discourage Entrepreneurship among the Poor? Experimental Evidence from India,"
  American Economic Review, 103, 2196­2226.

Fischer, G. (2013): "Contract Structure, Risk-Sharing, and Investment Choice," Econo-
  metrica, 81, 883­939.

Friedson-Ridenour, S. and R. S. Pierotti (2019): "Competing Priorities: Women's
 Microenterprises and Household Relationships," World Development, 121, 53­62.

Galiani, S., M. Mele ´ndez, and C. N. Ahumada (2017): "On the Effect of the Costs
 of Operating Formally: New Experimental Evidence," Labour Economics, 45, 143­157.

Garlick, R., K. Orkin, and S. Quinn (2019): "Call Me Maybe: Experimental Evidence
 on Frequency and Medium Effects in Microenterprise Surveys," World Bank Economic
 Review, forthcoming.

                                          33
Gebreeyesus, M. and P. Mohnen (2013): "Innovation Performance and Embeddedness
 in Networks: Evidence from the Ethiopian Footwear Cluster," World Development, 41,
 302­316.

Gindling, T. and D. Newhouse (2014): "Self-Employment in the Developing World,"
 World Development, 56, 313­331.
   ´, X. and D. S. Karlan (2014): "Group versus Individual Liability: Short and Long
Gine
 Term Evidence from Philippine Microcredit Lending Groups," Journal of Development
 Economics, 107, 65­83.
   ´, X. and G. Mansuri (2019): "Money or Management? A Field Experiment on
Gine
 Constraints to Entrepreneurship in Rural Pakistan," Working paper.

Grimm, M., P. Knorringa, and J. Lay (2012): "Constrained Gazelles: High Potentials
 in West Africa's Informal Economy," World Development, 40, 1352­1368.

Groh, M. and D. McKenzie (2016): "Macroinsurance for Microenterprises: A Random-
 ized Experiment in Post-Revolution Egypt," Journal of Development Economics, 118,
 13­25.
 ¨ nther, I. and A. Launov (2012): "Informal Employment in Developing Countries:
Gu
 Opportunity or Last Resort?" Journal of Development Economics, 97, 88­98.

Hardy, M. and G. Kagy (2018): "Mind the (Profit) Gap: Why Are Female Enterprise
 Owners Earning Less than Men?" AEA Papers and Proceedings, 108, 252­255.

------ (2019): "It's Getting Crowded in Here: Experimental Evidence of Demand Con-
  straints in the Gender Profit Gap," Working paper.

Haushofer, J. and J. Shapiro (2016): "The Short-Term Impact of Unconditional Cash
 Transfers to the Poor: Experimental Evidence from Kenya," Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 131, 1973­2042.

Hussam, R., N. Rigol, and B. Roth (2018): "Targeting High Ability Entrepreneurs
 Using Community Information: Mechanism Design in the Field," Working paper.

Jakiela, P. and O. Ozier (2016): "Does Africa Need a Rotten Kin Theorem? Experi-
  mental Evidence from Village Economies," Review of Economic Studies, 83, 231­268.

Jaramillo, M. (2009): "Is There Demand for Formality among Informal Firms? Evidence
  from Microfirms in Downtown Lima," German Development Institute Discussion Paper.

Jayachandran, S. (2019): "Social Norms as a Barrier to Women's Employment in Devel-
  oping Countries," Working paper, Northwestern University.

Karlan, D. and M. Valdivia (2011): "Teaching Entrepreneurship: Impact of Business
 Training and Microfinance Clients and Institutions," Review of Economics and Statistics,
 93, 510­527.

                                           34
Kelley, E., G. Lane, and D. Scho  ¨ nholzer (2019): "The Impact of Monitoring Tech-
 nologies on Contracts and Employee Behavior: Experimental Evidence from Kenya's
 Matatu Industry," Job Market Paper.

Klapper, Leora F. Parker, S. C. (2011): "Gender and the Business Environment for
 New Firm Creation," World Bank Research Observer, 26, 237­257.

Klinger, B. and M. Schu   ¨ ndeln (2011): "Can Entrepreneurial Activity Be Taught?
 Quasi-Experimental Evidence from Central America," World Development, 39, 1592­1610.

La Porta, R. and A. Shleifer (2014): "Informality and Development," Journal of
 Economic Perspectives, 28, 109­126.

Lafortune, J., J. Riutort, and J. Tessada (2018): "Role Models or Individual Con-
 sulting: The Impact of Personalizing Micro-Entrepreneurship Training," American Eco-
 nomic Journal: Applied Economics, 10, 222­245.

Lagakos, D., B. Moll, T. Porzio, N. Qian, and T. Schoellman (2018): "Life Cycle
  Wage Growth across Countries," Journal of Political Economy, 126, 797­849.

Mano, Y., A. Iddrisu, Y. Yoshino, and T. Sonobe (2012): "How Can Micro and
 Small Enterprises in Sub-Saharan Africa Become More Productive? The Impacts of Ex-
 perimental Basic Managerial Training," World Development, 40, 458­468.

McKenzie, D. (2017): "Identifying and Spurring High-Growth Entrepreneurship: Exper-
 imental Evidence from a Business Plan Competition," American Economic Review, 107,
 2278­2307.

McKenzie, D. and O. S. Puerto (2017): "Growing Markets through Business Train-
 ing for Female Entrepreneurs: A Market-Level Randomized Experiment in Kenya," IZA
 Discussion Papers 10615, Institute of Labor Economics (IZA).

McKenzie, D. and Y. S. Sakho (2010): "Does It Pay Firms to Register for Taxes? The
 Impact of Formality on Firm Profitability," Journal of Development Economics, 91, 15­24.

McKenzie, D. and C. Woodruff (2008): "Experimental Evidence on Returns to Capital
 and Access to Finance in Mexico," World Bank Economic Review, 22, 457­482.

------ (2014): "What Are We Learning from Business Training and Entrepreneurship Eval-
  uations around the Developing World?" World Bank Research Observer, 29, 48­82.

Meager, R. (2019): "Understanding the Average Impact of Microcredit Expansions: A
 Bayesian Hierarchical Analysis of Seven Randomized Experiments," American Economic
 Journal: Applied Economics, 11, 57­91.

Monteiro, J. C. and J. J. Assunc      ~ o (2012): "Coming Out of the Shadows? Esti-
                                     ¸a
 mating the Impact of Bureaucracy Simplification and Tax Cut on Formality in Brazilian
 Microenterprises," Journal of Development Economics, 99, 105­115.


                                           35
Nix, E., E. Gamberoni, and R. Heath (2015): "Bridging the Gender Gap: Identifying
  What Is Holding Self-Employed Women Back in Ghana, Rwanda, Tanzania, and the
  Republic of Congo," World Bank Economic Review, 30, 501­512.

Quinn, S. and C. Woodruff (2019): "Experiments and Entrepreneurship in Developing
 Countries," Annual Review of Economics, 11.

Rand, J. and N. Torm (2012): "The Benefits of Formalization: Evidence from Vietnamese
 Manufacturing SMEs," World Development, 40, 983­998.

Rothenberg, A. D., A. Gaduh, N. E. Burger, C. Chazali, I. Tjandraningsih,
 R. Radikun, C. Sutera, and S. Weilant (2016): "Rethinking Indonesia's Informal
 Sector," World Development, 80, 96­113.

Ubfal, D., I. Arraiz, D. W. Beuermann, M. Frese, A. Maffioli, and D. Verch
 (2019): "The Impact of Soft-Skills Training for Entrepreneurs in Jamaica," Working paper.

Ulyssea, G. (2018): "Firms, Informality, and Development: Theory and Evidence from
 Brazil," American Economic Review, 108, 2015­2047.

Valdivia, M. (2015): "Business Training Plus for Female Entrepreneurship? Short and
 Medium-Term Experimental Evidence from Peru," Journal of Development Economics,
 113, 33­51.




                                           36
