                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   ASSOCIATIVE MEMORY AND BELIEF FORMATION

                                         Benjamin Enke
                                       Frederik Schwerter
                                      Florian Zimmermann

                                       Working Paper 26664
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26664


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin Enke, Frederik Schwerter, and Florian Zimmermann. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Associative Memory and Belief Formation
Benjamin Enke, Frederik Schwerter, and Florian Zimmermann
NBER Working Paper No. 26664
January 2020
JEL No. D03

                                           ABSTRACT

Information is often embedded in memorable contexts, which may cue the asymmetric recall of
similar past news through associative memory. We design a theory-driven experiment, in which
participants observe signals about hypothetical companies. Here, identical signal realizations are
communicated with identical contexts: stories and images. Because participants asymmetrically
remember those past signals that get cued by the current context, beliefs systematically overreact.
This overreaction depends in predictable ways on the signal history; the correlation between
signals and contexts; and the scope for forgetting and associative memory. We quantify these
results by structurally estimating a model of associative recall.


Benjamin Enke                                     Florian Zimmermann
Department of Economics                           University of Bonn
Harvard University                                Schaumburg-Lippe-Str. 3
Littauer M008                                     Bonn, NRW 53113
Cambridge, MA 02138                               Bonn
and NBER                                          florian.zimmermann@briq-institute.org
enke@fas.harvard.edu

Frederik Schwerter
Institute of Applied Microeconomics
Adenauerallee 24
53113 Bonn, Germany
frederik.schwerter@uni-koeln.de




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/4247
1    Introduction
This paper experimentally studies the role of associative memory for the formation of be-
liefs. In textbook models of belief formation, memory imperfections play no role: agents
combine prior knowledge with current information, and yesterday's belief equals today's
prior. Our paper starts from the premise that people do not constantly have access to
their beliefs about every potentially relevant state of the world. Rather, when people are
prodded to act on or update their beliefs, they need to reconstruct their prior knowledge
and beliefs from memory. This observation raises the empirical question how people re-
trieve prior information, and which features of news make it more or less likely for
memory traces to be recollected.
    The second observation that motivates our paper is that real-world information sig-
nals typically do not just consist of abstract information. Rather, information is often
embedded in memorable contexts, by which we mean intrinsically uninformative en-
vironmental features that accompany information, such as stories and narratives, im-
ages, emotions, or sounds. Oftentimes, similar news are embedded in similar contexts.
For example, when individuals receive negative feedback about their performance, these
negative news are often associated with scolding and public shaming. Similarly, when
good news prevail in the stock market, people are disproportionately exposed to bulls,
upward-sloping trend lines, and good-times stories. To take yet another example, when
immigration opponents relay negative information about the "typical" character traits
of immigrants, then this often occurs through similar stories and images involving theft
and other forms of violence.
    The observations (i) that people may need to reconstruct prior information from
memory and (ii) that similar news are often embedded in similar memorable contexts
motivate the question about the role of associative recall for belief formation. Associative
recall refers to the idea that people are more likely to recollect items that are cued by cur-
rent items (here: the current context). The associative nature of memory has recently
received increased attention in the theory literature (Mullainathan, 2002; Bordalo et
al., 2019b). A central prediction that emerges from this body of work is that asymmetric
context-cued recall could lead to overreaction: after receipt of a piece of news, people
reconstruct past knowledge from memory, yet predominantly remember those past news
that appeared in similar contexts as today's news. As a consequence, beliefs might look
like they overreact to recent news, purely as a result of how prior knowledge is recon-
structed. Yet even though overreaction in beliefs about macroeconomic variables and
geopolitical events is the object of an active line of research (Augenblick and Rabin,
2018; Bordalo et al., 2018) and has been argued to reflect the effects of memorable
narratives (Shiller, 2019), direct empirical evidence on a potential link between overre-


                                              1
action and memory is scarce.
   We present laboratory experiments that are structured around the predictions of a
simple formal framework that applies the idea of associative recall to belief formation,
based on the formulations in Bordalo et al. (2019b) and Mullainathan (2002). In this
model, decision-makers (i) have imperfect memory; (ii) are more likely to recollect a
piece of news from the past if the context in which it is experienced is similar to today's
context; and (iii) are at least partially naïve about their memory imperfections. This styl-
ized model predicts overreaction in beliefs. Importantly, in the model, this overreaction
does not occur because people incorporate the current signal in some suboptimal way,
but only because they asymmetrically retrieve past signals. The model makes predictions
about how such overreaction depends on the signal history, the correlation structure be-
tween signals and contexts, the imperfection of memory, or the relevance of associative
recall. Our experimental treatments are tightly designed around these predictions.
   We propose a new experimental paradigm to investigate the role of associative mem-
ory for belief formation in an economic decision context. This paradigm builds a bridge
between (i) the types of tightly-controlled, model-based, and financially incentivized de-
signs that dominate modern experimental economics research on bounded rationality
and (ii) psychological paradigms on cued recall problems. In our experiment, partici-
pants predict the stock market value of multiple hypothetical companies, an intuitive
exercise for participants. The experiment comprises two distinct periods that we think
of as "past" and "present." Across both periods, a subject sequentially observes pieces
of news about a company on their decision screen, where each piece of news takes on
the value +10 or -10. The value of a company is deterministic and given by 100 plus
the sum of all news that were shown up to a given point in time. As in the motivating
examples, the news are not communicated to subjects as mere abstract numbers but
are embedded in a context, which consists of a story and an image that relate to the
piece of news. For example, for one company, a positive signal would be shown with
an (intrinsically uninformative) story about the company having launched a successful
advertisement campaign with a celebrity, accompanied by a picture of that celebrity.
   In the baseline version of the experiment, as in the motivating examples, identical
news are embedded in identical contexts: there is a one-to-one mapping between {Com-
pany × type of news} and context. That is, for each company, all positive news are
communicated using the same context, and all negative news are communicated using
the same context. However, the same context is never used for different types of news
or for different companies. All of this is known to subjects.
   In the first period of the experiment, a subject sequentially observes a weakly positive
number of news for a company and then states a first belief about the value of that com-
pany. This process is repeated for all companies. Using the data on first-period beliefs,

                                             2
we verify that ­ absent memory constraints ­ subjects understand our new paradigm
and are well-capable of aggregating the signals into a rational guess.
   After the first period of the experiment, subjects work on an unrelated real effort task
for 15 minutes to activate long-term memory. In the second period, subjects observe up
to one additional piece of news for a company and immediately after state their second-
period belief about the value of that company. In addition, subjects explicitly indicate
how many positive or negative signals they recall having seen throughout the experi-
ment. Again, this procedure is repeated for all companies. As before, the true value of a
company is given by 100 plus the sum of all signals that have accumulated throughout
the entire experiment, including in the first period. The basic intuition behind this ex-
perimental setup is that observing a particular piece of news in the second period might
make it more likely for subjects to (asymmetrically) remember first-period news that
were communicated in the same context.
   In this setup, our interest lies in evaluating the extent to which second-period beliefs
overreact with respect to the second-period signal. Because of the simple deterministic
structure of the experiment, the prediction of a rational model is that the OLS coefficient
in a regression of second-period beliefs on second-period signals equals one. Likewise,
a version of our model with imperfect but no associative memory also predicts a regres-
sion coefficient of one. In contrast, our framework predicts that, if context and news are
positively correlated, (i) the OLS coefficient is larger than one, meaning that second-
period beliefs overreact; (ii) overreaction increases in the number of first-period signals
that take on the same realization as the second-period signal (because more first-period
news can be cued); (iii) overreaction disappears if memory is manipulated to be per-
fect; and (iv) overreaction disappears if associative recall is exogenously shut down. All
of these predictions hold when context and news are always linked in the same way.
In contrast, when signals suddenly appear in a context that was previously associated
with the opposite type of signal, our framework predicts that beliefs under- rather than
overreact (prediction (v)). Our experiments with a total of 830 lab subjects were pre-
registered to test these predictions, including a pre-analysis plan.
   We test prediction (i) using the baseline treatment variation Main discussed above.
We find that second-period beliefs strongly overreact with respect to the second-period
signal: the aggregate OLS regression coefficient is 1.10, substantially larger than its
rational or imperfect-but-no-associative-recall benchmark of one.
   In a follow-up treatment, we document that overreaction in beliefs extends to eco-
nomic choices. We implement the same setup as in treatment Main, except that we do
not elicit participants' beliefs about the value of the hypothetical companies but instead
participants' willingness-to-pay. Here, reported willingness-to-pay also strongly overre-
acts with respect to the second-period signal, with an aggregate OLS coefficient of 1.11.

                                            3
   Having established the baseline phenomenon of overreaction, we next turn to exoge-
nous variation in our model parameters and hence direct causal evidence for the role
of memory in overreaction. As a first piece of causal evidence, we study the effect of
the signal history (prediction (ii)). As predicted by our model, the magnitude of over-
reaction is strongly increasing in the number of first-period signals that get cued by the
second-period signal. For instance, when subjects do not observe any first-period signals
that match the second-period signal, their beliefs do not overreact at all. We verify that
subjects' direct recall data further support our findings on participant beliefs: subjects
are much better at recalling the frequency of those first-period signals that got com-
municated in the same context as the second-period signal. These patterns cannot be
explained by recency effects and directly point to a role of associative recall for overre-
action.
   To provide further causal evidence for the role of imperfect and associative memory,
we turn to testing predictions (iii) and (iv). To this effect, we exogenously manipulate
the strength (or relevance) of both imperfect and associative memory. To show that
imperfect memory is necessary in order for overreaction to arise in our setup, we intro-
duce treatment Reminder. This treatment follows exactly the same structure as condition
Main, except that before subjects observe the second-period signal for a given company,
they are reminded of their own first-period belief. Viewed through the lens of our formal
framework, this treatment eliminates the imperfection of memory, so that asymmetric
recall and hence overreaction can no longer take place. We find that subjects' beliefs
indeed do not overreact in treatment Reminder.
   Having documented the role of imperfect memory for overreaction, we next directly
manipulate the relevance of associative recall. In our model, associativeness operates
via identical contexts. Thus, in order to show that it is indeed associative memory that
generates overreaction in our experiments, treatment No Cue follows the same structure
as condition Main, except that each piece of news is communicated with a different con-
text. That is, subjects never observe the same story or image twice, even if they receive
the same signal for a given company twice. As predicted by the model, overreaction dis-
appears entirely in No Cue, and the treatment difference in overreaction between Main
and No Cue is quantitatively large and statistically significant. Again, all of these results
hold not only when we consider participants' beliefs but also when we directly look at
their reported recall of first-period signals.
   In all experiments reported above, types of news and contexts (stories and images)
were connected through a one-to-one mapping: all positive signals for a given company
appeared with the same context, and all negative signals appeared with the same (yet
different) context. In treatment Underreaction, we modify this correlation structure be-
tween signals and contexts to test prediction (v) above. Specifically, in the second period

                                                 4
of the experiment, positive signals are communicated with the context that was associ-
ated with negative signals for that same company in the first period. Likewise, negative
signals for a company appear in the context that was previously associated with positive
signals for that same company. In this treatment, our formal framework predicts that
beliefs should underreact to the last signal because it selectively cues the retrieval of
signals that took on a different value than the current signal. We find that beliefs in Un-
derreaction systematically underreact, also relative to a control treatment Underreaction
reminder that reminds participants of their first-period beliefs.
   Because this paper focuses on the role of associative recall conditional on the exis-
tence of forgetting in the first place, our model and baseline treatments are agnostic
about whether forgetting arises due to the time lag between the first and second period,
due to general memory load, or due to what memory researchers call "interference:"
memory imperfections that arise from the similarity of news (+10 and -10) across the
different companies. Still, to shed some light on this issue, we also implement variations
of our experiment in which we vary the length of the time lag and the presence of inter-
ference. While we discuss the details of these treatments in Section 6, the results suggest
an important role for interference in shaping memory constraints.
   All of our main results are derived from theoretically-motivated reduced-form regres-
sions. In complementary analyses in the final part of the paper, we structurally estimate
our stylized model, in particular the parameters that govern the imperfection of memory
and the strength of associative recall. The results of our estimations show that associa-
tive recall plays a quantitatively large role in generating observed beliefs. For example,
our parameter estimates suggest that the probability of accurately recalling a piece of
news is 50% (30 percentage points) higher if it got cued by the second-period signal.
We further document that our simple model matches the observed data well: the model
parameters that are estimated from participants' beliefs data accurately predict subjects'
stated recall.
   In summary, the central contributions of our paper are threefold: (i) the first ex-
perimental economics investigation of the role of associative memory for belief forma-
tion and choice; (ii) in a novel model-based decision environment that builds a bridge
between quantitative economic decision tasks and psychological cued recall problems;
and (iii) the first structural quantification of the roles of imperfect and associative recall
for belief formation. Our paper hence fits into an emerging literature that has argued
for the importance of associative memory for economics. Mullainathan (2002) and Bor-
dalo et al. (2019b) present models of how cued recall shapes economic decision-making
across a broad set of domains. Models on cuing effects in consumption include Laibson
(2001) and Bernheim and Rangel (2004). Related theoretical work has investigated the
implications of associative recall in applied settings such as updating biases (Gennaioli

                                              5
and Shleifer, 2010), financial markets (Bodoh-Creed, 2013; Bordalo et al., 2017, 2018;
Wachter and Kahana, 2019), and self-esteem (Koszegi et al., 2019). ¹ Thus far, this lit-
erature is theoretical in nature. As much of the simple formalism that structures our
experiments directly draws from this literature, we view our experiments as providing
some of the first direct evidence from tightly structured economic decision making tasks
in relation to this emerging body of theoretical work.
    Our work builds on a long psychology literature on episodic memory, which is the
part of long-term memory that stores information about events and experiences. Asso-
ciative recall is usually thought of as a component of episodic memory. Psychological
experiments on associative recall exhibit a different structure than the experiments that
are presented here (see Kahana, 2012, for an overview). These typically consist of ex-
plicit cued recall problems (such as with words), rather than model-driven quantitative
economic decision tasks. Also, psychological experiments do not focus on the implica-
tions of associative recall for beliefs or willingness-to-pay, as we do here. An important
concept in psychological research, which we also leverage in our experimental design, is
that of item similarity (Tversky, 1977). For example, Bordalo et al. (2019a) present an
experiment on selective recall of abstract images that shows a link between associative
memory and the representativeness heuristic.
    Finally, our work also relates to work that documents overreaction or excess move-
ment in survey expectations (Augenblick and Rabin, 2018; Bordalo et al., 2018, 2017).
We discuss the relationship between this line of work and our results in the Conclusion.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 offers a stylized formal
framework that motivates the experimental design and structures the empirical analysis.
Section 3 describes the experimental design, implementation, and pre-registration. Sec-
tions 4 and 5 present the main results, and Section 6 evidence aimed at understanding
mechanisms. Section 7 estimates the model and Section 8 concludes.




    ¹ Other research in economics on memory that does not focus on associative recall includes work on
heuristics (Wilson, 2014), the role of personal experiences (Schwerter and Zimmermann, 2019; Herz and
Taubinsky, 2017; Malmendier and Nagel, 2015) and motivated (self-serving) memory (Zimmermann,
forthcoming; Carlson et al., 2018; Huffman et al., 2018). More broadly, our paper also relates to the
recent experimental literature on bounded rationality, in particular work that has focused on the micro-
foundations behind behavioral anomalies (Enke and Zimmermann, 2019; Enke, 2017; Enke and Graeber,
2019; Esponda and Vespa, 2016; Martínez-Marquina et al., 2017; Dertwinkel-Kalt et al., 2017; Frydman
and Jin, 2018; Hartzmark et al., 2019).


                                                   6
2     Theoretical Framework

2.1    Setup
This section presents a stylized model to guide the design of the experiments and struc-
ture the empirical analysis. The mechanics of the model directly build on some of the
formulations in Mullainathan (2002) and Bordalo et al. (2019b). The framework rests
on three key assumptions: (i) people may forget prior knowledge, so that they need to
reconstruct it from memory; (ii) this recollection process is subject to associative recall,
meaning that news are more likely to get remembered if they were observed in a con-
text that is similar to the context in which today's signal is observed; and (iii) people are
(at least partially) naïve about their biased memory technology. In this model, decision-
makers behave optimally conditional on what they recall. This means that we abstract
away from additional behavioral assumptions that the literature on associative memory
has incorporated, such as salience or rehearsal.
    Consider a decision-maker (DM) who forms beliefs about the state of a time-varying
stochastic variable  t with initial value v . We consider two periods that we will think
of as "past" and "present." In any given period t ,  t is given by its initial value plus the
sum of all news n x that have accumulated up to this point, where n x  {-q, q}. News
are equally likely and i.i.d. We will use the terms "news" and "signal" interchangeably.
    A piece of news n x is associated with a memorable context c x  { L , H }. In the "past",
                                  k
k news arrive, so that 1 = v +    x =1
                                         n x . In t = 1, there is a one-to-one mapping between
type of news (positive or negative) and context (high or low): n x = n y  c x = c y .
    In the "present" ( t = 2), the DM observes one final piece of news nk+1 . Thus:

                                                k
                                  2 = v +             n x + nk+1                          (1)
                                               x =1


Just as in t = 1, the piece of news is associated with a context. We will consider two
regimes, though for any given DM the prevailing regime is known. In the first regime,
second-period news and contexts are associated in the same way as in the first period:
positive news appear in a "high" context and negative news in a "low" context. In the
second regime, the DM receives second-period news in a context opposite to what he was
exposed to in the first period, meaning that he observes positive news in a "low" context
and negative news in a "high" one. As a shorthand for this "correlation" between news
and context, we define

                  1    if   P (ck+1 = H |nk+1 = q) = P (ck+1 = L |nk+1 = -q) = 1
          
                 -1    if   P (ck+1 = L |nk+1 = q) = P (ck+1 = H |nk+1 = -q) = 1


                                                7
2.2     Memory and Beliefs
Our object of interest is the extent to which the DM's belief about 2 in t = 2 responds
to the latest piece of news nk+1 . A rational (or Bayesian, though there is no uncertainty
                                                            k
here) DM would correctly predict 2 = v +                    x =1
                                                                   n x + nk+1 .
    Suppose instead that the DM potentially forgets some of the news between t = 1
and t = 2. Thus, his belief (after observing nk+1 ) is given by

                                                    k
                                      b2 = v +          m x n x + nk+1 ,                                (2)
                                                 x =1


where m x  {0, 1} denotes whether the DM remembers piece of news n x .
    Whether or not the DM remembers a piece of news is determined by both (i) imper-
fect and (ii) associative memory. First, by imperfect recall we mean that, irrespective of
the piece of news, there is some probability r  [0, 1) that the DM will remember. The
reduced-form assumption of imperfect recall is a shorthand for different mechanisms
that have been highlighted in the psychological literature. For now, we will assume that
the parameter r is exogenously given, though our experimental design and results will
shed some light on what induces imperfect memory in the first place.
    Second, by associative recall we mean that the probability of recalling a piece of
news from the past is higher if it is cued by today's signal. That is, a past signal is more
likely to get remembered if it occurred with the same context as today's signal. Formally,
there is an increase in the probability of recalling (1 - r )a, a  (0, 1], if the context ck+1
that is associated with nk+1 is the same as the context that is associated with news n x .
    We assume that the DM forms beliefs exclusively from what he recalls and is not
aware of his biased memory technology. This implies naïveté about memory imperfec-
tions as in Mullainathan (2002). ² We have:

                                 1   with probability              r + (1 - r )a1c x =ck+1
                      mx =                                                                              (3)
                                 0           else

Denote by z  0 the number of news in t = 1 that were observed in the same context as
nk+1 and hence got "cued." Doing straightforward algebra, the expected belief in period
t = 2 is then given by:




      ² In principle, naïveté could come in two forms: (i) the DM fails to realize that he sometimes forgets,
i.e., that there are signals he does not recall; (ii) the DM realizes that he sometimes forgets, but he does
not take into account that his recall is associative and hence asymmetric. In Appendix A.1, we formalize
these types of naïveté and show that our predictions are robust to assuming partial naïveté.


                                                        8
                                                    k
               E [ b2 |n x , nk+1 ] = v + nk+1 +          mx nx
                                                   x =1
                                                     k                z
                                 = v + nk+1 +               r nx +          (1 - r )an x                         (4)
                                                   x =1              x =1
                                                                                z                   k
                                 = v + nk+1 + [ r +  (1 - r )a]                       nx + r                nx   (5)
                                                                               x =1               x =z +1
                                                                                       k
                                 = v + 1 +  z (1 - r )a nk+1 + r                             nx                  (6)
                                                                                      x =1
                                         Object of interest

    Equation (6), in particular the bracketed term, is the core expression that we subject
to systematic experimental tests. If the agent is rational ( r = 1), second-period beliefs
will respond with a coefficient of one to variation in the second-period signal. Similarly,
if the agent exhibits imperfect ( r < 1) but no associative (a = 0) recall, the bracketed
term equals one. On the other hand, viewed through the lens of imperfect and associa-
tive memory, equation (6) suggests that beliefs will overreact if context and news are
positively correlated ( = 1). At the same time, the equation clarifies that overreaction
does not occur because the agent incorporates the last signal in some suboptimal way,
but only because he asymmetrically retrieves first-period signals. ³
    In our experiments, we exogenously manipulate the components of the bracketed ex-
pression. This suggests the following abstract testable hypotheses, which we concretize
for our experimental implementation in Section 3:

Hypotheses.
   1. If the correlation between news and context is positive ( = 1), expectations overreact
       to today's news, on average. Put differently, expectations are more sensitive to past
       news that took on the same realization as today's news.

   2. Overreaction increases in the number of past news that were communicated in the
       same context as today's news (z ).

   3. Overreaction increases in the imperfection of memory (1 - r ).

   4. Overreaction increases in the strength or relevance of associative recall (a).

   5. If the correlation between news and context is negative ( = -1), expectations un-
       derreact to today's news, on average.
    ³ Moreover, equation (5) clarifies that this overreaction can equivalently be understood as increased
sensitivity of beliefs to past news that were communicated in the same context as today's news (the third
term), relative to news that were communicated in a different context (the fourth term in eq. (5)).


                                                        9
    6. This underreaction increases in the number of past news that there were communi-
        cated in the same context as today's news.

    7. Underreaction increases in the imperfection of memory (1 - r ).

    It is worth highlighting that these predictions rely on the presence of associative
recall a > 0. Models of recency bias (Fudenberg et al., 2014) or optimized responses
to imperfect memory (Wilson, 2014) do not generate this joint set of predictions. For
example, recency bias predicts overreaction, but not that overreaction depends on the
history of news, or that it disappears once associative recall is shut down.



3       Experimental Design
Our experimental design is guided by the following design objectives: (i) a decision
setup that is closely tied to the model in Section 2; (ii) a task that is very intuitive and
simple, conditional on what is being recalled; (iii) to build a bridge between the tightly-
controlled and quantitative designs that dominate modern experimental economics re-
search on the one hand and psychological paradigms on cued recall problems on the
other hand; (iv) exogenous variation in the key model parameters; and (v) incentive-
compatible belief elicitation.


3.1     Experimental Setup
Task.    To isolate the role of memory, we implemented a simple deterministic decision
environment in which, absent potential memory constraints, behaving rationally is triv-
ial. This ensures that results are not conflated or noised up by subjects having to go
through non-trivial Bayes'-rule-type calculations. The experiment consisted of two peri-
ods, as summarized in Figure 1. In both periods, participants estimate the stock market
value of hypothetical companies.


First period.    Continuing the notation from Section 2, the value of company j in period
t = 1 is given by a baseline value, v = 100, plus the sum of all news about that company
in t = 1:
                                                     kj

                                      j ,1 = 100 +          nx .                        (7)
                                                     x =1




                                             10
                                  Figure 1: Experimental Timeline

   COMPANYi            COMPANY x ii           COMPANYiv                   COMPANYi x
  news period-1 . . . news period-1      news period-2 signal . . . news period-2 signal
 display belief       display belief    display belief  recall      display belief  recall
                                                                                                    t
                                   Time                                                 Question-
              Period 1             Gap                         Period 2
                                                                                         naire




where k j  {0, 1, 2, 3} is the number of signals in t = 1.  News were equally likely to be
positive, n x = 10, or negative, n x = -10, and were randomly and independently drawn
by the computer. All of this was known to subjects.
    Subjects sequentially observed news for a particular company on their computer
screens. Then, they were asked to estimate the company's current value. This proce-
dure was repeated for all twelve companies. Thus, participants worked on the twelve
companies strictly sequentially.
    Beliefs in the first period allow us to verify whether subjects understood the basic
information structure, had sufficient time to process the information, and were in prin-
ciple able to determine correct estimates in our decision environment. As we will see
below, first-period beliefs are indeed always very close to rational beliefs, which lends
credence to our assumption that (absent memory constraints) subjects understood our
design and were well-capable of behaving optimally.
    After the first period, we implemented a time gap in which subjects worked on an un-
related real effort task, which required subjects to type multiple combinations of letters
and numbers into the keyboard. Subjects had 15 minutes to type in as many combina-
tions as they could. For each correctly solved task, subjects received 5 cents.


Second period.      In the second period, for each company, subjects were shown up to
one additional piece of news. The value of company j is hence given by:

                                                          kj

                            j ,2 =  j ,1 + nk+1 = 100 +          n x + nk+1 .                       (8)
                                                          x =1


For ten companies, subjects received an additional piece of news, while for two com-
panies, there were no additional news. The experimental instructions and comprehen-
sion questions emphasized that first-period signals are also relevant for second-period
guesses. We included two companies with no additional news because these allow us
to directly assess whether subjects perfectly remember their first-period belief in the

     Each subject saw three companies with three pieces of news, three with two pieces of news, three
with one pieces of news and three with zero pieces of news.


                                                 11
second period.
   Immediately after observing the additional piece of news for a company, subjects
were asked to state a second-period belief about the value of that company. Second-
period beliefs constitute our main outcome of interest. In addition, on a subsequent
decision screen, subjects were asked to recall the number of positive and negative news
that were shown to them in the course of the entire experiment for that company. These
recall measures were not financially incentivized. Again, this procedure was repeated
for all twelve companies, so that participants worked on the 12 companies strictly se-
quentially within a given period.
   To summarize, as depicted in Figure 1, the timeline of the experiment was as fol-
lows. First, a subject received all first-period signals for a company and immediately
after stated a first-period belief. Then, the subject received all first-period signals for the
next company and stated a first-period belief. This process was repeated for all twelve
companies, after which a 15-minutes real effort task followed. Then, the subject received
a second-period signal (if any) for a company and immediately after stated a second-
period belief and indicated their recall of positive and negative signals. This procedure
was then repeated for all twelve companies.


Communication of news and context. News were not only communicated as abstract
numbers, but were shown on subjects' computer screens with what we refer to as a
context. Neither our stylized model nor existing theoretical contributions define what
exactly is part of a context. For the purposes of our experimental implementation, we
use "context" as a shorthand for an image and a story that accompany a signal.
   The written instructions clarified that these images and stories were supplied to
"explain" to subjects why a particular piece of news for a company was observed. For
instance, all stories that accompanied positive news gave some rationale for why the
value of the company had gone up, such as a successful marketing campaign or a re-
cent technological innovation. The content of the story and the picture were tailored to
match each other. The signal, picture and story were displayed on subjects' computer
screens for 15 seconds. The time was calibrated such that subjects would have sufficient
time to process the news, as well as to fully grasp the content of the picture and the
story. Appendix F contains examples of these images and stories (see Figures 15 and
16). An English version of the computer program that communicates the sequence of
first-period and second-period news and contexts in treatment Main can be accessed at
https://unikoelnwiso.eu.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_0MrVD2rNNrKeLGt.


Randomization and incentives. The experiment was independently randomized across
subjects across the following layers: (i) the order of companies in the first period; (ii) the

                                              12
order of companies in the second period; (iii) whether or not a company received a piece
of news in the second period; and (iv) the actual signal realizations.
   Beliefs were incentivized using a binarized scoring rule, which is incentive-compatible
regardless of subjects' risk attitudes (Hossain and Okui, 2013). Under this scoring rule,
subjects could potentially earn a prize of 10 euros. The probability of receiving the prize
was given by 100 minus the squared distance between a subject's belief and the true
value of the asset. In order to avoid hedging motives, at the end of the experiment one
of the 24 beliefs was randomly selected for payment. Since second-period beliefs are our
main outcome measure, we incentivized them more heavily, in expectation: with 90%
probability a second-period belief was randomly selected for payment, and with 10%
probability a first-period belief. To avoid extreme outliers due to typing mistakes, the
computer program restricted beliefs to be in [50, 150].


3.2    Discussion of Design in Relation to Psychological Concepts
Given that ours is arguably the first structured economics experiment on associative re-
call, we deem it helpful to explain our design choices in light of the psychology literature.
As discussed in the Introduction, associative recall is thought to be part of episodic mem-
ory, which is that part of long-term memory that stores past events. Our experiment is
based on the following concepts from memory research (Kahana, 2012).
   First, because associative recall is believed to operate on long-term (rather than work-
ing) memory, we implemented a distraction task between the first and second period.
The memory literature contains many demonstrations that sufficiently long distraction
tasks activate long-term memory and corresponding memory imperfections.
   Second, an important component of recent memory models in both economics and
psychology is that of similarity (Tversky, 1977) and resulting interference (Kahana,
2012; Bordalo et al., 2019b). The key idea is that it is hard for people's memory to link
a specific piece of past information to a particular variable if they have been exposed
to similar information also for other variables. Based on this insight, we deliberately
designed our experiment so as to include twelve companies with similar news.
   Notice that both of these components could generate baseline forgetting. While the
focus of our paper is an analysis of the role of associative memory conditional on the
existence of forgetting, in Section 6, we shed light on the relative importance of the time
lag and interference in generating forgetting in the first place.




                                            13
3.3    Treatment Variations and Sources of Exogenous Variation
We conducted seven treatments, referred to as Main, Reminder, No Cue, Underreaction,
Underreaction reminder, WTP and WTP reminder. In combination, these treatments allow
for causal tests of all of the abstract predictions laid out in Section 2. That is, the treat-
ments were designed to identify (i) potential overreaction in beliefs and correspnding
economic actions; (ii) the ways in which the quantitative magnitude of such overreac-
tion causally depends on the precise signal history, in particular the parameter z ; (iii)
the causal roles of imperfect and associative memory for overreaction; and (iv) the role
of the correlation between context and news.


Treatments Main and WTP.          In treatment Main, there is a one-to-one mapping be-
tween type of news (positive or negative) for a given company and the context with
which the signal is communicated. That is, every positive news for company A is com-
municated with the same context (image and story). Likewise, every negative news for
company A is communicated with the same context (albeit a different one than the pos-
itive news). The same logic holds for all other companies. Thus, it can never happen
that a context is communicated with news for different companies, or with both positive
and negative news. A context deterministically identifies a piece of news. Thus, treat-
ment Main resembles our opening examples and implements a situation in which we
hypothesize to observe overreaction.
   Because the number and realizations of the signals vary across companies and sub-
jects, the twelve tasks exhibit substantial variation in signal histories. We leverage this
source of exogenous variation to test the within-treatment predictions derived in Sec-
tion 2 about how the presence or quantitative magnitude of overreaction depends on
the number of first-period signals that occurred in the same context (have the same
realization) as the second-period signal. 80 subjects participated in treatment Main.
   Treatment WTP follows the same structure as Main, except that we do not elicit par-
ticipants' beliefs about the value of the hypothetical companies. Neither do we elicit
subjects' recall of positive and negative signals. Instead, in both the first and the second
period of the experiment, subjects were endowed with 150 points for each company and
then stated their willingness-to-pay (WTP) for a company. This treatment hence allows
us to tie associative recall back to economic actions. To elicit WTP, we implemented a
direct Becker-deGroot-Marschak elicitation mechanism, such that subjects directly en-
tered the maximum number of points m that they would be willing to pay for an asset.
We then randomly determined a price p  U [50, 150] and subjects received the asset if
m  p and kept their endowment otherwise. Because we anticipated that participants'
WTP would be a slightly noisier measure than pure beliefs data, 100 subjects partici-


                                             14
pated in treatment WTP.


Treatments Reminder and WTP reminder. In treatments Reminder and WTP reminder,
we seek to remove subjects' memory constraints, holding everything else constant. The
setup in Reminder was exactly the same as in Main, except that at the beginning of the
second period (i.e., before a subject observes the second-period signal for a company),
subjects were reminded of their own first-period belief for that company. Similarly, the
setup in WTP reminder is the same as in WTP, except that subjects were reminded of their
own first-period willingness-to-pay before they received a second-period signal. Thus,
the reminder treatments assist subjects in the recall of their first-period knowledge, so
that they presumably no longer need to reconstruct their prior knowledge from memory.
Conceptually, we think of this treatment as exogenously setting the parameter r = 1
in the framework of Section 2 (meaning perfect memory). 50 subjects participated in
treatment Reminder and 80 subjects in treatment WTP reminder.


Treatment No Cue. Treatment No Cue was designed to manipulate the relevance of
associative recall. The setup in this treatment was exactly the same as in Main, except
that each piece of news was communicated with a different context. That is, a given
context (image and story) never appears twice, even if the company and type of news
is identical. Thus, it is no longer the case that every positive news for a given company
is communicated with the same context, and every negative news for a given company
is communicated with the same context. As a consequence, stories and images can no
longer trigger associative recall. At the same time, all other features of the environ-
ment remain unchanged. Comparing treatments Main and No Cue therefore allows us
to cleanly identify the role of associative recall. 80 subjects participated in this treat-
ment.


Treatments Underreaction and Underreaction reminder. All treatments described
above rely on a design in which the observation of a positive piece of news in the second
period cues the asymmetric recollection of positive first-period news (and analogously
for negative news), which corresponds to  = 1 in our formal framework. Treatments
Underreaction and Underreaction reminder conceptually correspond to setting  = -1. In
both treatments, the first period proceeded exactly as in treatment Main. In the second
period, however, news were communicated on subjects' decision screens along with the
opposite story and image, relative to the first period. That is, a positive piece of news
for company A was communicated along with the story and image that were associated
with negative news for company A in the first period of the experiment. Analogously,
a negative piece of news for company A was communicated along with the story and

                                           15
the image that were associated with positive news for company A in the first period of
the experiment. The instructions in Underreaction emphasized that second-period news
were communicated along with the opposite story and image, and control questions
verified subjects' understanding of this aspect of the design. 80 subjects participated in
this treatment.
   To allow for causal inference, we additionally conducted condition Underreaction
reminder. This treatment was identical to Underreaction, except that subjects were re-
minded of their own first-period belief right before they received the second-period sig-
nal for a company. This treatment hence allows us to verify whether any potential un-
derreaction in treatment Underreaction indeed stems from memory imperfections, rather
than from confusion because the mapping between news and contexts flips after the first
period. 50 subjects took part in Underreaction reminder. In all other respects, these two
treatments followed the same procedure as treatments Main and Reminder.


3.4    Predictions
Equation (6) in the conceptual framework directly suggests the following estimating
equation for subject i 's second-period belief about the value of company j :

                                                           k
                             i, j             j
                            b2      =    + 1 nk+1   + 2           j
                                                                 nx + i , j             (9)
                                                          x =1


That is, we regress a subject's second-period belief on the value of the second-period
signal as well as the first-period stock value (or the first-period belief). In those treat-
                                                                      i, j
ments in which we elicited WTPs rather than beliefs, b2 refers to the second-period
WTP. Appendix A.2 formally derives the properties of the OLS estimator ^1 and shows
that E [^1 ]  1 +  (1 - r )az
                            ¯, where z
                                     ¯ is the average number of first-period signals that
were observed in the same context as the second-period signal. By applying the abstract
predictions derived in Section 2 to this experimental design and estimating equation,
we are hence ready to state the following predictions:

Predictions.
  1. In treatments Main and WTP, there is overreaction: ^1 > 1.

  2. In treatments Main and WTP, overreaction increases in the number of first-period
      signals that were observed in the same context as the second-period signal.

  3. Overreaction is stronger in treatment Main than in Reminder, and stronger in WTP
      than in WTP reminder.

  4. Overreaction is stronger in treatment Main than in No Cue.

                                                16
                 Table 1: Mapping from model predictions to experimental predictions

 Abstract model prediction                                          Treatments         Experimental prediction

 1. Overreaction if news and context positively corr.               Main, WTP                ^Main > 1
                                                                                              1

 2. Overreaction increases in # identical past contexts             Main, WTP           ^Main increases in z
                                                                                         1

 3. Overreaction increases in imperfection of memory            Main, WTP, Reminder     ^Main > 
                                                                                                ^Reminder
                                                                                         1       1

 4. Overreaction increases in relevance of associative recall      Main, No Cue          ^Main > 
                                                                                                 ^No Cue
                                                                                          1       1

 5. Underreaction if news and context negatively corr.             Underreaction            ^Under. < 1
                                                                                             1

 6. Underreaction increases in # identical past contexts           Underreaction       ^Underr. decreases in z
                                                                                        1

 7. Underreaction increases in imperfection of memory            Under., Under. rem.   ^Under. < 
                                                                                                 ^Under. rem.
                                                                                        1         1




  5. In treatment Underreaction, we observe underreaction: ^1 < 1.

  6. In treatment Underreaction, underreaction increases in the number of first-period
      signals that were observed in the same context as the second-period signal.

  7. Underreaction is stronger in treatment Underreaction than in Underreaction reminder.

   For clarity, Table 1 explicitly spells out which abstract model prediction from Sec-
tion 2 maps into which specific experimental prediction, and which experimental treat-
ments we use to test a given prediction.


3.5    Procedures and Logistics
Upon arrival in the lab, subjects received written instructions about the experiment.
Appendix E contains the full set of paper-based instructions, translated into English.
Subjects were given unlimited time to read the instructions and could ask questions at
any point in time. After all subjects had indicated that they had finished the instructions,
they completed a total of seven computerized control questions to verify adequate com-
prehension. Whenever a subject did not solve a control question correctly, a computer
screen pointed out the mistake and explained the correct solution. As we pre-registered
(see below), we exclude subjects from the analysis that answered more than one control
question incorrectly (7% of potential participants).
   Treatments Main, Reminder, and No Cue were conducted in the BonnEconLab of the
University of Bonn. Since we had exhausted the subject pool of the BonnEconLab, treat-
ments WTP, WTP reminder, Underreaction and Underreaction reminder were conducted
in the University of Cologne's Laboratory for Experimental Economics. Assignment to the
relevant treatments was randomized within experimental sessions: Baseline, Reminder,
and No Cue were all implemented in the same sessions, as were Underreaction and Un-
derreaction reminder. In our statistical analyses, we only compare treatments that were

                                                        17
randomized within experimental sessions, in the same location. The experiments were
computerized using Qualtrics and lasted up to 90 minutes.


3.6    Pre-Registration
All experiments in this paper were pre-registered in the AEA RCT registry, including a
pre-analysis plan. The different pre-registration files include (i) the design of all treat-
ments reported in this paper; (ii) the heterogeneity analysis discussed in Section 4.3;
(iii) the regression equation (9) through which we analyze all data; (iv) all predictions
outlined in Section 3.4; (v) the sample size in each treatment; (vi) that subjects would be
dropped from the sample (and replaced) if they answer more than one control question
incorrectly; and (vii) the labs in which we ran the experiments.
    We proceeded in multiple steps. We first pre-registered and implemented treatments
Main, Reminder, No Cue, as well as treatments Extended time lag and Extended time lag
reminder (to be discussed in Section 6). Based on results from these treatments, we
pre-registered treatments Underreaction, Underreaction reminder, WTP, WTP reminder,
and additional treatments discussed in Section 6. Table 7 in Appendix B provides an
overview of all treatments that we conducted for this paper, including information on
subjects' average earnings and pre-registration details. All pre-registration documents
are available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/4247.



4     Baseline Results on Overreaction

4.1    Preliminaries
Before we present the results, we conduct two checks on our experimental data. First, we
verify people's understanding of the experimental setup by investigating the accuracy
of participants' first-period beliefs. Table 8 in Appendix D shows that beliefs almost per-
fectly correspond to the true value of a company, in each of the three treatments Main,
Reminder and No Cue: in a regression of subjects' beliefs on actual company values, the
OLS coefficient is always almost exactly one and hence rational. The average percent-
age deviation between first-period beliefs and the truth is only 0.4%, while the median
deviation is zero. This provides reassuring evidence that subjects appear to understand
the decision task well.
    Second, to show that subjects can no longer perfectly remember their first-period be-
lief once the second period starts, we consider the relationship between subjects' second-
period and first-period beliefs in those tasks in which a subject did not receive a second-
period signal. Table 9 in Appendix D reports the results. In a regression of second-period


                                            18
on first-period beliefs, the OLS coefficient is only 0.56 and hence far from the perfect
memory benchmark of one. This suggests that memory is indeed imperfect in our setup,
hence opening up a potential role for associative recall.


4.2     Treatments Main and WTP: Overreaction in Beliefs and Choices
Throughout the empirical analysis, we present OLS regressions that correspond to vari-
ants of the estimating equation (9). Columns (1)­(4) of Table 2 presents the results for
treatment Main. In columns (1)­(3), we present three regression specifications. First, a
regression in which we regress second-period beliefs on the second-period signal (+10 or
-10), controlling for the first-period belief. Second, an analogous regression in which
we control for the objective first-period stock value as opposed to the first-period be-
lief. Third, a comprehensive specification in which we control for experimental session
fixed effects, first-period signal history fixed effects, company fixed effects, experimental
order fixed effects, and subject fixed effects. In this third specification, controlling for
first-period beliefs or stock values is redundant as these are implicitly accounted for by
the first-period signal history fixed effects. In each regression specification, an observa-
tion corresponds to a subject-task, for a total of ten tasks per subject.  Throughout, we
cluster the standard errors at the subject level.
    The framework outlined in Section 2 predicts that the coefficient of first-period be-
liefs or first-period stock values is less than one (due to imperfect memory) and that the
coefficient of the second-period signal is greater than one (due to imperfect and associa-
tive memory). This is indeed what we find, see columns (1)­(3). In terms of magnitude,
the OLS coefficient suggests that beliefs substantially overreact with respect to second-
period signals, by 10­11 percent relative to the rational prediction of one. The last row
of Table 2 reports the p-value for the null hypothesis that the coefficient of the second-
period signal equals one. We reject this rational null hypothesis at all conventional levels
of significance. 
    As highlighted by equation (5) in the formal framework, our hypothesis is that over-
reaction occurs because the first-period signals get recollected more successfully if they
get cued, that is, if they take on the same value as the second-period signal. To investi-
gate this more explicitly, columns (4) and (5) of Table 2 include as separate regressors

     Naturally, and as specified in the pre-analysis plan, we restrict attention to those tasks in which a
subject indeed received a signal in the second period.
     Table 10 in Appendix D replicates the results of Tables 2 for the direct recall data. As specified in the
pre-analysis plan, we analyze the recall data by computing the difference between recall of positive and
recall of negative news and multiplying this difference by 10 so that the variable has the same scale as
the beliefs data. This summary statistic of a subject's recall is highly correlated with actual second-period
beliefs ( = 0.95), suggesting that the recall data are meaningful. The results using this measure are very
similar to those in Table 2.


                                                     19
                                      Table 2: Treatments Main and WTP

                                                   Treatment Main                             Treatment WTP


                                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                   2nd period belief                          2nd period WTP
                                            (1)      (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)        (6)      (7)      (8)
                                                                                                           
 2nd period signal                        1.10     1.11        1.11      0.87     1.11        1.14     1.13     0.98
                                          (0.02)   (0.02)      (0.03)    (0.04)   (0.04)      (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.07)
 Belief in 1st period                     0.75
                                          (0.03)
 Company value in 1st period                       0.74                                       0.60
                                                   (0.03)                                     (0.04)
 Value of cued 1st period signals                                        0.90                                   0.70
                                                                         (0.03)                                 (0.05)
 Value of non-cued 1st period signals                                    0.59                                   0.49
                                                                         (0.05)                                 (0.06)
 WTP in 1st period                                                                0.51
                                                                                  (0.04)
 Session FE                                 No       No         Yes        Yes      No         No       Yes      Yes
 1st period signal history FE               No       No         Yes        No       No         No       Yes      No
 Company FE                                 No       No         Yes        Yes      No         No       Yes      Yes
 Order FE                                   No       No         Yes        Yes      No         No       Yes      Yes
 Subject FE                                 No       No         Yes        Yes      No         No       Yes      Yes
 Observations                              800       800        800       800     1000        1000     1000     1000
 Adjusted R2                              0.80      0.80       0.80       0.81    0.61        0.51     0.72     0.73
 p-value H0:  (2nd period signal)=1       <0.01     <0.01      <0.01      n/a     <0.01       <0.01    <0.01     n/a
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level. The sample includes
all observations from treatments Main (columns (1)­(4)) and WTP (columns (5)­(8)) where subjects observed a
second-period signal.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


the overall value of those first-period signals that do (or do not) equal the second-period
signal. The results show that beliefs are much more responsive to the value of the cued
first-period signals. Here, the difference in regression coefficients is statistically signifi-
cant at all conventional levels.
   Columns (5)­(8) of Table 2 report analogous analyses for treatment WTP, where the
dependent variable is now a participant's reported WTP. Note that because the decision
problem in our setup is deterministic in nature, the prediction for a rational decision-
maker is that the OLS coefficient of the second-period signal equals one, regardless of
subjects' risk attitudes. The results are very similar to those in treatment Main: (i) we
see overreaction with an aggregate OLS coefficient of 1.11; and (ii) the coefficient of
cued first-period signals is substantially and significantly larger than the coefficient of
non-cued first-period signals.

Result 1. Beliefs and choices overreact with respect to the second-period signal.



                                                          20
4.3     Heterogeneity Analysis
Next, we examine across-subject heterogeneity in overreaction. To estimate the presence
of such heterogeneity, we require a subject-level measure of overreaction. To this effect,
we resort back to the beliefs data from treatment Main and run our standard regression
of second-period beliefs on the second-period signal, but now separately for each subject.
Figure 12 presents the distribution of subject-level regression coefficients. Here, both
the rational and the imperfect-but-no-associative-recall predictions again correspond to
a coefficient of one. While the beliefs of a notable fraction of subjects do not reflect
associative recall (35% have a regression coefficient of at most one), the majority of
participants exhibit overreaction to varying degrees.
    To investigate the correlates of this heterogeneity, we turn to three pre-registered
heterogeneity analyses: (i) performance on a Raven matrices IQ test that was admin-
istered at the end of the experiment; (ii) a measure of the strength of memory that is
estimated from the experimental recall data as a proxy for r ;  and (iii) response times.
Tables 11 and 12 in Appendix D report the results. We find that subjects with higher
Raven scores and better non-cued recall exhibt less overreaction. The relationship be-
tween overreaction and response times is negative, but not statistically significant.



5     Exogenous Variation in Model Parameters

5.1     Variation in the Signal History
We proceed by considering exogenous variation in the model parameters. We begin by
considering Prediction 2: that overreaction increases in the number of cued first-period
signals z . This is a direct test of the role of associative memory because with either
perfect memory ( r = 1 in the model) or imperfect-but-no-associative memory (a = 0),
this prediction would not hold, compare equation (6). Moreover, while a particular form
of recency bias could in principle generate the type of overreaction we observe in Table 2,
this is not the case for the prediction that overreaction depends on the signal history in
specific ways.
    Figure 3 visualizes the results for treatment Main. We show the analogous figure for
treatment WTP in Figure 8 in Appendix C. For each set of possible signal frequencies in
the first period of the experiment, we regress second-period beliefs on the the second-
period signal, and then plot the OLS coefficient and corresponding standard error. The
figure shows that this coefficient is almost always larger than one, indicating overreac-


     For each subject, we regress the reported recall of non-cued signals on the actual number of corre-
sponding signals and use this regression coefficient as a measure of the strength of (non-cued) memory.


                                                  21
                                     Heterogeneity in overreaction


                 .25
                 .2.15
            Fraction
                 .1
                 .05
                 0




                         0            .5                  1                1.5                 2
                                   Subject-specific regression coefficient

Figure 2: Subject-level distribution of regression coefficients of the second-period signal in treatment Main
(N=80). To estimate these coefficients, we run regressions akin to column (1) in Table 2 except that in
each regression the sample is restricted to only one subject. To identify overreaction in the presence of
cued recall, the sample is restricted to tasks in which a subject observed at least one first-period signal. A
rational subject would exhibit a coefficient of one.


tion. At the same time, visual inspection suggests that the coefficient is increasing in
the number of first-period signals.  This is intuitive and predicted by the model because
if there are more past signals that can be cued, then associative recall generates more
pronounced overreaction.
    It is reassuring that beliefs do not at all overreact in the case of zero positive and
zero negative first-period signals, as predicted by our model. In fact, this coefficient is
significantly smaller than one, consistent with a large literature on belief updating that
shows that in lab environments where the role of (associative) memory is shut down,
people's belief updating typically exhibits underreaction or shading (Benjamin, 2018).
As suggested in recent work by Enke and Graeber (2019), such shading at least partly
reflects a response to cognitive uncertainty: people's subjective uncertainty about what
the rational belief is. Here, cognitive uncertainty plausibly arises because subjects know
that they might forget some first-period signals. Either way, in our experiments, associa-
tive memory is sufficiently strong to turn such underreaction into overall overreaction.
    Table 3 provides a formal and pre-registered statistical test of Prediction 2 for both
treatment Main and WTP. Here, we interact the value of the second-period signal with

      A casual inspection of Figure 3 may suggest that overreaction depends on whether first-period sig-
nals are predominantly positive or negative. In a replication that we report on below (treatment Main
replication), we do not see such suggestive patterns, see Figure 10 in Appendix C.


                                                     22
                                                         OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal by signal history


                                                 1.8
            OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal
                      1        .6   1.4




                                                       0:0   1:0        0:1     1:1      2:0      0:2      2:1       1:2      3:0   0:3
                                                                   Signal frequencies (positive vs. negative) in first period

                                                                                       Treatment Main


Figure 3: OLS coefficient (+/- 1 SE) in a regression of second-period beliefs on the last signal, separately
for each set of signal frequencies in the first period. The regressions control for a subject's first-period
belief. Standard error bars are computed based on clustering at the subject level.


the number of first-period signals that were communicated in the same context as the
second-period signal (z in the model). The results show that the interaction term is
positive and statistically highly significant. The magnitude suggests that each additional
first-period signal increases the responsiveness to the second-period signal by about 20­
35%, on average.
    To corroborate this result, we next turn to subjects' direct recall data. Figure 4 shows
average levels of reported recall of first-period signals in condition Main, as a function of
whether these first-period signals were identical to or different from the second-period
signal. That is, the figure shows how many signals subjects report to have recalled, as
a function of whether those signals were cued or not. The figure shows that the recall
of cued signals is very accurate, on average. In contrast, the recall of non-cued signals
is more compressed. This is indicative that associative memory helps not only with re-
membering whether a certain type of signal has appeared before, but also how often it
appeared. 

      Subjects indicated their recall of signals immediately after they stated a point belief. A potential
concern is that the recall data do not have independent informational content but are constructed by
subjects through ex post reasoning to match their stated beliefs. At first sight, the data do not seem to
support such a consistency-based interpretation. To see why, note that Figure 4 reveals very accurate recall
of cued signals. Such accurate recall would not be predicted by a simple consistency account because there
are often multiple combinations of positive and negative signals that would rationalize a given belief. For
example, if a subject stated a belief of 110, then there are two combinations of recall data that rationalize
such a belief: one positive / zero negative signals, and two positive / one negative signals.


                                                                                           23
                    Table 3: Treatments Main and WTP: The role of the signal history

                                                    Treatment Main                    Treatment WTP


                                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                   2nd period belief                2nd period WTP
                                                 (1)         (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)      (6)
                                                                                               
       2nd period signal                       0.85         0.87      0.87     0.93        0.95     0.98
                                               (0.04)       (0.04)    (0.04)   (0.07)      (0.07)   (0.07)
       2nd period signal ×                     0.34         0.32      0.31     0.25        0.26     0.20
       # 1st period signals in same context    (0.05)       (0.05)    (0.05)   (0.07)      (0.08)   (0.07)
       Belief in 1st period                    0.59
                                               (0.05)
       Company value in 1st period                          0.59                           0.47
                                                            (0.05)                         (0.06)
       WTP in 1st period                                                       0.46
                                                                               (0.05)
       Session FE                                No          No         Yes      No         No       Yes
       1st period signal history FE              No          No         Yes      No         No       Yes
       Company FE                                No          No         Yes      No         No       Yes
       Order FE                                  No          No         Yes      No         No       Yes
       Subject FE                                No          No         Yes      No         No       Yes
       Observations                             800          800       800      1000       1000     1000
       Adjusted R2                              0.81         0.81      0.81     0.62       0.52     0.73
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level.
      The sample includes all observations from treatment Main where subjects observed a second-
      period signal. Columns (1)­(6) suppress the coefficient of the number of first-period signals that
      were communicated with the same context as the second-period signal.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,
      
         p < 0.01.


Result 2. Overreaction increases in the number of cued first-period signals.


5.2    The Role of Imperfect Memory
To provide causal evidence for the role of imperfect memory in belief overreaction, we
manipulate whether participants actually need to reconstruct prior knowledge from
memory. Conceptually, treatment Reminder is designed to set r = 1. To this effect, we
reminded participants of their first-period belief immediately before they received the
second-period signal.
   Figure 5 summarizes the results by comparing the OLS coefficient of the second-
period signal across treatments Main and Reminder. There is no overreaction in treat-
ment Reminder. Instead, the tightly estimated regression coefficients equal almost ex-
actly one. These results provide direct causal evidence that imperfect memory is neces-
sary in order for overreaction to arise in our setup, as predicted by our key equation (6).


                                                       24
                               Recall of 1st period signals in treatment Main


                     3
                     2
            Recall
                     1
                     0




                         0                       1                       2                         3
                                                Number of 1st period signals

                             Identical to 2nd period signal     Different from 2nd period signal


Figure 4: Recall of first-period signals in Treatment Main, depending on whether the second-period signal
was identical to or different from the first-period signals. We construct the recall variables as follows. In
the case of recall of signals that are different from the second-period signal, we use the reported recall
quantity. In the case of recall of signals that are identical to the second-period signal, we use the reported
recall minus one. That is, in constructing the figure we make the arguably very plausible assumption that
subjects always remember the value of the second-period signal that they just saw a few seconds ago.


These results also represent reassuring evidence that our experimental setup is not mis-
construed by subjects: in the absence of memory constraints, the second-period signal
is incorporated in a rational fashion.
    To formally compare treatments Main and Reminder, we again resort to OLS regres-
sions. Columns (1)­(2) of Table 4 present the results. As specified in the pe-registration,
we again analyze our data by means of OLS regressions in which we relate subjects'
second-period beliefs to the value of the second-period signal, except that now we also
interact the second-period signal with a treatment dummy. Our prediction, spelled out
in Sections 2 and 3.4, is that the value of the second-period signal should matter more
in treatment Main than in Reminder. The results provide supporting evidence for this
prediction. The interaction term is quantitatively large and statistically significant at all
conventional levels. In Main, subjects respond 12­14% more to the value of the second-
period signal than subjects in Reminder. Again, this pattern is a specific prediction of our
framework, but not of an account of recency effects. ¹
    Columns (3)­(4) present analogous analyses for actions (willingness-to-pay) by com-
paring treatments WTP and WTP reminder. Again, overreaction is substantially stronger

   ¹ Table 13 in Appendix D shows that almost identical results hold when we again consider the summary
statistic of subjects' direct recall.


                                                          25
                                                        OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal by signal history


                                                1.8
           OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal
                     1        .6   1.4




                                                      0:0   1:0        0:1     1:1      2:0      0:2      2:1       1:2      3:0   0:3
                                                                  Signal frequencies (positive vs. negative) in first period

                                                                         Treatment Main          Treatment Reminder


Figure 5: OLS coefficient (+/- 1 SE) in a regression of second-period beliefs on the last signal, separately
for each set of signal frequencies in the first period. The regressions control for a subject's first-period
belief. Standard error bars are computed based on clustering at the subject level.


in the presence of memory imperfections. Indeed, the coefficient of the second-period
signal suggests that in treatment WTP reminder there is no overreaction at all.

Result 3. Overreaction disappears once forgetting is shut down.



5.3     The Role of Associative Memory
We proceed by experimentally manipulating the relevance of associative memory. Ac-
cording to equation (6), if there is no associative recall, there should be no overreaction.
As a direct test of this hypothesis, we compare treatments Main and No Cue. Recall that
in treatment No Cue, each signal realization was communicated with a different context,
so that the current context cannot cue identical past contexts.
    Figure 6 summarizes the results. As predicted, there is no overreaction in treatment
No Cue. If anything, the data reveal slight underreaction. As discussed above, this result
is consistent with a large set of findings from belief updating experiments in which asso-
ciative recall cannot play a role by design (Benjamin, 2018; Enke and Graeber, 2019). In
combination, the results from treatments Main and No Cue again suggest that associative
recall is so strong that it turns slight shading into overreaction.
    Columns (5)­(6) of Table 4 present a formal comparison of treatments Main and No



                                                                                          26
                             Table 4: Treatments Main vs. Reminder and No Cue

                                                           Dependent variable:
                                      2nd period belief     2nd period WTP         2nd period belief
    Treatments                       Main vs. Reminder    WTP vs. WTP reminder      Main vs. No Cue
                                       (1)       (2)       (3)          (4)          (5)        (6)
                                                                                        
    2nd period signal                0.99      0.98       0.97        0.96         0.89        0.88
                                     (0.01)    (0.01)     (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.04)      (0.04)
    2nd period signal ×              0.12      0.14
    1 if Main, 0 if Reminder         (0.03)    (0.03)
    2nd period signal ×                                   0.14        0.17
    1 if WTP, 0 if Reminder WTP                           (0.06)      (0.07)
    2nd period signal ×                                                            0.21        0.22
    1 if Main, 0 if No Cue                                                         (0.04)      (0.05)
    Belief in 1st period             0.84                                          0.62
                                     (0.02)                                        (0.03)
    WTP in 1st period                                     0.66
                                                          (0.04)
    Treatment FE                       Yes       Yes       Yes          Yes          Yes        Yes
    Session FE                         No        Yes       No           Yes          No         Yes
    1st period signal history FE       No        Yes       No           Yes          No         Yes
    Company FE                         No        Yes       No           Yes          No         Yes
    Order FE                           No        Yes       No           Yes          No         Yes
    Subject FE                         No        Yes       No           Yes          No         Yes
    Observations                      1300      1300      1800         1800         1600       1600
    Adjusted R2                       0.86      0.86      0.69         0.74         0.68       0.67
   Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level.
  In columns (1)­(3), the sample includes all observations from treatments Main and Reminder
  where subjects observed a second-period signal. In columns (4)­(6), the sample includes all
  observations from treatments Main and No Cue where subjects observed a second-period signal.
  
    p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


Cue. ¹¹ As specified in the pre-analysis plan, we link participants' second-period beliefs
to the second-period signal, interacted with a treatment dummy. As predicted, the inter-
action term shows that subjects respond significantly more to the second-period signal
in Main than in No Cue.

Result 4. Overreaction disappears once associative recall is shut down.


5.4    Over- vs. Underreaction
Next, we turn to investigating predictions 5­7 in Section 3.4, which conceptually cor-
respond to setting the parameter  = -1 in the simple model. For this purpose, as
  ¹¹ We again replicate the analysis using the direct recall data in Table 13 in Appendix D.


                                                   27
                                                          OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal by signal history


                                                  1.8
             OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal
           .6            1           1.4




                                                        0:0   1:0        0:1     1:1      2:0      0:2      2:1       1:2      3:0   0:3
                                                                    Signal frequencies (positive vs. negative) in first period

                                                                            Treatment Main          Treatment No Cue


Figure 6: OLS coefficient (+/- 1 SE) in a regression of second-period beliefs on the last signal, separately
for each set of signal frequencies in the first period. The regressions control for a subject's first-period
belief. Standard error bars are computed based on clustering at the subject level.


discussed in Section 3, we implemented treatments Underreaction and Underreaction re-
minder. Here, a second-period signal cues the recollection of the opposite past signals.
To verify that potential underreaction in treatment Underreaction is not driven by some
form of confusion that could arise from the change in the mapping from news to contexts
after the first period, treatment Underreaction reminder serves as a control treatment.
    Figure 7 summarizes the results for both treatments, separately for each signal his-
tory. The figure shows that (i) there is underreaction in Underreaction but not in Under-
reaction reminder and (ii) underreaction increases in the number of first-period signals,
as predicted.
    Table 5 presents the regression results. Columns (1) and (2) show that, within treat-
ment Underreaction, the coefficient of the second-period signal is 0.74­0.76, substan-
tially smaller than one. Columns (3) and (4) leverage exogenous variation in signal
histories to document that, as posited in Prediction 6, underreaction strongly increases
in the number of first-period signals that were communicated in the same context as the
second-period signal, see the statistically significant interaction term. ¹²
    Finally, columns (5) and (6) compare treatments Underreaction and Underreaction
reminder. Again, the coefficient of interest is the interaction term between the second-
period signal and a treatment dummy. The dummy is statistically highly significant and


   ¹² Table 14 in Appendix D shows that very similar results hold when we consider the recall data.


                                                                                            28
                                                         OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal by signal history


                                                 1.4
            OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal
             .2          .6           1




                                                       0:0   1:0        0:1     1:1      2:0      0:2      2:1       1:2      3:0   0:3
                                                                   Signal frequencies (positive vs. negative) in first period

                                                             Treatment Underreaction            Treatment Underreaction reminder


Figure 7: OLS coefficient (+/- 1 SE) in a regression of second-period beliefs on the last signal, separately
for each set of signal frequencies in the first period. The regressions control for a subject's first-period belief.
Standard error bars are computed based on clustering at the subject level. In treatment Underreaction
reminder, there was no variation in the second-period signal for first-period signal history "3:0", so that
this coefficient cannot be reported.


suggests that underreaction is 25­28% stronger in Underreaction. In contrast, as we can
infer from the coefficient of the second-period signal, there is no underreaction in treat-
ment Underreaction reminder, with a coefficient of 1.01, statistically indistinguishable
from one. The evidence hence points to asymmetric recall as mechanism behind under-
reaction in the same way as it produced overreaction when  = 1. ¹³

Result 5. When the correlation between context and news is negative, beliefs underreact
with respect to the second-period signal.

Result 6. Underreaction increases in the number of cued first-period signals.

Result 7. Underreaction disappears once memory imperfections are shut down.




   ¹³ To further corroborate the idea that underreaction is generated by asymmetric recall, Figure 11
in Appendix C analyzes the self-reported recall patterns in treatment Underreaction as a function of the
signal history, akin to Figure 4 in Section 4. Here, we see that, in contrast to treatment Main, subjects'
recall is much more precise for those first-period signals that differ from the second-period signal than for
those signals that take on the same realization as the second-period signal. Again, this pattern is expected
because those first-period signals that take on a different value from the second-period signal now get
cued by the second-period context.


                                                                                           29
                    Table 5: Treatments Underreaction and Underreaction reminder

                                                                Dependent variable:
                                                                 2nd period belief
                                                                    Treatments:
                                                          Underreaction                 + Reminder
                                               (1)        (2)     (3)        (4)        (5)       (6)
                                                                                          
    2nd period signal                        0.76     0.74       0.99      0.95       1.01      1.01
                                             (0.04)   (0.04)     (0.04)    (0.05)     (0.02)    (0.02)
    Belief in 1st period                     0.65                0.50                 0.77
                                             (0.04)              (0.05)               (0.03)
    2nd period signal ×                                         -0.31     -0.28
    # 1st period signals in same context                         (0.06)    (0.07)
    2nd period signal ×                                                               -0.25     -0.28
    1 if Underr., 0 if Reminder underr.                                                (0.04)    (0.05)
    Treatment FE                               No         No       No        No         Yes       Yes
    Session FE                                 No         Yes      No        Yes        No        Yes
    Signal history FE                          No         Yes      No        Yes        No        Yes
    Company FE                                 No         Yes      No        Yes        No        Yes
    Order FE                                   No         Yes      No        Yes        No        Yes
    Subject FE                                 No         Yes      No        Yes        No        Yes
    Observations                              800       800       800       800        1300      1300
    Adjusted R2                              0.67      0.68       0.68      0.70       0.79      0.79
    p-value H0:  (2nd period signal)=1       <0.01     <0.01      n/a       n/a         n/a       n/a
    Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level. In
   columns (3)­(4), the table suppresses the coefficients of the number of first-period signals that were
   communicated in the same context as the second-period signal. The sample includes all observations
   from treatments Underreaction and Underreaction reminder where subjects observed a second-period
   signal.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


6 Extension: Mechanisms Behind Forgetting
At the most basic level, our paper is agnostic about what exactly generates imperfect
recall per sé: we are mostly interested in identifying the role of associative memory
conditional on the existence of forgetting in the first place. Nonetheless, this section pro-
vides a first pass at studying the relative importance of three potential mechanisms that
could generate forgetting in our new experimental paradigm: (i) the existence of a time
lag of 15 minutes between the first and second period; (ii) similarity-based interference,
as it results from the presence of twelve similar companies with identical signal realiza-
tions (+10 / -10); and (iii) more general memory load, as it results from the presence
of twelve simultaneous recall problems (even if these were not similar to each other).
To provide some evidence on the relative importance of these potential mechanisms,
we first manipulate the length of the time lag and then the presence of similarity-based
interference. Of course, these mechanisms cannot be perfectly disentangled almost by

                                                     30
definition because (i) inducing interference takes time and, conversely, (ii) a time lag
will under any realistic circumstances imply at least mild interference.


Extended Time Lag.          Treatment Extended time lag followed the same procedure as
treatment Main, except that the time lag between the first and second period of the
experiment was three days. On the first day, subjects completed the first period of the
experiment, using the same experimental instructions and control questions as in Main.
After the first period, participants completed the real effort task, the Raven matrices
test as well as the demographic questionnaire. ¹ On the second day, participants re-read
the original instructions and completed the same set of control questions again. Then,
they completed the second period of the experiment. Due to the substantially increased
time lag, we conducted treatment Extended time lag reminder as an additional bechmark
condition, which is identical to treatment Reminder, except for the increased time lag.
   These two treatments were also pre-registered in the original pre-registration. 80
subjects participated in treatment Extended time lag and 50 in treatment Extended time
lag reminder. The treatments were randomized within experimental sessions and imple-
mented in the BonnEconLab of the University of Bonn. Attrition was negligible: 95% of
subjects returned for the second session.
   Figure 9 in Appendix C and Tables 15 and 16 in Appendix D summarize the results,
which are very similar to those in treatments Main and Reminder: we see (i) overreaction;
(ii) stronger overreaction when more first-period signals get cued by the second-period
signal; and (iii) stronger overreaction relative to a treatment with a reminder. If any-
thing, we find that overreaction is even stronger with a time lag of three days rather
than 15 minutes: in the baseline regression, the OLS coefficient of the second-period
signal increases from 1.10 in Baseline to 1.17 in Extended time lag. This is consistent
with the model in Section 2 if one assumes that the strength of memory r decays over
time, yet the strength of associative recall a remains constant or decays less.


No Time Lag.      We now manipulate the length of the time lag in the opposite direction:
in treatment No time lag, subjects start the second period immediately after the first
period ends. Thus, the time lag is 15 minutes shorter than in treatment Main. Of course,
for any given company, the time lag is not zero because participants also receive news
for other companies. 60 subjects participated in this treatment, which was randomized
within experimental sessions with a replication of treatment Main (also 60 subjects).
Figure 10 in Appendix C presents the results and Table 18 in Appendix D shows cor-
responding regression analyses. We find that the OLS coefficient of the second-period


  ¹ Thus, subjects could not take notes right after the first period.


                                                   31
signal is 1.11 in both Main replication and No time lag, and statistically indistinguish-
able from each other. This suggest that the time lag of 15 minutes between the first and
second period is inessential for forgetting and the experimental design more generally.


No interference. To study the importance of interference for forgetting, we introduce
treatment No interference. The design of this treatment is guided by two design ob-
jectives: (i) reducing similarity-based interference, while holding overall memory load
roughly constant and (ii) holding the time line of the experiment constant. In treatment
No interference, there is only one company, which is randomly selected across partici-
pants from the set of twelve companies in the original experiments. In addition to this
one company, subjects also completed eleven recall tasks that were designed to be sim-
ilar to the main experimental task, without introducing interference via similarity. To
this effect, we introduced eleven "groups" of colored shapes, where each group consisted
of two shapes. For each of the groups, participants sequentially observed between zero
and three shapes on their decision screen in the first period of the experiment. In the
second period, they observed one more shape from each group and were then asked
how many times they had seen shapes that belong to a particular group. We designed
this experiment such that the timing was extremely similar to treatment Main: shapes
were shown for the same period of time as news for companies, and we implemented
the same 15 minutes time lag between the first and second period. We implemented this
treatment with 60 additional subjects, randomized within session along with treatments
Main replication and No time lag discussed above.
   We find that, for the one company, overreaction almost entirely disappears: the OLS
coefficient of the second-period signal is 1.01 and indistinguishable from the rational
benchmark of one. Moreover, overreaction in No interference is significantly smaller than
in treatment Main replication, see Figure 10 in Appendix C and Table 18 in Appendix D.
In fact, as Figure 13 in Appendix C shows, subjects' recall of first-period signals is close
to perfect once there is no interference.
   It is worth highlighting that these results hold even though we attempted to keep
working memory load constant relative to the baseline condition by introducing the
eleven shapes recall tasks. Indeed, as we document in Table 19 in Appendix D, we do
find strong associative recall for the shapes, presumably because there was similarity-
based interference with respect to these shapes due to the presence of eleven similar
recall problems.
   While these results on the micro-foundations of memory imperfections are not the
focus of our paper, we view them as suggestive that similarity-based interference plays
an important role in generating forgetting, consistent with recent theoretical work in
both economics (Bordalo et al., 2019b) and psychology (Kahana, 2012).

                                            32
7    Estimating the Model
All analyses reported up to this point are motivated and structured through the formal
framework laid out in Section 2. To supplement these reduced-form analyses, we now
explicitly estimate this model, in particular its key memory parameters.
    Specifically, we estimate the parameters ^, ^       ^ by minimizing the sum of squared
                                                r , and a
residuals for the non-linear regression equation (compare equation (4) above):

                                                     k                             z
                                        i, j
                  b   i, j
                             =   100 + nk+1    +r          nix, j   + (1 - r )a          nix, j + i , j ,   (10)
                                                    x =1                          x =1

where  measures an individual's intrinsic responsiveness to the second-period signal.


Aggregate data. To start, we estimate this equation on the aggregate data across sub-
jects, separately for each treatment. Table 6 summarizes the estimates. The quantita-
tive estimates are in line with the results reported above and provide interesting cross-
treatment comparisons. In treatment Main, we estimate a substantial role for associa-
tive recall. The estimates imply that participants recall non-cued signals with probability
59% and cued ones with probability 91%. In treatment Reminder, we confirm that imper-
fect memory entirely disappears (by construction of the treatment), so that associative
recall cannot be identified with reasonable precision (compare the huge standard error).
Analogously, we see that in treatment No Cue, associative recall collapses to zero, again
by construction of the treatment. Related to the discussion of the mechanisms behind
memory imperfections in Section 6, we see that the estimated memory imperfection is
larger in condition Extended time lag than in Main. In treatment No interference, the
estimated memory imperfection drops to almost zero.
    Finally, we see that subjects' intrinsic responsiveness to the second-period signal 
(conditional on memory parameters) is consistently estimated to be less than one, unless
there are no memory imperfections. This again resonates with a large body of work
on belief formation that is summarized in the recent meta-study by Benjamin (2018):
intrinsically, subjects usually underreact to current news. However, in our setup, the
effects of associative recall are sufficiently strong to turn such intrinsic underreaction
into overall overreaction.


Individual-level data.            Next, we estimate the same model, separately for each individ-
ual. To assess the fit of the model at the individual level, we use the individual-level
estimates of ^      ^i to predict participant i 's reported recall of those first-period news
             ri and a




                                                         33
                       Table 6: Estimates of model parameters across treatments

    Treatment                Forgetting (1 - ^
                                             r)                           ^
                                                       Associative recall a       Responsiveness ^

                                   0.41                      0.79                     0.86
    Main
                                   (0.05)                    (0.07)                   (0.04)
                                    0.01                      -1.59                   1.00
    Reminder
                                   (0.01)                    (4.83)                   (0.01)
                                   0.51                       0.01                    0.88
    No Cue
                                   (0.05)                    (0.11)                   (0.05)
                                   0.68                      0.65                     0.85
    Extended time lag
                                   (0.05)                    (0.06)                   (0.05)
                                   0.48                      0.53                     0.93
    Main replication
                                   (0.06)                    (0.09)                   (0.03)
                                   0.43                      0.53                     0.94
    No time lag
                                   (0.06)                    (0.10)                   (0.04)
                                    0.04                      0.64                    0.99
    No interference
                                   (0.04)                    (1.04)                   (0.05)

   Notes. Estimates of equation (10), standard errors (clustered at subject level) reported in
   parentheses. The model is estimated by pooling the data across subjects in a given treat-
   ment.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


that did (qic ) or did not (qin ) get cued by the second-period signal:

                                     ^in = ^
                                     q     ri  ( k - z )                                         (11)
                                     ^ic = [^
                                     q      ri + (1 - ^
                                                      ri ) a
                                                           ^i ]  z                               (12)

where z again denotes the number of first-period signals that were communicated in the
same context as the second-period signal, and k the total number of first-period signals.
Note that the recall data do not enter the estimation and prediction procedure because
the memory parameters are estimated only from the beliefs data. Thus, comparing pre-
dicted with actual recall allows for an assessment of model fit.
   We find that, within treatment Main, the correlation between predicted and actual
recall of those signals that got cued by the second-period signal is  = 0.82. The cor-
relation between predicted and actual recall of those signals that did not get cued is
 = 0.67, see Figure 14 in Appendix C. We interpret these results as encouraging evi-
dence that our simple two-parameter memory model fits the observed data well.




                                                  34
8    Discussion
This paper has provided a theoretically-structured experimental analysis of the role of
associative memory for belief formation. The notion of associative recall has recently re-
ceived increased attention from economic theorists, yet direct experimental evidence on
the importance of cued recall in structured economic decision environments is limited.
We present the first set of theory-driven experiments that build a bridge between psycho-
logical paradigms on cued recall and structured, quantitative economic decision tasks.
Our experiments and estimations suggest a predictable and quantitatively meaningful
role for associative memory in belief formation.
    Our experiments are potentially related to an active literature that documents over-
reaction or excess movement in survey expectations about macroeconomic variables or
geopolitical events (Augenblick and Rabin, 2018; Bordalo et al., 2018). The result of
overreaction in field data is often considered to be a slight puzzle from the perspec-
tive of laboratory research on belief formation. This is because structured laboratory
belief updating problems almost always find underreaction (Benjamin, 2018), at least
partly due to participants' cognitive uncertainty (Enke and Graeber, 2019). However, in
these laboratory experiments, memory imperfections are by design ruled out. We do not
intend to claim that associative recall can explain the entire pattern of over- and under-
reaction identified in the literature. However, it is conceivable that part of the reason
why the laboratory and field literatures identify such different patterns is that memory
constraints and memorable contexts likely play a more important role in the field, as
exemplified by Shiller's (2017; 2019) discussion of the role of memorable "narratives."
We believe that by offering a new experimental paradigm in which these types of effects
can be studied, our paper opens up the possibility for further experimental research in
an agenda on memory imperfections and belief formation.




                                           35
References
Augenblick, Ned and Matthew Rabin, "Belief movement, uncertainty reduction, and
  rational updating," UC Berkeley-Haas and Harvard University Mimeo, 2018.

Benjamin, Daniel J, "Errors in Probabilistic Reasoning and Judgmental Biases," in
  "Handbook of Behavioral Economics" 2018.

Bernheim, B Douglas and Antonio Rangel, "Addiction and cue-triggered decision pro-
  cesses," American economic review, 2004, 94 (5), 1558­1590.

Bodoh-Creed, A, "Mood, memory, and the evaluation of asset prices," Review of Finance,
  2013.

Bordalo, Pedro, Katherine Coffman, Nicola Gennaioli, Frederik Schwerter, and An-
  drei Shleifer, "Memory and representativeness," Working Paper, 2019.

  , Nicola Gennaioli, and Andrei Shleifer, "Memory, Attention, and Choice," Working
  Paper, 2019.

  ,      , Rafael La Porta, and Andrei Shleifer, "Diagnostic expectations and stock re-
  turns," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

  ,      , Yueran Ma, and Andrei Shleifer, "Over-reaction in macroeconomic expecta-
  tions," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2018.

Carlson, Ryan W, Michel Marechal, Bastiaan Oud, Ernst Fehr, and Molly Crockett,
  "Motivated misremembering: Selfish decisions are more generous in hindsight," 2018.

Dertwinkel-Kalt, Markus, Holger Gerhardt, Gerhard Riener, Frederik Schwerter,
  and Louis Strang, "Concentration bias in intertemporal choice," Working Paper, 2017.

Enke, Benjamin, "What you see is all there is," Working Paper, 2017.

      and Florian Zimmermann, "Correlation neglect in belief formation," The Review of
  Economic Studies, 2019, 86 (1), 313­332.

      and Thomas Graeber, "Cognitive Uncertainty," Working Paper, 2019.

Esponda, Ignacio and Emanuel Vespa, "Hypothetical Thinking: Revisiting Classic
  Anomalies in the Laboratory," Working Paper, 2016.

Frydman, Cary and Lawrence J Jin, "Efficient coding and risky choice," Working Paper,
  2018.


                                           36
Fudenberg, Drew, David K Levine et al., "Learning with recency bias," Proceedings of
  the National Academy of Sciences, 2014, 111, 10826­10829.

Gennaioli, Nicola and Andrei Shleifer, "What Comes to Mind," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 2010, 125 (4), 1399­1433.

Hartzmark, Samuel M, Samuel Hirshman, and Alex Imas, "Ownership, Learning, and
  Beliefs," Available at SSRN 3465246, 2019.

Herz, Holger and Dmitry Taubinsky, "What makes a price fair? An experimental study
  of transaction experience and endogenous fairness views," Journal of the European
  Economic Association, 2017, 16 (2), 316­352.

Hossain, Tanjim and Ryo Okui, "The binarized scoring rule," Review of Economic Stud-
  ies, 2013, 80 (3), 984­1001.

Huffman, David, Collin Raymond, and Julia Shvets, "Persistent Overconfidence and
  Biased Memory: Evidence from Managers," 2018.

Kahana, Michael Jacob, Foundations of human memory, OUP USA, 2012.

Koszegi, Botond, George Loewenstein, and Takeshi Murooka, "Fragile Self-Esteem,"
  Working Paper, 2019.

Laibson, David, "A cue-theory of consumption," The Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  2001, 116 (1), 81­119.

Malmendier, Ulrike and Stefan Nagel, "Learning from inflation experiences," The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 2015, 131 (1), 53­87.

Martínez-Marquina, Alejandro, Muriel Niederle, and Emanuel Vespa, "Probabilistic
  States versus Multiple Certainties: The Obstacle of Uncertainty in Contingent Reason-
  ing," Technical Report, National Bureau of Economic Research 2017.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, "A Memory-Based Model of Bounded Rationality," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 2002, pp. 735­774.

Schwerter, Frederik and Florian Zimmermann, "Determinants of trust: The role of
  personal experiences," Working Paper, 2019.

Shiller, Robert J, "Narrative economics," American Economic Review: Papers and Proceed-
  ings, 2017, 107 (4), 967­1004.

  , Narrative Economics: How Stories Go Viral and Drive Major Economic Events, Princeton
  University Press, 2019.

                                          37
Tversky, Amos, "Features of similarity.," Psychological review, 1977, 84 (4), 327.

Wachter, Jessica A and Michael J Kahana, "A retrieved-context theory of financial
  decisions," Available at SSRN, 2019.

Wilson, Andrea, "Bounded memory and biases in information processing," Economet-
  rica, 2014, 82 (6), 2257­2294.

Zimmermann, Florian, "The dynamics of motivated beliefs," American Economic Review,
  forthcoming.




                                           38
                          ONLINE APPENDIX
A     Additional Derivations

A.1     Partial Naïveté
A.1.1    Type I naïveté

The main text assumes that decision-makers are fully naïve about their memory imper-
fections. We now verify robustness against assuming partial naïveté. Suppose the DM
to some extent (captured by naïveté parameter  such that  = 0 for full naïveté and
 = 1 for full sophistication) fails to realize that he sometimes forgets. When he does
realize that he forgot a past signal n x , however, then he correctly (in a Bayesian sense)
infers the realization of the information based on memory parameters r and a.
                                                                            (1- r )-(1- r )a           1-a
    We have that P r (n x = nk+1 |nor ecall , nk+1 ) =                  (1- r )-(1- r )a+(1- r )   =   2-a .   Accordingly,
                                                        -a                         -a
we have that E (n x |nor ecall , nk+1 ) =        nk+1 1
                                                      2-a       -         1
                                                                    nk+1 2- a = 2-a nk+1 .
    The expected belief in period t = 2 is then given by:

                                         k                      k
                                                                                    -a
    E [ b2 |n x , nk+1 ] = v + nk+1 +          mx nx +                (1 - m x )       nk+1
                                        x =1                   x =1
                                                                                   2-a
                                          k              z
                     = v + nk+1 +              r nx +          (1 - r )an x
                                        x =1            x =1
                           k                                        z
                                      -a                         -a
                     +      (1 - r )     nk+1 +       (1 - r )a     nk+1                                              (13)
                       x =1
                                     2-a         x =1
                                                                2-a
                                                                                                           k
                                                  a       1
                     = v + [1 +  (1 - r )a(z + z     - k     )]nk+1 + r                                          nx   (14)
                                                 2-a     2-a                                              x =1


    Note that equation (14) mirrors equation (6) from Section 2. Equation (14) allows
us to directly analyze the implications of allowing for partial naïveté.
    We first note that if  is small (  0), then equation (14) converges to equation (6).
    Second, we note that "on average" (across possible signal histories), equation (14)
still predicts overreaction for all leves of  < 1 and  = 1. To see this, note that there is
                                         1
overreaction as long as z + z 2-
                               a
                                 a -  k 2-a > 0. For a given k , z is randomly and symmet-
                              k
rically distributed with mean 2 . Due to the linear structure of equation (14), it therefore
                                       1
suffices to note that z + z 2-
                             a
                               a -  k 2-a > 0 for z =
                                                                          k
                                                                          2   and  < 1.




                                                         39
A.1.2   Type II naïveté

According to type II naïveté, the DM fully realizes that he sometimes forgets, but is
naïve in how she infers what he forgot. This form of naïveté is captured by the DM's
                                               ^ = 0 captures full naïvité, meaning
                                   ^  a. Here, a
       ^ about memory parameter a, a
belief a
that the DM is aware of imperfect memory but not of the associative nature of recall.
^ = 1 captures full sophistication, meaning that the DM fully takes into account that he
a
is more likely to retrieve information that is cued by the current context.
   The DM's inference would then be as outlined in the previous section, except that
                                                                                                             k
             ^. The DM's forecast would thus be given by f = v + nk+1 +
it would use a                                                                                               x =1
                                                                                                                    mx nx +
  k
  x =1
       (1 -   m x ) 2-
                     -a
                       ^
                       a
                        ^ nk+1 .
   Analogous to type I naïveté, the expected belief in period t = 2 is given by:

                                                  k                   k
                                                                                          -a
                                                                                           ^
    E [ b2 |n x , nk+1 ] = v + nk+1 +                  mx nx +              (1 - m x )        nk+1
                                                x =1                 x =1
                                                                                         2-a^
                                                  k              z
                          = v + nk+1 +                 r nx +         (1 - r )an x
                                                x =1            x =1
                               k                                    z
                                                 -a
                                                  ^                         -a^
                          +          (1 - r )        nk+1 +      (1 - r )a       nk+1                                 (15)
                              x =1
                                                2-a^        x =1
                                                                           2 - ^
                                                                               a
                                                                                                       k
                                                                             ^
                                                                             a       ^
                                                                                     a
                          = v + [1 +  (1 - r )(az + az                           -k      )]nk+1 + r          nx       (16)
                                                                            2-a^    2-a^              x =1


                                               ^  0), then equation (16) converges to
                                   ^ is small (a
   As above, we first note that if a
equation (6).
   Moreover, by an analogous argument to the previous section, there would again be
                        ^ < 1. To see this, note that there is overreaction as long as
overreaction as long as a
         ^        ^
az + az 2-
         a        a
           ^ - k 2-a
           a        ^ > 0. For a given k , z is randomly and symmetrically distributed with
     k
mean 2 . Due to the linear structure of equation (16), it therefore suffices to note that
         ^        ^
az + az 2-
         a
           ^ - k 2-a
           a
                  a
                    ^ > 0 for z =
                                            k
                                            2
                                                     ^ < 1.
                                                 and a




                                                                40
A.2    Derivation of OLS Estimator
We formally derive the relationship between equation (6) and the OLS estimator ^1 in
equation (9). Keeping the notation that b is the belief and n the news, then with N
observations (subject-tasks) the OLS estimator is given by

                                         ni bi - 1/N         ni         bi
                          E [^] = E                                                    (17)
                                             i - 1/ N (
                                            n2                     i)
                                                                  n2

This expectation of a ratio can be approximated by the ratio of the expectations (also,
the expectation of a ratio equals the ratio of probability limits). Denote c = v + r    nx ,
which is not a function of the last signal. Substitute in for the forecast. Observing that
E [ni ] = 0, we get

                                  E [ni bi ] - 1/N        E [ ni ]      E [ bi ]
                       E [^] =                                                         (18)
                                        E [n2
                                            i ] - 1/ N E (            i)
                                                                     n2
                                  E [ni [ni (1 + zi (1 - r ) a) + c ]]
                             =                                                         (19)
                                                    E [n2
                                                        i]
                                                     E [n2 z]
                                                         i i
                             = 1 + (1 - r ) a                                          (20)
                                                      E [ n2
                                                           i]
                                                     E [n2
                                                         i
                                                           ] E [zi ]
                             = 1 + (1 - r ) a                                          (21)
                                                        E [n2
                                                            i]
                                                ¯
                                                z      E [ n2
                                                            i
                                                              ]
                             = 1 + (1 - r ) a                                          (22)
                                                      E [n2
                                                          i]

                             = 1 + (1 - r ) az
                                             ¯                                         (23)

Because zi and ni are independent.




                                            41
B     Overview of Experimental Treatments

                                        Table 7: Treatment overview

 Treatment                         # of subjects     Ave. earnings (euros)       Pre-registration document
 Main                                    80                   15.20                             1
 Reminder                                50                   17.80                             1
 No Cue                                  80                   14.00                             1

 Extended time lag                       80                   24.00                             1
 Extended time lag reminder              50                   27.50                             1

 Underreaction                           80                   14.70                             2
 Underreaction reminder                  50                   18.00                             2

 WTP                                     100                  19.10                             3
 WTP reminder                            80                   18.80                             3

 Main replication                        60                   13.40                             4
 No time lag                             60                   12.40                             4
 No interference                         60                   19.20                             4
 Notes. Horizontal lines indicate which treatments were randomized within the same experimental sessions. Payments
included a show-up fee of 15 in Extended time lag / Extended time lag reminder and of 5 in all other treatments.




                                                      42
C     Additional Figures


                                                    OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal by signal history
           OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal
                   1        .6 1.4         1.8




                                                  0:0   1:0        0:1     1:1      2:0      0:2      2:1       1:2      3:0   0:3
                                                              Signal frequencies (positive vs. negative) in first period

                                                                   Treatment WTP           Treatment WTP reminder


Figure 8: OLS coefficient (+/- 1 SE) in a regression of second-period willingness-to-pay on the last signal,
separately for each set of signal frequencies in the first period. The regressions control for a subject's
first-period willingness-to-pay. Standard error bars are computed based on clustering at the subject level.




                                                                                      43
                                                         OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal by signal history

                                                 1.8
            OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal
                      1        .6   1.4




                                                       0:0      1:0        0:1     1:1      2:0      0:2      2:1       1:2      3:0      0:3
                                                                      Signal frequencies (positive vs. negative) in first period

                                                             Treatment Extended time lag           Treatment Extended time lag reminder


Figure 9: OLS coefficient (+/- 1 SE) in a regression of second-period beliefs on the last signal, separately
for each set of signal frequencies in the first period. The regressions control for a subject's first-period
belief. Standard error bars are computed based on clustering at the subject level.




                                                         OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal by signal history
            OLS coefficient of 2nd period signal
              .6         1         1.4       1.8




                                                       0:0      1:0        0:1     1:1      2:0      0:2      2:1       1:2      3:0      0:3
                                                                      Signal frequencies (positive vs. negative) in first period

                                                                       Treatment Main replication         Treatment No time lag
                                                                       Treatment No interference


Figure 10: OLS coefficient (+/- 1 SE) in a regression of second-period beliefs on the last signal, separately
for each set of signal frequencies in the first period. The regressions control for a subject's first-period
belief. Standard error bars are computed based on clustering at the subject level. The figure excludes
signal histories with less than four observations.



                                                                                              44
                         Recall of 1st period signals in treatment Underreaction
                 3
                 2
            Recall
                 1
                 0




                     0                         1                       2                         3
                                              Number of 1st period signals

                           Identical to 2nd period signal     Different from 2nd period signal


Figure 11: Recall of first-period signals in Treatment Underreaction, depending on whether the second-
period signal was identical to or different from the first-period signals. We construct the recall variables
as follows. In the case of recall of signals that are different from the second-period signal, we use the
reported recall quantity. In the case of recall of signals that are identical to the second-period signal, we
use the reported recall minus one. That is, we make the arguably very plausible assumption that subjects
always remember the value of the second-period signal that they just saw a few seconds ago.




                                                        45
                           Heterogeneity in overreaction (treatment WTP)


                .2
                .15
            Fraction
              .1.05
                0




                       0                     1                         2                        3
                                    Subject-specific regression coefficient

Figure 12: Subject-level distribution of regression coefficients of the second-period signal in treatment
WTP (N=100). To estimate these coefficients, we run regressions akin to column (5) in Table 2 except
that in each regression the sample is restricted to only one subject. To identify overreaction in the presence
of cued recall, the sample is restricted to tasks in which a subject observed at least one first-period signal.
A rational subject would exhibit a coefficient of one.




                                                     46
                                                        Recall of 1st period signals in treatment No interference
                                                 3
                                                 2
                                            Recall
                                                 1
                                                 0




                                                       0                                      1                       2                                                                                    3
                                                                                             Number of 1st period signals

                                                              Identical to 2nd period signal                                                          Different from 2nd period signal


       Figure 13: Recall of first-period signals in Treatment No interference, depending on whether the second-
       period signal was identical to or different from the first-period signals. We construct the recall variables
       as follows. In the case of recall of signals that are different from the second-period signal, we use the
       reported recall quantity. In the case of recall of signals that are identical to the second-period signal, we
       use the reported recall minus one. That is, we make the arguably very plausible assumption that subjects
       always remember the value of the second-period signal that they just saw a few seconds ago.




                                                     Model fit: Cued signals                                                                                            Model fit: Non-cued signals
               3




                                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                Observed recall of non-cued signals
Observed recall of cued signals
                      2




                                                                                                                                         2
      1




                                                                                                                        1
               0




                                                                                                                                 0




                                  0                      1                       2                     3                                              0                        1                       2                       3
                                      Recall of cued signals predicted by model estimation (rounded)                                                      Recall of non-cued signals predicted by model estimation (rounded)




       Figure 14: Relationship between recall as predicted by the model estimates and actual recall. The figures
       represent binned scatter plots that average observed recall for a given level of (rounded) predicted recall.
       Predicted recall is computed by first estimating equation (10) at the subject level and then applying
       equations (11) and (12).




                                                                                                           47
D    Additional Tables

            Table 8: Beliefs in the first period in treatments Main, Reminder, and No Cue


                                                  Dependent variable: 1st period belief
                                               Main                  Reminder                   No Cue
                                         (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
     Company value in 1st period        0.98      0.97            1.00      1.00            0.99      1.00
                                        (0.01)    (0.01)          (0.00)    (0.00)          (0.01)    (0.01)
     Session FE                           No          Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
     Company FE                           No          Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
     Order FE                             No          Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
     Subject FE                           No          Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
     Observations                        800          800          500          500          800          800
     Adjusted R2                         0.96         0.97         1.00         1.00         0.99         0.99
     Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the sub-
    ject level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.


             Table 9: Beliefs in the second period in case of no signal in second period


                                           Dependent variable: 2nd period belief
                                         Main                 Reminder                   No Cue
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)          (5)          (6)
          Belief in 1st period   0.70       0.70        0.95         0.94         0.48         0.45
                                 (0.05)     (0.06)      (0.04)       (0.05)       (0.05)       (0.06)
          Session FE               No           Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
          Company FE               No           Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
          Order FE                 No           Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
          Subject FE               No           Yes          No           Yes          No           Yes
          Observations            800          800          500          500          800          800
          Adjusted R2             0.29         0.28         0.57         0.58         0.17         0.16
         Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at
        the subject level.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                  48
                                Table 10: Treatment Main: Recall data

                                                             Dependent variable:
                                                             Recall [Pos. ­ Neg.]
                                         (1)       (2)      (3)         (4)    (5)      (6)      (7)
                                                                                           
 2nd period signal                      1.05     1.06     1.07     0.81       0.83     0.79     0.83
                                        (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.04)   (0.05)     (0.05)   (0.05)   (0.05)
 Belief in 1st period                   0.74                                           0.57
                                        (0.03)                                         (0.05)
 Company value in 1st period                     0.74
                                                 (0.03)
 Value of cued 1st period signals                                  0.92       0.90
                                                                   (0.03)     (0.03)
 Value of non-cued 1st period signals                              0.58       0.58
                                                                   (0.05)     (0.05)
 2nd period signal ×                                                                   0.36     0.31
 # 1st period signals in same context                                                  (0.05)   (0.05)
 Session FE                               No       No       Yes         No     Yes      No       Yes
 1st period signal history FE             No       No       Yes         No     No       No       Yes
 Company FE                               No       No       Yes         No     Yes      No       Yes
 Order FE                                 No       No       Yes         No     Yes      No       Yes
 Subject FE                               No       No       Yes         No     Yes      No       Yes
 Observations                            800      800      800      800        800      800      800
 Adjusted R2                             0.76     0.77     0.77     0.78       0.78     0.78     0.78
Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level. The
 recall variable is constructed as difference between reported recall of positive and negative signals.

 p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                 49
                        Table 11: Treatment Main: Heterogeneity analysis


                                                        Dependent variable:
                                                         2nd period belief
                                     (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)      (6)
 2nd period signal                 1.26       1.25       1.23      1.21       1.14     1.14
                                   (0.08)     (0.09)     (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.04)   (0.04)
 2nd period signal ×               -0.030     -0.028
 Raven score                        (0.01)     (0.01)
 2nd period signal ×                                     -0.23     -0.20
 Memory for non-cued signals                              (0.06)    (0.06)
 2nd period signal ×                                                           -0.37    -0.35
 Response time                                                                (0.29)   (0.24)
 Belief in 1st period              0.75                  0.75                 0.75
                                   (0.03)                (0.03)               (0.03)
 Session FE                           No        Yes        No        Yes       No       Yes
 1st period signal history FE         No        Yes        No        Yes       No       Yes
 Company FE                           No        Yes        No        Yes       No       Yes
 Order FE                             No        Yes        No        Yes       No       Yes
 Observations                        800       800         800       800       800      800
 Adjusted R2                         0.80      0.80        0.80      0.80      0.80     0.80
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject
level. The table suppresses the coefficients of Raven score (columns (1)­(2)), memory
for non-cued signals (columns (3) ­(4)), and response time (columns (5)­(6)). Response
times are measured in minutes. The sample includes all observations from treatment Main
where subjects observed a second-period signal.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                              50
                Table 12: Treatment Main: Heterogeneity analysis (recall data)


                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                       Recall [Pos. ­ Neg.]
                                    (1)       (2)         (3)       (4)          (5)     (6)
                                                                                   
 2nd period signal                1.29      1.27        1.21      1.19        1.15     1.15
                                  (0.13)    (0.13)      (0.06)    (0.05)      (0.05)   (0.05)
 2nd period signal ×              -0.045    -0.042
 Raven score                       (0.02)    (0.02)
 2nd period signal ×                                    -0.30     -0.26
 Memory for non-cued signals                             (0.08)    (0.08)
 2nd period signal ×                                                          -0.45    -0.50
 Response time recall                                                         (0.19)    (0.19)
 Belief in 1st period             0.74                  0.74                  0.74
                                  (0.03)                (0.03)                (0.03)
 Session FE                         No        Yes         No        Yes          No      Yes
 1st period signal history FE       No        Yes         No        Yes          No      Yes
 Company FE                         No        Yes         No        Yes          No      Yes
 Order FE                           No        Yes         No        Yes          No      Yes
 Observations                      800       800         800       800         800      800
 Adjusted R2                       0.76      0.77        0.76      0.77        0.76     0.77
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject
level. The  recall variable is constructed as difference between reported recall of positive
and negative signals. The table suppresses the coefficients of Raven score (columns (1) and
(4)), memory for non-cued signals (columns (2) and (5)), and response time (columns (3)
and (6)). Response times are measured in minutes. The sample includes all observations
from treatment Main where subjects observed a second-period signal.  p < 0.10,  p <
0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                             51
            Table 13: Treatments Main vs. Reminder and No Cue: Recall data

                                        Dependent variable:  Recall [Pos. ­ Neg.]
                                    Main vs. Reminder             Main vs. No Cue
                                  (1)        (2)      (3)      (4)      (5)         (6)
                                                                           
 2nd period signal              0.95       0.95     0.94     0.76     0.75      0.77
                                (0.02)     (0.02)   (0.02)   (0.05)   (0.05)    (0.06)
 2nd period signal ×             0.11      0.12     0.13
 1 if Main, 0 if Reminder        (0.04)    (0.04)   (0.04)
 2nd period signal ×                                         0.29     0.29      0.30
 1 if Main, 0 if No Cue                                      (0.06)   (0.06)    (0.07)
 Belief in 1st period           0.83                         0.60
                                (0.02)                       (0.03)
 Company value in 1st period               0.83                       0.61
                                           (0.02)                     (0.03)
 Treatment FE                     Yes        Yes      Yes      Yes      Yes         Yes
 Session FE                       No         No       Yes      No       No          Yes
 1st period signal history FE     No         No       Yes      No       No          Yes
 Company FE                       No         No       Yes      No       No          Yes
 Order FE                         No         No       Yes      No       No          Yes
 Subject FE                       No         No       Yes      No       No          Yes
 Observations                    1300       1300     1300     1600     1600      1600
 Adjusted R2                     0.82       0.83     0.83     0.62     0.63      0.63
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the sub-
ject level. In columns (1)­(3), the sample includes all observations from treatments Main
and Reminder where subjects observed a second-period signal. In columns (4)­(6), the
sample includes all observations from treatments Main and No Cue where subjects ob-
served a second-period signal. The  recall variable is constructed as difference between
reported recall of positive and negative signals.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                           52
         Table 14: Treatments Underreaction and Underreaction reminder: Recall data

                                                              Dependent variable:
                                                               2nd period belief
                                                                 Treatments:
                                                       Underreaction                  + Reminder
                                           (1)         (2)      (3)       (4)         (5)       (6)
                                                                                        
 2nd period signal                       0.62      0.60       0.86      0.81        0.89      0.91
                                         (0.05)    (0.05)     (0.05)    (0.06)      (0.03)    (0.04)
 Belief in 1st period                    0.66                 0.49                  0.76
                                         (0.04)               (0.05)                (0.03)
 2nd period signal ×                                          -0.33     -0.28
 # 1st period signals in same context                          (0.06)    (0.06)
 2nd period signal ×                                                                -0.28     -0.32
 1 if Underr., 0 if Reminder underr.                                                 (0.06)    (0.06)
 Treatment FE                               No         No       No        No          Yes       Yes
 Session FE                                 No         Yes      No        Yes         No        Yes
 Signal history FE                          No         Yes      No        Yes         No        Yes
 Company FE                                 No         Yes      No        Yes         No        Yes
 Order FE                                   No         Yes      No        Yes         No        Yes
 Subject FE                                 No         Yes      No        Yes         No        Yes
 Observations                              800         800     800       800         1300      1300
 Adjusted R2                               0.59        0.61    0.61      0.63        0.71      0.72
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level.
The  recall variable is constructed as difference between reported recall of positive and negative
signals. In columns (3)­(4), the table suppresses the coefficient of the number of first-period signals
that were communicated with the same context as tge second-period signal. The sample includes all
observations from treatments Underreaction and Reminder underreaction where subjects observed
a second-period signal.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                  53
              Table 15: Treatments Extended time lag and Extended time lag reminder

                                                            Dependent variable:
                                                             2nd period belief
                                                                  Treatments:
                                                       Time lag                 + Reminder time lag
                                          (1)         (2)    (3)        (4)       (5)       (6)
 2nd period signal                      1.17      1.16      0.85      0.84      1.02      1.03
                                        (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.05)    (0.06)    (0.02)    (0.02)
 Belief in 1st period                   0.52                0.33                0.71
                                        (0.04)              (0.05)              (0.03)
 2nd period signal ×                                        0.44      0.45
 # 1st period signals in same context                       (0.05)    (0.07)
 2nd period signal ×                                                            0.18      0.15
 1 if Time lag, 0 if Reminder t. l.                                             (0.04)    (0.05)
 Treatment FE                             No          No      No        No        Yes       Yes
 Session FE                               No          Yes     No        Yes       No        Yes
 Signal history FE                        No          Yes     No        Yes       No        Yes
 Company FE                               No          Yes     No        Yes       No        Yes
 Order FE                                 No          Yes     No        Yes       No        Yes
 Subject FE                               No          Yes     No        Yes       No        Yes
 Observations                            800       800       800       800      1300       1300
 Adjusted R2                             0.68      0.67      0.70      0.70     0.77       0.77
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level. In
columns (3)­(4), the table suppresses the coefficient of the number of first-period signals that were
communicated with the same context as tge second-period signal. The sample includes all observa-
tions from treatments Extended time lag and Extended time lag reminder where subjects observed a
second-period signal.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                 54
     Table 16: Treatments Extended time lag and Extended time lag reminder: Recall data

                                                             Dependent variable:
                                                              Recall [Pos. ­ Neg.]
                                                                   Treatments:
                                                        Time lag                 + Reminder time lag
                                           (1)         (2)     (3)       (4)      (5)        (6)
                                                                                     
 2nd period signal                       0.97      0.96      0.66      0.66      0.97      0.98
                                         (0.05)    (0.06)    (0.05)    (0.06)    (0.03)    (0.03)
 Belief in 1st period                    0.52                0.33                0.70
                                         (0.04)              (0.05)              (0.03)
 2nd period signal ×                                         0.43      0.43
 # 1st period signals in same context                        (0.06)    (0.07)
 2nd period signal ×                                                             0.022     -0.0011
 1 if Time lag, 0 if Reminder t. l.                                              (0.06)     (0.06)
 Treatment FE                              No          No      No        No       Yes        Yes
 Session FE                                No          Yes     No        Yes      No         Yes
 Signal history FE                         No          Yes     No        Yes      No         Yes
 Company FE                                No          Yes     No        Yes      No         Yes
 Order FE                                  No          Yes     No        Yes      No         Yes
 Subject FE                                No          Yes     No        Yes      No         Yes
 Observations                             800       800        800      800      1300       1300
 Adjusted R2                              0.57      0.57       0.60     0.60     0.70       0.70
 Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level.
The  recall variable is constructed as difference between reported recall of positive and negative
signals. In columns (3)­(4), the table suppresses the coefficient of the number of first-period signals
that were communicated with the same context as tge second-period signal. The sample includes
all observations from treatments Extended time lag and Extended time lag reminder where subjects
observed a second-period signal.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                                  55
                                                 Table 17: Treatments Main replication, No time lag, and No interference

                                                                                                           Dependent variable:
                                                                                                            2nd period belief
                                                                                                            Treatments:
                                                                Main repl.        No time lag      No interference Main repl. + No time lag   Main repl. + No interf.
                                                               (1)      (2)      (3)      (4)       (5)         (6)      (7)       (8)         (9)         (10)
                                                                                                                                                  
      2nd period signal                                       1.11     1.14     1.11     1.11      1.01       0.92      1.11     1.12         1.11        1.14
                                                              (0.03)   (0.04)   (0.03)   (0.04)    (0.04)     (0.06)    (0.03)   (0.04)       (0.03)      (0.03)
      Belief in 1st period                                    0.65              0.67               0.98                 0.66                  0.68
                                                              (0.05)            (0.05)             (0.03)               (0.04)                (0.05)
      2nd period signal × 1 if No time lag, 0 if Main repl.                                                            -0.0011   -0.0058
                                                                                                                        (0.05)    (0.05)




56
      2nd period signal × 1 if No interf., 0 if Main repl.                                                                                    -0.16       -0.33
                                                                                                                                              (0.07)       (0.08)
      Treatment FE                                             No       No       No       No        No          No       Yes       Yes         Yes          Yes
      Session FE                                               No       Yes      No       Yes       No          Yes       No       Yes          No          Yes
      Signal history FE                                        No       Yes      No       Yes       No          Yes       No       Yes          No          Yes
      Company FE                                               No       Yes      No       Yes       No          No        No       Yes          No          Yes
      Order FE                                                 No       Yes      No       Yes       No          No        No       Yes          No          Yes
      Subject FE                                               No       Yes      No       Yes       No          No        No       Yes          No          No
      Observations                                             600      600      600      600        60         60       1200     1200         660         660
      Adjusted R2                                              0.76     0.76     0.74     0.76      0.95       0.95      0.75     0.76         0.77        0.77
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level. The sample includes all observations from treatments Main
     replication, No time lag, and No interference where subjects observed a second-period signal.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
                                           Table 18: Treatment Main replication, No time lag, and No interference: Recall data

                                                                                                       Dependent variable:
                                                                                                        Recall [Pos. ­ Neg.]
                                                                                                            Treatments:
                                                                Main repl.        No time lag      No interference Main repl. + No time lag      Main repl. + No interf.
                                                               (1)      (2)      (3)       (4)      (5)       (6)       (7)          (8)           (9)         (10)
                                                                                                                                                      
      2nd period signal                                       1.06     1.07     1.04     1.03      1.07     1.03      1.06         1.06          1.06         1.08
                                                              (0.04)   (0.04)   (0.05)   (0.05)    (0.05)   (0.04)    (0.04)       (0.05)        (0.04)       (0.04)
      Belief in 1st period                                    0.68              0.69               1.00               0.68                       0.70
                                                              (0.05)            (0.04)             (0.03)             (0.03)                     (0.04)
      2nd period signal × 1 if No time lag, 0 if Main repl.                                                           -0.020        -0.031
                                                                                                                      (0.06)        (0.07)
      2nd period signal × 1 if No interf., 0 if Main repl.                                                                                       -0.050       -0.17




57
                                                                                                                                                 (0.08)       (0.09)
      Treatment FE                                             No       No        No       No        No       No        Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
      Session FE                                               No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No           Yes           No           Yes
      Signal history FE                                        No       Yes       No       Yes       No       Yes       No           Yes           No           Yes
      Company FE                                               No       Yes       No       Yes       No       No        No           Yes           No           Yes
      Order FE                                                 No       Yes       No       Yes       No       No        No           Yes           No           Yes
      Subject FE                                               No       Yes       No       Yes       No       No        No           Yes           No           No
      Observations                                             600      600      600      600        60       60       1200         1200           660         660
      Adjusted R2                                              0.73     0.73     0.71     0.71      0.94     0.97      0.72         0.72           0.74        0.74
      Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered at the subject level. The  recall variable is constructed as difference between reported
     recall of positive and negative signals. The sample includes all observations from treatments Main replication, No time lag, and No interference where subjects
     observed a second-period signal.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.
Table 19: Treatment No interference: Associative memory in recall of colored shapes


                                                     Dependent variable:
                                                   Recall of shapes in group
                                                    (1)       (2)       (3)
                                                                 
     # 1st period shapes in same context          0.74      0.68      0.70
                                                  (0.05)    (0.11)    (0.10)
     # 1st period shapes in different context     0.60      0.53      0.56
                                                  (0.06)    (0.12)    (0.11)
     Session FE                                     No        Yes       Yes
     Shape history FE                               No        Yes       Yes
     Group FE                                       No        Yes       Yes
     Order FE                                       No        Yes       Yes
     Subject FE                                     No        No        Yes
     Observations                                  540        540       540
     Adjusted R2                                   0.45       0.46      0.55
     Notes. OLS estimates, robust standard errors (in parentheses) are clus-
    tered at the subject level. The sample includes all observations from
    treatment No interference where subjects reported the recall of the num-
    ber of shapes in a given group.  p < 0.10,  p < 0.05,  p < 0.01.




                                        58
E     Experimental Instructions
We provide translations of the paper-based instructions here. An English version of the
computer program for treatment Main (where subjects observe news and enter their
guesses) can be accessed at https://unikoelnwiso.eu.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/
SV_0MrVD2rNNrKeLGt.


E.1    Treatment Main
Welcome to the Experiment!

We ask you to remain quiet throughout the experiment, and to refrain from talking to or
disturbing other participants. Should you have any questions, please notify one of the
experimenters. Please do so quietly in order to avoid disturbing other participants.

As is the case in all experiments in the BonnEconLab, you are free to leave the experiment
at any time without explanation.

The main part of the experiment consists of two parts that belong together. Below you
will receive the instructions for both parts. Please read the instructions carefully. At the
end of the instructions, you will be asked a series of control questions in order to test
your understanding of the instructions. You may only take part in the experiment if you
answer these control questions correctly.

For your participation you will receive a participation fee of 5 euros. Depending on your
decisions, you can earn additional money.


PART 1 OF THE EXPERIMENT



In this experiment, there are twelve hypothetical firms. We have invented twelve firms
that are in no way related to real firms. These firms have the following names:

    · Firm X

    · Firm I

    · Firm K

    · Firm N

    · Firm J


                                            59
   · Firm M

   · Firm D

   · Firm U

   · Firm P

   · Firm G

   · Firm R

   · Firm T


Each firm has a stock price that is determined by a simple formula: The stock price is
given by the so-called base price plus the sum of all news you receive about the respective
firm over the course of the entire experiment.

For example, suppose that there are two pieces of news for a firm. Then, the stock price
of that firm is calculated as follows:

Stock price = Base price + News 1 + News 2

This is just an example. In the actual experiment, you will not receive two pieces of news
for each firm. Instead, the number of news varies from firm to firm. You will thus receive
more news about some firms than about others. It is also possible that you receive no
news at all for some firms. It is just important for you to understand that the stock price
is calculated as the sum of the base price and all news. In this experiment, you can hence
simply calculate the stock price of a firm by adding up the base price of a firm and all
news about this firm. Other factors do not play a role in determining the stock price.

The Base Price

The base prices of the firms are known and identical across firms: the base price of each
firm is 100.

The News

In this experiment, there are two types of news for each firm, where one type of news
is positive and the other type of news is negative. Positive news have a value of +10,
which means that the stock price of the respective firm increases by 10. Negative news
have a value of -10, which means that the stock price of the respective firm decreases



                                            60
by 10. You can see that positive and negative news each have exactly the same value,
except that one is positive and one negative.

Once the experiment begins, you will see the news for the different firms in sequential
order. First, on a separate screen, you will be informed about which firm the upcoming
news concern. In case you receive no news for that firm, you will be informed about this
on your screen. In case you do receive news, these will be displayed one after another on
your screen (one piece of news per screen). How many news you receive for a particular
firm is determined randomly by the computer and does not depend on the value of the
news for the firm.

The computer determines randomly whether the news for a particular firm are positive
or negative. You can think of this as the computer tossing a fair coin each time:

   · Heads means positive news (Probability 50%)

   · Tails means negative news (Probability 50%)


Importantly, it can happen that the same type of news occurs several times. In this case,
you also have to incorporate the news several times.

Example 1: The base price of a firm is 100 and you receive news -10 twice for this firm,
and news +10 once (because the three coin tosses of the computer turned out that way).
Then, the correct stock price is given by 100 - 10 - 10 + 10 = 90.

Example 2: The base price of a firm is 100 and you receive no news about this firm. Then,
the correct stock price is 100.

Example 3: The base price of a firm is 100 and you receive one news +10 for the firm
(because the coin toss of the computer happened to land that way). The correct stock
price in this case is given by 100 + 10 = 110.

Please note that the computer independently tosses a coin for each firm and each piece of
news, such that each coin toss is completely independent of the others. This means that
the development of the stock price of a firm is completely random and does not follow
systematic trends. Just because the first piece of news was positive does not mean that
the second piece will also be positive. Rather, the probability for positive news is again
exactly 50%, because the coin tosses are completely independent of each other.

Please also note that this implies that for every firm the expected value of the news is
exactly zero: positive and negative news have the same value and the probability for

                                           61
each is 50:50. Thus, in case you don't know the news for a firm, you know that the news
is on average zero and thus no change in the stock price occurs.

Communication of the News

As already mentioned, in this experiment you will receive news about the stock prices of
twelve firms. In case you receive news for a firm, the news will appear sequentially on
separate screens. However, the news appear separately for each firm. This means that
you will first observe all news for one company, then all the news for another company,
and so on. It will be important for you to distinguish which news belong to which firm.

The news will be communicated to you on your screen. Each piece of news is communi-
cated along with two features:

  1. Each type of news is accompanied by a particular "story", that explains to you why
      this particular type of news occurred.

  2. Each type of news is accompanied by a particular image that will be displayed on
      your screen. This image will roughly reflect the story.


In this experiment, there are 24 types of news in total: one positive and one negative
type of news for each of the twelve firms. As explained above, each of these 24 types of
news is accompanied by a specific image and a specific story:

   · The positive news about firm X will only be communicated with story 1 and image
     1.

   · The negative news about firm X will only be communicated with story 2 and image
      2.

   · The positive news about firm I will only be communicated with story 3 and image
      3.

   · The negative news about firm I will only be communicated with story 4 and image
     4.

   · Etc.


Please note: As mentioned above, it can happen that you receive the same news several
times. For example, it can happen that you receive the positive news +10 twice for a
given firm. The two pieces of news would then be accompanied by exactly the same


                                           62
story and image. When you determine a company's stock price, you would then have to
take both of these positive news into account.

Importantly, please note that it can never happen that a story accompanies different
types of news, or even belongs to different firms. Each story only belongs to one type of
news for one particular firm. Likewise, it can never happen that an image is associated
with different types of news. Each image and each story are assigned to only one type
of news for one particular firm.

If you now enter the code "1108" on your screen, you will see an example of a piece of
news. Please note that the accompanying story and image are only an example and do
not correspond to those in the actual experiment.

Your Task: Determine the Stock Prices of the Twelve Firms

After you will have seen the news for a firm, you will be asked to provide an estimate of
the stock price of that firm. In doing so, you can earn 10 Euros. The closer your estimate
is to the actual stock price of the firm, the higher the probability that you actually receive
the 10 Euros. This is determined using the following formula:

Probability of winning 10 Euros (in percent) = 100 - (Estimate - True price)2

This means that the difference between your estimate and the true value is squared. This
number is then subtracted from the maximum possible probability of 100%. While this
formula might seem complicated, the underlying principle is very simple: the smaller
the difference between your estimate and the true value, the higher the likelihood that
you win 10 Euros. Notice that the probability of winning only depends on the absolute
difference. Thus, it doesn't matter for your payment whether you overestimate the true
value by, say, 5 or underestimate it by 5.


PART 2 OF THE EXPERIMENT

As explained above, in the first part of the experiment your task is to provide an estimate
of the stock price of each firm. In the second part, we will again ask you to estimate the
stock price of each firm.

You will receive up to one additional piece of news for each company. For some compa-
nies, there will be no further news. Whether or not you receive an additional piece of
news for a particular company is randomly determined by the computer and does not
depend on the value of the previous news for this company.

Afterwards, you will again be asked provide an estimate of the stock price of that firms.

                                             63
As in the first part of the experiment, the stock price is determined by the base price
(100) plus the sum of all news for the firm. Please note that the stock price of a firm
is determined by all news that you have seen for that company over the course of the
entire experiment, i.e., all news from the first and all news from the second part.

As in the first part, the closer your estimate is to the actual stock price of the firm, the
higher your probability of winning 10 Euros. This is determined by the same formula as
in the first part of the experiment:

Probability of winning 10 Euros (in percent) = 100 - (Estimate - True Price)2

PROCEDURE OF THE EXPERIMENT

   1. You will first answer a set of control questions on the computer.

   2. You complete the first part of the experiment:

         · We will first inform you about which of the twelve hypothetical firms is next.
         · You will sequentially receive pieces of news for this firm. In case you receive
           no news for a firm, you will be informed about this on your screen.
         · Afterwards, you will be asked to enter an estimate of the stock price of this
           firm.
         · We will repeat this procedure for each of the twelve firms.

   3. You complete several other tasks.

   4. You complete the second part of the experiment:

         · We will first inform you about which of the twelve hypothetical firms you are
           dealing with.
         · Then, you will potentially receive an additional piece of news for this firm.
           For some firms, you will receive no further news.
         · Afterwards, you will be asked to enter an estimate of the stock price of this
           firm. The actual stock price of the firm is given by the base price plus all news
           that you received over the course of the experiment (i.e., part 1 and part 2).
         · We will repeat this procedure for each of the twelve firms.

YOUR PAYMENT

In addition to the 5 Euro participation fee, you can earn money with your estimates as
described above. In total, you will provide 24 estimates in this experiment: two for each

                                            64
of the 12 firms. At the end of the experiment, the computer randomly selects one of the
twelve firms as well as one of your two estimates for this firm. The probability that the
estimate from part 2 of the experiment gets selected is 90% and the probability that
the estimate from part 1 gets selected is 10%. You will then be paid according to your
earnings from your estimate for this firm. Thus, every decision is potentially relevant for
your payments. However, only one decision will actually be paid out, so there is no point
in strategizing by, for example, alternating between high and low answers. In order to
maximize your earnings, you should always enter the best estimate that you have in
mind for the task at hand.

As soon as all participants have read the instructions, we will provide you with another
code to start the control questions.


E.2    Treatment Reminder
Instructions for treatment Reminder were identical to treatment Main, except that we in-
formed subjects in the instructions for part 2 that they would be reminded of their part 1
estimates in part 2. For completeness, we display the relevant parts below.


PART 2 OF THE EXPERIMENT

As explained above, in the first part of the experiment your task is to provide an estimate
of the stock price of each firm. In the second part, we will again ask you to estimate the
stock price of each firm.

For each company, we will first remind you of your estimate of the stock price for this
company from part 1.

You will receive up to one additional piece of news for each company. For some compa-
nies, there will be no further news. Whether or not you receive an additional piece of
news for a particular company is randomly determined by the computer and does not
depend on the value of the previous news for this company.

Afterwards, you will again be asked provide an estimate of the stock price of that firms.

As in the first part of the experiment, the stock price is determined by the base price
(100) plus the sum of all news for the firm. Please note that the stock price of a firm
is determined by all news that you have seen for that company over the course of the
entire experiment, i.e., all news from the first and all news from the second part.



                                            65
As in the first part, the closer your estimate is to the actual stock price of the firm, the
higher your probability of winning 10 Euros. This is determined by the same formula as
in the first part of the experiment:



Probability of winning 10 Euros (in percent) = 100 - (Estimate - True Price)2


PROCEDURE OF THE EXPERIMENTS

   1. You will first answer a set of control questions on the computer.

   2. You complete the first part of the experiment:

         · We will first inform you about which of the twelve hypothetical firms is next.
         · You will sequentially receive pieces of news for this firm. In case you receive
           no news for a firm, you will be informed about this on your screen.
         · Afterwards, you will be asked to enter an estimate of the stock price of this
           firm.
         · We will repeat this procedure for each of the twelve firms.

   3. You complete several other tasks.

   4. You complete the second part of the experiment:

         · We will first inform you about which of the twelve hypothetical firms you are
           dealing with.
         · We will then remind you of your part 1 estimate of the stock price for this
           company.
         · Then, you will potentially receive an additional piece of news for this firm.
           For some firms, you will receive no further news.
         · Afterwards, you will be asked to enter an estimate of the stock price of this
           firm. The actual stock price of the firm is given by the base price plus all news
           that you received over the course of the experiment (i.e., part 1 and part 2).
         · We will repeat this procedure for each of the twelve firms.


E.3    Treatment No Cue
Instructions for treatment No Cue were again identical to treatment Main, except for the
description of news and stories. For completeness, we display the relevant parts below.



                                            66
Communication of the News

As already mentioned, in this experiment you will receive news about the stock prices of
twelve firms. In case you receive news for a firm, the news will appear sequentially on
separate screens. However, the news appear separately for each firm. This means that
you will first observe all news for one company, then all the news for another company,
and so on. It will be important for you to distinguish which news belong to which firm.

The news will be communicated to you on your screen. Each piece of news is communi-
cated along with two features:

  1. Each type of news is accompanied by a particular "story", that explains to you why
      this particular type of news occurred.

  2. Each type of news is accompanied by a particular image that will be displayed on
      your screen. This image will roughly reflect the story.


Every single piece of news is attached to its own image and its own story.

   · The first piece of news for company X (should you receive one) will be communi-
      cated with an separate story and a separate image.

   · The second piece of news for company X (should you receive one) will be commu-
      nicated with an separate story and a separate image.

   · The first piece of news for company I (should you receive one) will be communi-
      cated with a separate story and a separate image.

   · The second piece of news for company I (should you receive one) will be commu-
      nicated with a separate story and a separate image.

   · Etc.


Please note: As mentioned above, it can happen that you receive the same news several
times. For example, it can happen that you receive the positive news +10 twice for a
given firm. The two pieces of news would then be accompanied by exactly two different
stories and two different images. When you determine a company's stock price, you
would then have to take both of these positive news into account.

Importantly, please note that it can never happen that a story accompanies multiple
news, or even belongs to different firms. Each story only belongs to one piece of news
for one particular firm. Likewise, it can never happen that an image is associated with

                                           67
multiple news. Each image and each story are assigned to only one piece of news for
one particular firm.

If you now enter the code "1108" on your screen, you will see an example of a piece of
news. Please note that the accompanying story and image are only an example and do
not correspond to those in the actual experiment.




                                         68
F     Experimental Materials

F.1    Screenshots of signal, story and image presentation




Figure 15: Example screenshot of how a piece of positive news for Company N is communicated to subjects.
The signal is displayed in the last line of the text. A story and an image accompany the signal.




                                                  69
Figure 16: Example screenshot of how a piece of negative news for Company K is communicated to subjects.
The signal is displayed in the last line of the text. A story and an image accompany the signal.




                                                  70
