                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    THE CONSUMPTION EFFECTS OF THE DISPOSITION TO SELL WINNERS AND
                            HOLD LOSERS

                                      Benjamin Loos
                                      Steffen Meyer
                                      Michaela Pagel

                                    Working Paper 26668
                            http://www.nber.org/papers/w26668


                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  January 2020




We thank Chris Mayer, Brad Barber, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, Florian Peters, Neng Wang,
Rawley Heimer, Alexander Michaelides, Paul Tetlock, Gur Huberman, Markku Kaustia, Ivo
Welch, Samuli Knüpfer, Valentin Haddad, Michael Weber, Valentin Haddad, Cameron Peng,
Christine Laudenbach, Alex Imas, Johannes Maier, Simeon Schudy, and Martin Weber as well as
seminar and conference participants at the 2nd Annual Conference for Women in Economics at
Princeton, AQR Institute Academic Symposium 2019, Cornell IBHF Symposium, WashU
Household Finance Conference, UCLA Anderson, University of Rotterdam, ESMT, University of
Mannheim, Endless Summer Conference, New Consumption Data Workshop in Copenhagen,
Red Rock Finance Conference, MIT Junior Finance Conference, SFS Cavalcade, Norwegian
Business School, University of Georgia, Columbia, and Rising 5 Star for valuable comments.
This research would not have been possible without the collaboration of a German bank. We
gratefully acknowledge provision of data from this bank. We thank this bank and all its
employees who helped us. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Benjamin Loos, Steffen Meyer, and Michaela Pagel. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Consumption Effects of the Disposition to Sell Winners and Hold Losers
Benjamin Loos, Steffen Meyer, and Michaela Pagel
NBER Working Paper No. 26668
January 2020
JEL No. G02,G5

                                         ABSTRACT

We use individual-level data on all security trades, holdings, spending, and income from an
online retail bank. We study the effects of an exogenous change in the displayed purchase prices
of the mutual funds in individuals' portfolios. We find that individuals are more likely to sell
what we call fictitious winners, i.e., funds that are winners under the newly displayed purchase
price but are losers under the actual purchase price. We also document that individual
consumption increases in response to realizing fictitious capital gains. We thus document a causal
link among purchase prices, trades, and consumption using observational data and find that the
trading and consumption results are more prevalent for less-informed investors. We thereby
document a marginal propensity to consume out of (confused) capital gains, which is informative
about the literature on consumption out of stock market wealth.

Benjamin Loos                                   Michaela Pagel
University of Technology Sydney                 Columbia Business School
Sydney, Australia                               3022 Broadway
beni.loos@gmail.com                             Uris Hall
                                                New York, NY 10027
Steffen Meyer                                   and NBER
University of Southern Denmark                  mpagel@columbia.edu
Campusvej 55
5230 Odense M
Denmark
stme@sam.sdu.dk
1 Introduction
Stock and mutual fund holdings represent a signicant fraction of household nancial wealth com-


parable to the stock of housing wealth.
                                           1 Fluctuations in stock prices should thus signicantly aect

households' investment, savings, and consumption decisions.        Furthermore, uctuations in stock


prices may be a source of disutility that makes households reluctant to invest in the stock market in


the rst place (Campbell, 2006; Barberis et al., 2006; Pagel, 2018). Unlike house prices, stock prices


are highly volatile and transparent, which may amplify the disutility associated with monitoring


one's wealth. Additionally, stocks can be easily monetized if consumption needs arise or households


experience changes in beliefs about stock market performance or preferences for risk taking. There


exists a large empirical literature documenting that individuals prefer to sell winning stocks and


hold losing stocks (see Odean, 1998; Chang et al., 2016). Researchers have argued that this nding


is dicult to rationalize within standard economic models and have highlighted the importance


of non-standard preferences or beliefs to explain such behavior. However, whether the disposition


eect has real eects in terms of changing consumption is unclear and empirical evidence on how


much individuals consume out of stock market wealth remains scarce.


   Clearly, estimating the marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of investing in winning


stocks or stock market wealth more generally is dicult. Individuals endogenously decide to trade


successful or unsuccessful investments in response to individual shocks to consumption needs or


aggregate uctuations in consumer condence. Therefore, the relationships between trading, indi-


vidual consumption, stock price uctuations, and other aggregate variables are subject to common


shocks.     However, the economic environment, individual wealth, and changes in preferences are


not the only factors that inuence consumption; subjective feelings of being a successful investor


also have an eect.         Psychologists have long known that being rich or poor is a state of mind


(Tang et al., 2004). In this paper, we show that subjective feelings of investment success, or having


invested in winning as opposed to losing stocks or funds, aect trading. Additionally, we attempt


to determine the extent to which the subjective feeling of being a successful investor matters and

  1 See,   e.g., Pfeer et al. (2016).



                                                     2
whether such behavior has any real consequences in aecting consumption.


    To investigate the eect of selling a winning investment on individual investor consumption, we


use a unique panel dataset on the daily trading of more than 100,000 private investors in Germany


spanning the years 2003 to 2018. We precisely measure each individual's daily activity by his or her


login and trading behavior and all of his or her transactions and balances in his or her settlement,


savings, and checking accounts.         As a source of exogenous changes in the subjective feeling of


investment success, we utilize the implementation of a capital gains tax reform in Germany in


January 2018. The capital gains tax reform simplied the tax treatment of retaining domestic and


foreign funds, i.e., funds that automatically reinvest capital gains, dividends, and interest payments.


    To simplify the process of assessing capital gains taxes after the reform and subtracting them


at the bank level, the majority of German banks initiated a ctitious sale on January 1, 2018, of


all funds and ETFs individuals held. This ctitious sale changed the displayed purchase prices of


all funds and ETFs (but no other investments) on January 1, 2018, to take the December 29, 2017,


closing price, as quoted by the exchange. In turn, this new purchase price determined the displayed


absolute capital gains and losses as well as their displayed percentage returns.                Importantly, the


reform did not have any real implications for individual tax liabilities because the actual purchase


prices and cost basis of any investments as well as the capital gains tax rate remained the same.


    We estimate the eects of these changes in the displayed purchase prices and capital gains or


losses on trades using a linear probability model as is standard in the disposition-eect literature.
                                                                                                                  2

We nd that individuals are aected by the change in the purchase price and their respective


displayed capital gains or losses: 1) individuals' likelihood to sell a fund is 4.09% higher when funds


are displayed as (ctitious) winners even though they are losers based on the actual purchase prices


and 2) individuals' likelihood to sell a fund is 0.82% lower when funds are displayed as (ctitious)


losers even though they are actual winners.

   2 We document a disposition eect for all stocks and funds that is of similar magnitude to that in the literature.
The propensity to sell winning stocks is higher than the propensity to sell winning funds. In the overall sample
of 103,000 German investors over the period 2003 to 2018, we nd a slightly negative disposition eect for only
funds. This result is in line with Chang et al. (2016), who use the data from Odean (1998) consisting of 73,558 US
households from January 1991 to November 1996 and document a reverse disposition eect for delegated investments
such as mutual funds. However, when we split the sample by years, for instance, we generally nd an attenuated,
sometimes positive and sometimes negative disposition to sell winning funds. Nevertheless, the propensity to sell
ctitious winning funds is large and positive in all sample splits and robustness checks we performed.


                                                         3
   Next, we employ a two-stage instrumental variable strategy to estimate the eect of realizing


ctitious winners on consumption.       Specically, we use individuals' tendencies to sell ctitious


winners as a rst stage to estimate the individual MPC out of realizing ctitious capital gains. We


can use the eect of ctitious capital gains on selling as a rst stage because the ctitious capital


gain is a plausibly exogenous shock to each individual's wealth once we control for time xed eects


to account for uctuations in all aggregate variables such as stock market performance or consumer


condence. In the second stage, we then estimate the MPC out of each euro of ctitious capital


gains. We nd that individuals consume approximately 15.7% out of each euro of realized ctitious


capital gains in their funds when we measure consumption in ATM withdrawals and point of sale


transactions. Individuals consume 24.5% out of each euro of realized ctitious capital gains when


we also include domestic wires in our measure of consumption.


   Our experiment is dierent from simply regressing consumption on capital gains for two reasons.


First, we have an exogenous change in displayed purchase prices that serves as a rst stage for selling


a fund and liquidating a capital gain or loss.    Second, in our case, individuals are not actually


wealthier and therefore should not consume more. Our experiment provides a situation in which


the ctitious capital gain status is not reected in an individual's wealth because individuals are


subject to an actual capital loss.   Now, it matters for the interpretation of our results what are


individuals' information sets and whether they know that they experienced a capital loss but are


merely shown a ctitious capital gain.


   We thus further analyze two potential explanations for our ndings: 1) individuals are confused


about what their capital gains are, and 2) individuals are confused about the tax implications of


the reform. With respect to 1), it could be that, despite receiving a sales receipt by email and mail


that clearly states the purchase and sales price as well as fees paid and the incurred capital gains


or losses, investors remain confused about the tax implications of the reform. We attempt to assess


whether individuals are simply confused about what their actual capital gains are using sample splits


based on how informed investors may be. These sample splits indicate that our eects are generally


stronger for investors who appear less informed.      Specically, we nd stronger eects for both


trading and consumption when we examine each investor's earlier trades (trades that occur earlier




                                                  4
in the year or also earlier trades relative to each investor's own history of trades in 2018). With


respect to 2), it could be that individuals are confused about the tax implications of their selling


behavior. In principle, if individuals think their cost basis is determined by the newly displayed


purchase prices, they should not sell ctitious winners. Nevertheless, we also perform sample splits


to single out groups of individuals who are likely to be certain that taxes are irrelevant. Specically,


we single out individuals with small portfolios whose capital gains are well below the annual tax-free


allowances. Here, we do not nd evidence that individuals are confused about the tax implications


of the reform.


   By estimating the eects of exogenously changed purchase prices on the disposition to sell


winners and hold losers, we contribute to the large literature on the disposition eect. The initial


nding by Odean (1998) was further analyzed in a number of follow-up papers such as Barber


and Odean (2000), Kaustia and Knüpfer (2008), Chang et al. (2016), Koestner et al. (2017), and


Meng and Weng (2017), among many others. Specically, our ndings are related to a few recent


papers on the disposition eect. We follow Frydman and Wang (2019) in providing causal evidence


for the disposition eect.    In contrast to an exogenous change in the purchase price, Frydman


and Wang (2019) analyze a change in the salience of purchase prices from a natural experiment


in which the online broker added price variables and color-coded gains and losses to make them


visually more apparent to investors.     This paper follows Frydman and Rangel (2014), who use


a laboratory experiment to demonstrate the eects of displaying or omitting individual purchase


prices. Additionally, Birru (2015) also nds that retail investors confuse winning and losing stocks


after stock splits rather than properly adjusting their purchase price points.       Furthermore, the


dierent eects of ctitious winners versus losers suggest that individuals are happy to take a


ctitious winner at face value and close the mental account (as suggested in Frydman et al., 2015).


   We argue that our ndings help us to understand the mechanisms and psychologies behind the


disposition eect. We have a natural experiment in which purchase prices are changed exogenously,


and we nd that the displayed purchase prices appear to partly determine a new reference point


for investors, i.e., the focal point relative to which investments are classied as winners versus losers


in theories of reference dependence that explain the disposition eect (Shefrin and Statman, 1985;




                                                   5
Barberis and Xiong, 2009; Meng and Weng, 2017; Barberis and Xiong, 2012) or stock market non-


participation and low equity shares (Barberis et al., 2001, 2006; Pagel, 2018). Our results are also


relevant for the two main potential confounders of the disposition eect: 1) tax implications and 2)


optimal performance strategies. With regard to 1), selling a ctitious winner, even when individuals


misperceive the new purchase price as the more tax-relevant one, is less tax ecient than selling a


loser. With regard to 2), if individuals follow some optimal trading strategy, even if that cannot


be shown in their portfolio performance (see Odean, 1998, for instance), then they should not be


aected by the articial change in the purchase price. Furthermore, we may learn from our paper


whether the disposition to realize winners is solely driven by a belief in mean reversion of stock


prices (as originally proposed in Odean, 1998). Our ndings indicate that the act of selling a winner


makes individuals feel richer and consume more.                In that sense, the action of selling a winner is


likely not solely driven by a belief in mean reversion of stock prices.
                                                                                  3

    We have a unique experiment in which individuals sell a ctitious capital gain if they are subject


to the disposition eect, and this ctitious gain is not actually reected in a real capital gain (out of


which individuals should consume). Despite a ctitious winner representing an actual capital loss,


which individuals see on their sales receipt or in their order history, they consume out of ctitious


capital gains. We thus argue that the disposition eect appears to have real consequences such that


individuals feel richer or more successful, which, in turn, aects their consumption. This observation


is the main lesson from our paper: the disposition eect is accompanied by feelings of investment


success as individuals sell to consume, and if they are under the (mistaken) assumption that they


are richer, they consume more. Moreover, perceiving a ctitious winner may relieve individuals of


the sense of having made poor investment decisions, which makes them feel better and consume

   3 Furthermore, our paper relates to a literature on how gains, losses, and trading success aect retail investors.
The literature has analyzed risk-taking in response to losses in a variety of settings, including choices over lotteries
in laboratory experiments (Thaler and Johnson, 1990) and trading decisions of experienced market-makers (Coval
and Shumway, 2005), IPO investors (Kaustia and Knüpfer, 2008; Anagol et al., 2015), and individuals receiving
inheritances (Andersen et al., 2019). There also exists a literature on how retail investors learn (or not) from their
trading success (Barber et al., 2018; Gervais and Odean, 2001; Seru et al., 2009; Linnainmaa, 2011). Beyond trading
decisions, our ndings are more broadly related to the literature on how personal experiences shape preferences, such
as Malmendier and Nagel (2011) and Andersen et al. (2019). Meyer and Pagel (2018) show that individuals appear
to learn from bad experiences in the stock market, which complements the experimental evidence in Kuhnen (2015)
and Koudijs and Voth (2016). Understanding individual preferences for investing in stocks and funds is important
for understanding puzzles in household nance such as the stock market-non-participation puzzle (Campbell, 2006).



                                                           6
more.


   Because we provide some evidence that investors are simply confused about what their actual


capital gains are, we also contribute to the literature on consumption out of stock market wealth, as


we estimate the consumption response to confused capital gains. The literature linking stock market


wealth with consumption includes studies employing aggregate and regional variation (e.g., Davis


et al. (2001), Dynan and Maki (2001), and Case et al. (2005)).
                                                               4 However, endogeneity concerns are

likely to aect the interpretation of the estimates in these existing studies, as they use aggregate


data and cannot distinguish between the direct eect of changes in stock wealth on consumption and


the fact that stock prices are a leading indicator of economic growth and reect consumer sentiment.


There also exist studies employing household-level data, but they either lack disaggregated data on


households' actual stock holdings or actual consumption (e.g., Parker, 1999a and Baker et al., 2007).


Specically, Baker et al. (2007) use CEX data and show that stockholder consumption responds


strongly to changes in dividend payments but not to changes in stock prices. They also provide


suggestive evidence that this behavior is driven by mental accounting. Furthermore, Maggio et al.


(2018) obtain the same ndings using disaggregated household consumption and asset holdings data


from the Swedish wealth registry. Finally, Meyer et al. (2018) estimate the MPC out of realized


capital gains using mutual fund liquidations as an exogenous source of forced sale events. As in


Meyer et al. (2018), we show that individuals have a high MPC out of capital gains once they are


liquidated, which links our paper to the literature on consumption out of cash ows (Parker, 1999b,


2014; Agarwal et al., 2007; Jappelli and Pistaferri, 2010; Olafsson and Pagel, 2018a).

  4 See   Poterba (2000) for a survey of the literature.




                                                           7
2 Data overview, institutional background, and summary statis-
      tics
2.1 Data overview
Our data set stems from the clients of one of the largest online banks in Germany.
                                                                                                   5   We have


daily information on logins (from 2012 onwards), trades, and portfolio holdings of approximately


103,000 customers as well as all balances and transactions of each investor's other accounts at the


online bank from 1999 to 2016. We retain only private investors who reside in Germany and obtain


data on customer demographics such as gender, age, occupation, and zip code. In online banks,


silent attribution is a common phenomenon, as there is usually no charge for having an account.


Therefore, to avoid analyzing accounts of investors who stopped trading, we require that individuals


execute at least one trade per year. An advantage of our data set is that we can exclude quasi-


automatic trades, such as savings plan transactions. Additionally, trading decisions in our sample


are not moderated by any inuence from third parties, such as nancial advisers. To further ensure


that our sample includes only self-directed online consumers, we exclude trades from limit orders


because these transactions do not reect current trading decisions of investors. For each trade, we


have the security's international identication number (ISIN) and obtain additional information on


the security, such as asset class, risk class, issuer or issue date, from Datastream.




2.2 Summary of the natural experiment
The online bank and all other major banks in Germany initiated a ctitious sale on January 1,


2018, to implement the 2018 capital gains tax reform.             This sale did not have any tax liability


consequences that changed the actual capital gains taxes for our individuals, but it changed the


displayed purchase prices and the relative and absolute returns in individuals' online portfolios.


   When individuals log in to their online brokerage, they see the purchase price, the current price,


their total holdings, and their return since purchase. On January 1, 2018, the purchase price was

  5 The ve largest online banks in Germany are (as of 2016): ING-Diba. (8.3 million customers), Deutsche Kredit-
bank (3.3 million), comdirect (2.1 million), Volkswagen-Bank (1.1 million), and Mercedes-Benz-Bank (1.1 million).


                                                       8
set equal to the December 29, 2017, closing price, as quoted by the exchange, and the return was


set to 0%.    Thereafter, the value developed as usual.        Figure 1 shows screenshots of the online


portfolio interface that individuals see. The portfolio interface shows all fund and stock holdings as


well as their daily absolute changes and percentage changes, i.e., returns. In addition to the daily


change, the interface also shows the absolute changes and percentage changes, i.e., returns, since the


purchase of the security position (which are displayed right next to the buy and sell buttons). The


latter portion was reset on January 1, 2018, to implement the capital gains tax reform. Investors


were informed via email and online upon logging in starting in March 2018. The online notication


is also displayed in Figure 1. Throughout 2017 and 2018, the actual purchase prices can be seen


by clicking on the order summary. As a default, the order summary screen displays the purchase


prices of the three most recent transactions. For many automatic transactions from savings plans,


for instance, individuals must dig deeper to nd their actual average purchase prices.



                                          [Insert Figure 1 about here]



   Let us discuss an example for the four scenarios that the experiment creates: Figure 2 shows the


price path of a Deutsche Bank (DWS) US equities mutual fund and two possible purchase prices


         O        O                                                      O    O
(called 0 and 1 ) as well as two possible sale prices (denoted by 3 and 4 ). Purchasing the fund


  O                     O
at 1 and selling it at 4 creates a real loser or loss because the fund is trading at a loss with respect


to its new purchase price and with respect to its original purchase price. Purchasing the fund at 0  O
                  O
and selling it at 4 creates a ctitious loser or loss because the fund is trading at a loss with respect


to its new purchase price but at a gain with respect to its original purchase price. Purchasing the


         O                     O
fund at 0 and selling it at 3 creates a real winner or gain because the fund is trading at a gain


with respect to its new purchase price and with respect to its original purchase price. Purchasing


the fund at   O
              1   and selling it at   O
                                      3   creates a ctitious winner or gain because the fund is trading


at a loss with respect to its new purchase price but at a gain with respect to its original purchase


price.



                                          [Insert Figure 2 about here]




                                                       9
2.3 Institutional background of the 2018 capital gains tax reform
Since January 1, 2009, private investors in Germany have owed capital gains taxes. Before January


2009, capital gains taxes were owed only if assets were liquidated within a year after purchase


and in some other special cases. In contrast, dividends and interest payments were taxed at the


personal income tax rate, which could amount to up to 42%. After January 2009, dividends, interest


payments, and capital gains were all taxed at the same rate. The capital gains taxes of stocks and


funds bought before January 1, 2009, (Altbestände) remain tax-free up to an initial allowance of


100,000 euros. However, any capital gains after January 1, 2018, that exceed 100,000 euros will be


taxed. For these stocks and funds, the January 1, 2018, price thus became the new cost basis. For


stocks and funds bought after January 1, 2009, capital gains are taxed at the same rate as dividends


and interest payments, and the tax is subtracted at the source, i.e., in the event of a capital gains


realization, the money that arrives in clients' settlement accounts after a sale are already after-tax


funds. This did not change with the 2018 capital gains tax reform. As of 2009, the capital gains tax


was 25% (Abgeltungsteuer auf Kapitalerträge) plus the solidarity surcharge (Solidaritätszuschlag)


(5.5% of the capital gains tax) and (if applicable) church tax (Kirchensteuer) (9% of the capital gains


tax), which amounts to 26.375% to 28.625%. Furthermore, there is an annual tax-free allowance


(Freibetrag) of 801 euros for singles and 1602 euros for married couples. Individuals can specify their


main brokerage such that the capital gains tax will not be subtracted unless the initial allowance


is exceeded (Freistellungsauftrag). Furthermore, if capital losses are realized before capital gains,


then the capital gains tax will be automatically lowered by the realized losses.     Thus, gains and


losses are oset with losses exceeding gains either rolled forward or, upon request, being certied


to be considered in individual tax returns.    At the brokerage level, the initial allowance and the


initial allowance for funds bought before January 2009 are taken into account. To begin taxing all


funds bought before 2009 (Altbestände) from their value as of January 1, 2018, was one reason for


the capital gains tax reform and the subsequent ctitious sale. However, none of our investors were


actually aected because the initial allowance is very high (100,000 euros for singles and 200,000


euros for couples).




                                                  10
    The second reason for the reform was to simplify the treatment of retaining foreign funds.


Previously, retaining foreign funds capital gains as well as dividends had to be reported separately


by investors in their individual tax returns (while retaining domestic funds were taxed at the fund


level on their retentions and non-retaining domestic and foreign funds were taxed at the investor


level). Now, all funds are treated equally and all tax assessments are done automatically without


any reporting requirements for the investor. On all retaining funds, individuals now have to pay a


fraction of the taxes on their retentions at the end of the tax year (Vorabpauschale).


    The second reason for the reform was to simplify the treatment of retaining foreign funds.


Previously, retained capital gains and dividends from foreign funds had to be reported separately


by investors in their individual tax returns (while retaining domestic funds were taxed at the fund


level on their retentions, and non-retaining domestic and foreign funds were taxed at the investor


level).
         6 Now, all funds are treated equally, and all tax assessments are done automatically without

any reporting requirements for the investor. For all retaining funds, individuals now have to pay a


fraction of the taxes on their retentions at the end of the tax year (Vorabpauschale).


    To simplify the process of calculating this fraction of capital gains, taxes to be paid were the


second reason that the online bank and many other banks ctitiously bought and sold all fund


holdings of all clients on January 1, 2018, and reset the purchase price to the December 29, 2017,


closing price, as quoted by the exchange. This constitutes a change in when taxes are paid for those


individuals who hold foreign retaining funds, but not their eective tax rate. However, 1) many


individuals do not hold foreign retaining funds, 2) many of our individuals do not earn capital gains


above the initial tax-free allowance (801 euros for singles and 1602 euros for married couples) and


thus do not have to pay the Vorabpauschale, and 3) the Vorabpauschale is very small. For instance,


for purely retained equity funds in 2018, the Vorabpauschale equals the German prime interest rate


(Basiszins of 0.87% in 2018) times 70% times the December 29, 2017, closing price of the fund. In


total, this is 60.9 basis points of the fund price or 36.54 euros for a 6000 euro fund position. The


rst time that individuals have to pay the Vorabpauschale will be December 2019.


    In summary, the ctitious sale did not have any tax liability consequences in terms of changing

  6 In   Germany, two-thirds of funds held are domesticated in Luxembourg.


                                                       11
the actual capital gains tax rate for our individuals (as none exceeds 100,000 euros in capital gains


for their pre-2009 funds). A subset of individuals who hold foreign retaining funds and who's capital


gains exceed the tax-free allowance of 801 euros or 1602 euros are subject to a change in when the


retained capital gains tax is paid (December 2019 versus the time of income tax reporting in July


2020).




2.4 Summary statistics
Our sample is not representative of the German population as a whole; less than half of Germans are


invested in equities, either directly or indirectly. However, it is a relatively representative sample of


self-directed retail investors in Germany. Our sample does not comprise the entirety of the bank's


customer base but roughly 7 percent of all customers.         The bank did not select the sample of


retail investors by trading frequency but instead chose a random subset of all brokerage clients that


executed at least one trade per year. In that sense, our sample is representative of individuals in


Germany that participate in the stock market. Table 1 shows detailed summary statistics for our


universe of investors. As shown in Table 1, the average age of investors is 54, and the median age


is 52. Women represent 16 percent of our sample. Brokerage clients are generally expected (Cole


et al., 2014) and found to be more sophisticated than the overall population (Dorn and Huberman,


2005). The same is true of our sample: 7.8 percent of our investors hold a doctoral degree, which is


higher than average in the German population (according to the German Department of Statistics,


2011).



                                      [Insert Table 1 about here]



   Investors own portfolios that are worth 55,836 euros, on average, with a median of 33,586 euros.


These descriptive statistics are comparable to those reported by other household nance studies and


to ocial statistics in Germany. The Deutsche Bundesbank (2013) reports the average portfolio


value of a German stock market investor to be approximately 48,000 euros. Additionally, we com-


pare our portfolio values to the self-reported (in brackets) wealth measure obtained from a survey


when investors opened their accounts. Reassuringly, the numbers are very similar. Additionally,




                                                   12
we compare portfolio holdings to self-reported gross annual household incomes for those investors


who reported these data. Since income is reported in several ranges, we use the midpoint of each


range as a proxy for investor income. The mean ratio of the average portfolio value (over the entire


sample period) to annual income is 1.3. For comparison, the ratio of total nancial assets to gross


household income in the German population is approximately 1.1 (Bundesbank, 2013).


   Our investors are reasonably active on average, the mean number of security purchases over the


sample period is 145, and the median is 39, which is slightly less trading than found in Barber and


Odean (2000). Furthermore, our investors are reasonably well diversied but typically hold only a


handful of dierent securities (distinct ISINs). When we count funds as containing 100 stocks, we


nd the mean number of securities to be 46, and when we consider the portfolio Herndahl index


of diversication, we nd the mean to be 0.14 (a Herndahl index larger than 0.5 corresponds to


holding only a handful of stocks).


   All investors in our sample who held a mutual fund on December 29, 2017, were aected by the


exogenous change in the purchase price. Of the 103,000 clients we observe, 37,785 executed at least


one sale between January 1, 2018, and June 30, 2018, for whom we have complete records including


all spending and income transactions. Of those 37,785 clients, 27,545 were aected because they


held funds and all funds were ctitiously repriced, and the average fund share was 18.28%.


   The rst (top) graph in Figure 3 shows a distribution of the positions in all fund securities


in 2018 and their new returns since December 29, 2017, closing price, as quoted by the exchange


(either at the time of sale or using their June 30, 2018, prices).    The second (bottom) graph in


Figure 3 shows only fund positions that were sold and their returns since January 1, 2018. We can


clearly see that the majority of funds' returns since January 1, 2018 are slightly negative, given that


the market performed poorly in the beginning of 2018. However, the returns of funds that were


sold after January 1, 2018, are more often positive, i.e., there is more probability mass in the bar


just above 0% returns and more probability mass in the more positive returns domain. Thus, in the


raw data, we see that individuals are more likely to sell funds at a gain relative to their December


29, 2017, closing price, i.e., their ctitious sale price.


                                      [Insert Figure 3 about here]



                                                    13
   The rst (top) graph in Figure 4 shows a distribution of the individual changes in all funds'


returns due to the repricing, i.e., the distribution of the return from December 29, 2017, to the date


the position was sold in 2018 or the price on June 30, 2018 (the new return), minus the return from


the purchasing date to December 29, 2017 (the old return). The second (bottom) graph in Figure 4


shows the distribution of new minus old returns for the sold fund positions only. We can clearly see


that the repricings resulted in very dierent displayed returns and that most repricings themselves


resulted in a negative new return (mostly because the market performed poorly in the beginning of


2018). However, for the funds that were sold, there is again a substantial probability mass in the


positive return domain because individuals tend to sell funds that have a positive new return.



                                    [Insert Figure 4 about here]



   Clearly, the fund repricings do not represent an actual wealth shock but only a ctitious shock to


subjective feelings of investment success and wealth. Nevertheless, as we can see in these pictures,


the repricings had substantial eects on the displayed returns.


   Table 2 shows the mean prices for all purchases and sales of all funds and other securities in


2017 and 2018. When funds were not sold, we use the average price from January 1 to June 30,


2018, for the 2018 columns and the average price in 2017 for the 2017 column. This table also shows


the mean sizes of funds and other securities trades and the closing prices on December 29, 2017.



                                     [Insert Table 2 about here]



   Table 3 shows the propensity of our investors to sell at a gain or loss for all securities.   The


propensity to realize gains is dened as all realized gains relative to all (realized and paper) gains


in the portfolio (as in Odean, 1998). In turn, we nd the familiar discrepancy in the propensity to


sell at a gain versus at a loss, as rst documented by Odean (1998) followed by a sizable literature.


Our statistics are in line with the ndings in these studies.



                                     [Insert Table 3 about here]




                                                 14
3 Methodology and identication
3.1 Specications for trades and consumption
We rst run a disposition eect regression to determine how ctitiously changed purchase prices


aect trades. For either the full sample period or only 2018, we regress a dummy for selling either all


securities or only funds on whether the sold security was a winner, a ctitious winner (i.e., actually


a loser relative to the purchase price but at the time of sale displayed as a winner), or a ctitious


loser (i.e., actually a winner relative to the purchase price but at the time of sale displayed as a


loser):

                            it                it             it             it                               it
                       SaleDj  = t + i + GainDj  + F ictGainDj  + F ictLossDj  +                             j               (1)


               it
where     SaleDj        is a dummy for whether investor           i   sold security   j   at time   t, t   is a month-by-year

                                                                 it
xed eect,          i   is an individual xed eect,           GainDj      is a dummy for whether security           j   of investor

                                                                                             it
i   at time   t   is a winner relative to the original purchase price,             F ictGainDj      is a dummy for whether


security   j      of investor   i   at time   t   is a winner relative to the new purchase price even though it is a

                                                                                  it
loser at the original purchase price (ctitious winner),                 F ictLossDj       is a dummy for whether security


j   of investor     i at time t is a loser relative to the new purchase price even though it is a winner at the

original purchase price (ctitious loser). As is standard in the disposition-eect literature, investor


i's   trades and (ctitious) gains or losses at time               t   are observations whenever investor          i   makes any


trade at time          t,   i.e., we run a regression conditional on individual trading days. The (ctitious)


winner or loser status of a security is plausibly exogenous to individual investors.                              Nevertheless,


other control variables may increase precision, and time xed eects are important because they


control for any aggregate trends aecting stock prices and selling behavior. Furthermore, we cluster


standard errors at the individual level.


      To analyze the eects of ctitious capital gains on consumption, we consider a two-stage in-


strumental variable (IV) approach after we aggregated all variables at the monthly level.                                   The


time-series regression thus employs a panel for each month                     t   from January 2017 to June 2018. We


use the ctitious gain status as a rst stage to cause liquidations and then estimate the MPC out




                                                                 15
of each dollar of ctitious capital gains.            In the rst stage of the IV approach, we thus regress

                                                                           it
the endogenous variable, the decision and amount to sell (Liq                   ) in euros by individual       i   in each


month   t on the (unrealized or realized) euro value of the ctitious capital gains (U F ictGainit ).                  The


predicted values of that regression (Liq it ) equal the realized ctitious capital gains.




                            Liq it = U F ictGainit +        it
                                                                  Liq it = F ictGainit


                                                                                                                       it
   In the second stage of the IV approach, simply regress the euro value of consumption (Cons )


on the predicted values of the rst stage regression (Liq it           = F ictGainit )   as follows:




         Consit = t + i + Gainit + Lossit + F ictGainit + F ictLossit + X it +                            it
                                                                                                                       (2)




Specically,   Consit   is the euro value of ATM withdrawals and point of sale transactions plus domes-


tic non-recurring outgoing wire transfers (Lastschrift und Überweisungen),                  Gainit    and   Lossit are

the capital gains or losses for the liquidated winners or losers, and             F ictGainit   and   F ictLossit      are


the capital gains or losses of the liquidated ctitious winners and the ctitious losers. The other


control variables,   X it , include Liq it , i.e., the total amount (including the capital gains or losses) that

is liquidated by individual     i   in month   t   minus the reinvestment in the portfolio, and this amount


naturally includes the actual capital gains of each investment. As we will discuss, our results are


robust to the inclusion or exclusion of the liquidation amount and other control variables such


as a liquidation dummy, salary payments, dividends, or interest payments. As before, we cluster


standard errors at the individual level.



3.1.1 Identication strategy

We include individual and month-by-year xed eects and thus utilize variation at the individual


level over the months from January 2017 to June 2018. Whether a fund is displayed at a (ctitious)


gain or loss depends on the price on December 29, 2017, and the price movement since, which, con-


ditional on month-by-year xed eects, is plausibly exogenous to individual investors. Controlling


for month-by-year xed eects is important in Regression (1), as time-varying economic sentiment



                                                          16
may aect stock prices and trading behavior, and the same is true in Regression (2).


    As discussed in the two-stage IV regression framework above, we can view the variables                 F ictGainit

and     F ictLossit    as instruments. As is evident from the signicant coecients in Specication (1),


F ictGainit     and    F ictLossit ,   or ctitious capital gains and losses, aect trading. In particular, indi-


viduals sell ctitious winners.           F ictGainit   and   F ictLossit   are, of course, correlated with the actual


capital gains      Gainit     and losses   Lossit   because both depend on the course of the fund's price since


January 1, 2018. However, we control for actual capital gains or losses with the available liquidation


amount      Liq it .   To the extent that individuals liquidated ctitious winners and losers,             F ictGainit

and     F ictLossit    are correlated with the decision and amount to liquidate that we control for via


Liq it ,   the liquidation amount minus reinvestment.              We thus have an instrument for liquidations,


F ictGainit     and    F ictLossit ,   and we then assess in the instrumental variable regression whether the


ctitious capital gains and losses cause liquidations and increase consumption.


    If an individual liquidates because he or she wants to consume or because his or her wealth is


higher, then his or her consumption amount should not be aected by the ctitious gains and losses,


i.e.,   F ictGainit     and   F ictLossit .   Ultimately, the displayed ctitious capital gains are, in a sense,


just random numbers depending on the price of the fund on December 29, 2017, at the end of the


day and its performance since. Economic sentiment that could aect both consumption and stock


prices is controlled for by the time xed eects, while the decision about how much to liquidate


and the wealth considerations are controlled for by the liquidation amount and actual capital gains


and losses. We thus argue that the variables              F ictGainit   and   F ictLossit   are exogenous conditional


on the controls.


    As an alternative interpretation to the IV approach, we can view Regression (2) as a dierences-


in-dierences specication, in which the treatment variable is whether individuals are subject to


a ctitious winner conditional on all individuals liquidating a certain amount.                       We then simply


regress consumption on the liquidation amount, and we examine an interaction,                        F ictGainit   and


F ictLossit ,    of the randomly assigned ctitious winner or loser status of that investment.


    To further understand Regression (2) and how we identify the causal eect of ctitious capital


gains that induce individuals to sell and consume, we can describe the omitted variables that aect




                                                              17
both consumption        Consit   and ctitious capital gains          F ictGainit      and would lead to a spurious


correlation rather than a causal relationship in Specication 2.


   We are concerned about three types of omitted variables:                      time, consumption plans or pref-


erence shocks, and wealth shocks.          First, there are time and aggregate variables that drive both


consumption and ctitious capital gains in 2018 (e.g., economic sentiment). As mentioned above,


we control directly for any aggregate variables correlated with time using the month-by-year xed


eects    t .     Second, there are individual consumption plans or shocks to individual preferences.


Specically, there is the decision to liquidate,          ILiq it ,   and then the amount that is liquidated,


which we denoted by        Liq it .   The decision to liquidate is clearly correlated with the liquidated


ctitious capital gains that equal        F ictGainit = LiqDit  U F ictGainit                if   U F ictGainit   denotes un-


realized ctitious capital gains as above.         However, we control for it directly by controlling for


Liq it = LiqDit  (U Gainit + InvLit - ReInvLit ) if U Gainit + InvLit - ReInvLit                        equals the unreal-


ized capital gains plus the initial investment amount minus the reinvested amount upon liquidation.


Additionally, as mentioned previously, we can control for a liquidation dummy,                        LiqDit .   In addition


to the decision to liquidate, the amount liquidated is determined by individual shocks or plans and


may be correlated with aggregate uctuations in the stock market, but we control for that directly


with   Liq it   and the time xed eects. Third, we may be concerned about wealth shocks that aect


consumption and individual capital gains that are correlated with ctitious capital gains. However,


again we control for realized capital gains directly via             Liq it .   The omitted variable bias theorem


tells us that when we run a regression of the form             Y = X +                and a variable      Z   (in our case,


the decision to liquidate plus how much) aects both              X      and     Y,   then        is biased. However,       is


unbiased if we control for     Z   in the regression   Y = X + Z +              , which is exactly what we do here.


As an alternative to interpreting our regression as a two-stage specication, we can simply identify


a causal eect of ctitious capital gains and consumption by directly controlling for the omitted


variables. Furthermore, we again note that we control directly for these omitted variables, i.e., we


do not use proxies and the omitted variables that we control for (such as actual capital gains or the


liquidated amount) are measured precisely in euro values and thus entirely free of error.




                                                        18
4 Results
4.1 Empirical results for trading
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 show the estimation results for the probability that either all securities


or only funds are sold when they are displayed as winners for the full sample period.        We see


in Column 1 that individuals are subject to the disposition eect, over the whole sample and all


securities, and the likelihood of sale is approximately 6 percent higher when the security is trading


at a gain relative to the original purchase price. Here, we simply replicate the ndings in Koestner


et al. (2017). When we only include funds, we obtain a slightly negative disposition eect. However,


this coecient is highly dependent on the sample period: individuals are sometimes more likely to


sell a winning fund but sometimes less likely to do so. This result is in line with the ndings in


Chang et al. (2016), who document a reverse disposition eect for funds. The disposition eect is


dicult to rationalize with ecient markets and rational expectations (as argued in Odean, 1998).


In principle, the decision to sell should be aected only by expectations about future risk-adjusted


returns, and those should be incorporated into stock prices. In contrast, the decision to sell should


not be aected by whether the investor made a gain or a loss relative to the initial investment.


   More important, Columns 3 and 4 of Table 4 show the estimation results for the probability


that funds are sold when they are 1) winners relative to their original purchase prices, 2) displayed


as winners after January 1, 2018, despite actually being losers (ctitious winners), or 3) displayed


as losers after January 1, 2018, despite actually being winners (ctitious losers).      We see that


individuals are subject to the disposition eect with respect to the ctitious winners and losers,


and they are nearly 4 percent more likely to sell a ctitious winner and nearly 1 percent less likely


to sell a ctitious loser.



                                    [Insert Table 4 about here]



   In turn, Table 4, Column 5 includes individual xed eects and month-by-year xed eects,


and Column 6 also adds fund xed eects. In the latter case, we thus control for all time-invariant


eects at the investor and fund level. In Figure 5, we show the ctitious loss and gain coecients




                                                 19
for ve quintiles of the new (displayed) loss (in percentage return terms) and ve quintiles of the


new (displayed) gain.   We see that the eect is monotonically increasing in the new (displayed)


gain, but we do not detect a pattern with respect to losses.



                                   [Insert Figure 5 about here]




4.2 Empirical results for consumption
Furthermore, Table 5 shows the estimation results for the amount consumed from Specication


2, using dierent measures of consumption, on liquidated ctitious capital gains or losses.        As


mentioned above, we run the regression using the sample period from January 2017 to June 2018.


We nd that individuals typically only consume a small fraction of their liquidations; however,


ctitious capital gains have a large eect. Approximately 15 to 25 percent is consumed out of a


ctitious capital gain that is liquidated. For ctitious capital losses, the eect is again attenuated.


We also report specications for the subsample of customers that the bank ags as main clients (as


further discussed in the next subsection). Here, we generally nd larger eects.



                                    [Insert Table 5 about here]



   The coecient       in the consumption regression (2) can thus be interpreted as the MPC out of


one dollar of realized capital gains or losses when the security was a ctitious winner.




4.3 Robustness
Main customers, additional controls, and reshuing experiment

When investors make a trade or a position is liquidated, there is a transfer to the settlement


account (Verrechnungskonto). The settlement account is dedicated to making trades and opened


automatically when individuals open a portfolio. It pays some interest and is federally insured. In


turn, individuals can transfer their funds into their checking or savings accounts. For consumption,


we consider the following outcome variables: 1) ATM withdrawals plus point of sale transactions,


i.e., individuals swipe their debit or credit card in a store or purchase goods or services online




                                                20
by entering their card information, and 2) ATM withdrawals plus point of sale transactions plus


all domestic non-recurring wire transfers that leave the bank (Lastschrift and Überweisungen). In


Germany, wire transfers are likely to be consumed because they are commonly used to pay for


online shopping or other services or to pay people. All the variables are transfers and thus ow


variables.


   We argue that it is unlikely that individuals have a second brokerage account or additional sav-


ings vehicles because banking with multiple banks is discouraged in the German credit score system.


Additionally, the self-reported wealth measure we have when individuals opened their accounts is


in line with their actual portfolio size. This is also reassuring and indicates that individuals are


unlikely to have other deposits of liquid wealth. Furthermore, individuals are incentivized to dedi-


cate one brokerage account as their main account to receive the tax-free allowance on capital gains.


Finally, we have a ag variable from the bank itself that indicates customers without any other


banking relationships.   This ag variable matches well with our own measures of main customer


status: a regular salary payment (which is agged as such in the German transaction system) or


a minimum number of transactions per month (as used in Ganong and Noel, 2019; Kuchler and


Pagel, 2019; Olafsson and Pagel, 2018a).


   In Table 5, we also display the results of the consumption regressions that consider only in-


dividuals that the bank has agged as main customers, i.e., clients without any other banking


relationships. As expected, the eects become stronger for this subset of individuals. Some indi-


viduals may not use the bank's ATM network or debit card for point of sale transactions because


they do not use this bank's checking account as their main checking account.


   Furthermore, Table A.16 in Appendix A, we report the results of consumption regressions


successively adding xed eects and other control variables such as a dummy for liquidations,


salary, dividend, and interest payments. In Table A.17, we successively add unrealized gains and


losses and unrealized ctitious gains and losses as controls. Finally, in Table A.18, we take logs or


rst-dierences or calculate the deviation from the mean of the outcome variable and also divide


the sample into early versus late 2018.


                      [Insert Tables A.16 to A.18 in Appendix A about here]



                                                21
    Finally, in Figure 6, we show the distribution of ctitious gain coecients for 100 reshuing


experiments, the average reshued coecient and its average standard error, and the true ctitious


gain coecient with its standard error while controlling for individual and month-by-year xed ef-


fects, the available liquidated amounts, and a dummy for liquidations with standard errors clustered


at the individual level. As expected, the reshued ctitious gain coecients are not signicant.



                                           [Insert Figure 6 about here]




Quality of the consumption data

We observe transaction categories from the transactions system that allow us to pinpoint ATM


withdrawals, (international) POS transactions, (repeated, automated, international) wires, interest


and dividend payments, (portfolio) fee payments, tax payments, check payments, salary transfers,


cash deposits, social security payments as well as security purchases and sales as FX-trading trans-


actions. However, we have no spending categories, such as groceries, and we are limited in the sense


that we cannot know for certain whether an individual has other bank accounts or portfolios. As


discussed previously, point of sale transactions occur when individuals swipe their debit or credit


card in the store or purchase goods or services online by entering their card information. Domestic


nonrecurring wire transfers that leave the bank (Lastschrift and Überweisungen) are also likely


spending in Germany as they are likely to be consumption as they are commonly used to pay for


online shopping or other services or to pay people.
                                                               7

    Thus, using ATM withdrawals and POS transactions or ATM plus POS plus wires as a measure


of spending should give us a relatively accurate picture of consumption. To assess the quality of our


spending data, we compare the spending responses to paydays to those that have been documented


in the literature using transaction-level spending data that are more thoroughly categorized (Olaf-


sson and Pagel, 2018a; Bräuer et al., 2019; Gelman et al., 2014). When we replicate the analysis in


Olafsson and Pagel (2018a) and Gelman et al. (2014), i.e., plotting the daily deviation in spending

   7 Domestic wires are also likely used for recurring transfers such as paying rent. However, in this case, individuals
can very easily, and most individuals do, set up a recurring domestic wire transfer (Dauerauftrag) that transfers the
rent automatically on a certain day of the month. These recurring transfers are agged as such in the transaction
system and are thus excluded from our measure of spending.



                                                          22
around paydays for three income groups of our nal sample of customers for the years 2017 and


2018, we obtain similar pictures in terms of magnitudes and tightness of the estimates (as Figure


7 shows). Furthermore, when we examine the daily consumption response from fund sales when


individuals liquidate a ctitious or actual capital gain in 2018, we nd similar responses to those in


Bräuer et al. (2019) as Figure 8 shows.



                                  [Insert Figures 7 to 8 about here]




4.4 Placebo tests
As placebo tests, we can run the exact same regressions for non-funds in 2018, for which there


was no ctitious sale.   Alternatively, we could consider funds but use the data from January to


June 2017 when no ctitious sale occurred. All placebo checks can be found in Tables 6 and 7 as


well as Figure 6.   In Table 6, Column 1, we examine 2018 but use non-fund securities and their


placebo ctitious gains and losses. By contrast, Column 2 uses funds, but considers data until June


2017 and the placebo ctitious gains and losses.        In turn, the next columns add individual and


month-by-year xed eects. Overall, we also nd signicant eects; however, the coecients are


only approximately half the size. In the data of Odean (1998), it is well known that there is also


a recency eect: individuals tend to sell securities that performed well recently, which we conrm


here.


   We can clearly see that the recency placebo eects we document are statistically signicantly


smaller than the eects of ctitious winners in 2018. Nevertheless, to identify the dierence in one


specication, we run a regression using data from January to June in 2017 and 2018. In turn, we


include ctitious capital gains and losses, either the actual ones or the placebo ones, in one variable.


Finally, we include a dummy for 2018 and document the interaction coecient of this dummy and


the (placebo) ctitious capital gains. This is done in Table 8, and we see that the interaction eect


is large and statistically signicant at approximately 1.3%.


   Furthermore, in Table 7, we show the consumption regressions for data up to June 2017 instead


of 2018 using the placebo ctitious capital gains and losses, for all individuals or individuals that




                                                  23
the bank agged as main customers, i.e., clients without any other banking relationships. In these


regressions, as in the reshuing experiment shown in Figure 6, the eects of placebo ctitious


capital gains and losses are insignicant and small.



                                  [Insert Tables 6 to 8 about here]




5 Lessons and mechanisms
5.1 Lessons for selective inattention
Table 4 shows that individuals are subject to the disposition eect with respect to the ctitious


winners and losers: they are almost 4 percent more likely to sell a ctitious winner and almost 1


percent less likely to sell a ctitious loser. The eect of ctitious losers is attenuated. A potential


explanation is selective inattention (as documented in Karlsson et al., 2009; Olafsson and Pagel,


2018b; Gherzi et al., 2014), i.e., individuals are happy to learn that a loser now appears to be a


winner but become concerned when a former winner is now displayed as a loser. Furthermore, in


the literature using the data in Odean (1998), it is well known that the disposition eect mainly


manifests in selling winners.


   In Figure 5, we depict the ctitious loss and gain coecients for ve quintiles of the new


(displayed) loss (in percentage return terms) and ve quintiles of the new (displayed) gain. We can


see that the eect is monotonously increasing in the new (displayed) gain, but we do not detect a


pattern with respect to losses. Again, this nding is consistent with selective inattention playing a


role.


   Table 5 shows the estimation results for the amount consumed, and we nd a very large con-


sumption response. Here, a potential reason is again inattention: because the absolute and relative


capital gain is very salient to investors when selling the fund (as opposed to the actual capital gain


and the actual liquidation amount that is only stated on the sales receipt that individuals receive


after the sale has been processed by the clearing house and the bank has subtracted all fees and


taxes).   Right next to the sell button, the ctitious capital gain is displayed in both euros and




                                                 24
percentage terms. Below, we will further explore whether less-informed individuals have a larger


consumption response.




5.2 Lessons for the disposition eect
We nd that individuals consume more after engaging in the disposition eect and selling ctitious


winners. This nding helps us to understand the psychological mechanism behind the disposition


eect: individuals sell winners because they believe that they are making money and hence consume


more.   How is our experiment dierent from simply regressing consumption on realized capital


gains? Such a regression would also identify the eect of liquidating and consuming in response


to a capital gain (if stock market returns are plausibly exogenous to individuals conditional on


time xed eects).     However, in this case, individuals are wealthier and should consume more.


In contrast, our experiment provides a situation in which the ctitious capital gain status is not


reected in an individual's wealth because individuals are subject to an actual capital loss. Now,


it matters for the interpretation of our results whether individuals know that they experienced a


capital loss but are merely shown a ctitious capital gain.      As discussed previously, individuals


receive a sales receipt that details their actual capital gains and losses, or they can look up their


purchase prices in their order summary. Nevertheless, it could still be the case that individuals are


confused about what their actual capital gains are.


   As another alternative, it could be that individuals liquidate and consume because they believe


that doing so is advantageous from a tax perspective.      We now perform some sample splits to


assess the validity of both mechanisms: confusion about actual capital gains and confusion about


tax implications. In short, we nd some evidence that individuals are confused about their actual


capital gains but no evidence that they are confused about tax implications.




5.3 Marginal propensity to consume out of (confused) capital gains
As discussed above, after individuals sell a security, they receive a sales receipt that details their


purchase price (if individuals bought at dierent points in time, the bank implements the rst-


in-rst-out (FIFO) principle in line with the German tax authority), their sale price, the realized



                                                 25
capital gains (or losses), and the fees that investors paid. This sales receipt is shown in Figure 9.


   The interpretation of our nding depends on whether individuals know their actual wealth or


are confused about the ctitious capital gain representing their actual capital gain. In the latter


case, we simply estimate the MPC out of (confused) capital gains using the ctitious winner status


as an instrument for the liquidation of capital gains. This estimate is of interest to the literature on


stock market wealth and consumption. In the former case, we estimate a consumption eect solely


from the act of selling a winning investment. Either way, the nding is of interest to the literature


on the disposition eect, showing that the act of selling winners has eects on consumption and


just trading. Individuals sell winners because they believe they make money and hence consume


more.


   When we perform sample splits or examine the interaction between early and late 2018 for our


rst stage (selling ctitious winners), we tend to nd statistically signicantly stronger eects in


early versus late 2018. This result is in line with the hypothesis that investors are more informed


in late 2018 than early 2018. The results can be found in Table 9.


                                     [Insert Table 9 about here]


   Tables A.12, A.13, and A.14 in Appendix A are intended to provide alternative sample splits and


interactions on how informed investors are. We rst consider the rst ve trades and then the rst


half of trades for each investor (split at the individual level). Then, we also split by passive versus


active investors. As we can see, it appears that all sample splits and interactions point towards the


hypothesis that the more informed investors exhibit less of a disposition to sell ctitious winners.


Nevertheless, we also observe signicant eects on selling in late 2018.


                  [Insert Tables A.12, A.13, and A.14 in Appendix A about here]


   In Table A.18, we provide a sample split into early versus late 2018 for the consumption regres-


sion specication using deviation from the mean of the outcome variable. Here, the sample split had


no inuence. However, Table 10 provides an additional set of interactions using the above measures


of informedness and absolute consumption as the outcome variable. Here, we consistently nd that


early trading and infrequent traders have a larger consumption response to ctitious capital gains.



                                                  26
As indicated in Table A.18, when we consider the deviation from the mean as the outcome variable,


we nd less stark dierences, as further explored in Table A.15.



                               [Insert Tables 10 and A.15 about here]



   Nevertheless, these additional pieces of evidence are more consistent with investors being con-


fused about what their actual capital gains are. Clearly, if investors believe that selling a winner is


actually making them richer, it makes sense that they consume more. This nding is informative


about the disposition eect, as it indicates that the act of selling a winner is actually reected in


consumption because individuals believe that they made money.




5.4 Confusion about tax implications
If individuals are confused about the tax implications of the reform and believe that the newly


displayed capital gains are somehow more tax-relevant, then they should not be more likely to sell


at a capital gain than a capital loss. Therefore, the disposition eect in new gain positions would be


more surprising or irrational from a tax perspective than in the classic disposition eect literature


(Odean, 1998).


   On the other hand, individuals could also believe that they need to secure a tax advantage and


hence be more inclined to sell. Thus, as an additional robustness check, we perform a sample split to


include only individuals who were not aected by the tax reform. First, we can restrict our attention


to individuals with portfolio sizes of less than 50,000 euros and additionally require that the to-date


yearly capital gains are less than 1602 euros (this equals a household's tax-free allowance) or 801


euros (which equals an individual's tax-free allowance). In the trading and consumption regressions,


we do not nd that tax considerations appear to matter, as can be seen in Table 11.



                                    [Insert Table 11 about here]




                                                  27
6 Conclusion
We use a large sample of transaction-level data on all asset holdings, securities trades, spending,


and income from clients of a German retail bank.      We explore how the individual propensity to


sell winners and hold losers as well as individual consumption respond to an exogenous change


in the displayed purchase price of funds.     This change in the purchase price also aected the


funds' displayed returns and capital gains and losses.      Our identication strategy exploits the


implementation of a capital gains tax reform that facilitated the online bank's assessment of capital


gains taxes that the bank has to subtract at the brokerage level. We nd that individuals react


to ctitious winners (funds that are displayed as winners but are actually losers) and losers (funds


that are displayed as losers but are actually winners) in their likelihood of selling. Furthermore, we


document that this ctitious disposition eect has real eects on consumption beyond just trading.


   As a contribution to the literature on the disposition eect, we provide causal evidence for


a preference for realizing (displayed) winners as opposed to losers and show that individuals care


about the displayed purchase prices rather than the actual purchase prices. We follow Frydman and


Wang (2019), who analyze the salience of new price variables and their colors in online portfolios.


Documenting the causal eect of ctitious winners on trading is evidence for an inherent preference


for realizing winners that is contrary to other explanations of the disposition eect, such as specula-


tion motives (Ben-David and Hirshleifer, 2012). However, we also show that some investors may be


confused about what their actual winners are, following the evidence documented in Birru (2015).


Thus, we provide additional evidence against the idea that retail investors follow optimal trading


strategies or act in tax-ecient manners. Additionally, we provide evidence that reference points


are set by displayed prices, for which, to the best of our knowledge, only experimental evidence


exists (Frydman and Rangel, 2014).


   However, we believe that the more novel contribution of this paper is the following: we document


that the disposition to sell winners has real consumption eects. To the best of our knowledge, no


paper links the disposition eect to consumption. Our ndings show that individuals are subject


to the disposition eect because they feel richer and thus consume more out of the realized capital




                                                 28
gains. We have a unique experiment in which the ctitious capital gains are actually capital losses.


However, as we show, individuals may be, to some extent, confused about what their actual capital


gains are, and that increases their consumption. Thus, documenting that ctitious capital gains


and reference points aect consumption is relevant for the literature on mental accounting and more


generally on consumption out of stock market wealth.




                                                29
References
Agarwal, S., C. Liu, and N. S. Souleles (2007, dec). The Reaction of Consumer Spending and Debt


  to Tax Rebates-Evidence from Consumer Credit Data.            Journal of Political Economy 115 (6),
  9861019.



Anagol, S., V. Balasubramaniam, and T. Ramadorai (2015). The eects of experience on investor


  behavior: Evidence from india's ipo lotteries.



Andersen, S., T. Hanspal, and K. M. Nielsen (2019). Once bitten, twice shy: The power of personal


  experiences in risk taking.   Journal of Financial Economics 132 (3), 97117.

Baker, M., S. Nagel, and J. Wurgler (2007). The Eect of Dividends on Consumption.            Brookings
  Papers on Economic Activity     (1), 231291.



Barber, B. M., Y.-T. Lee, Y.-J. Liu, T. Odean, and K. Zhang (2018).            Learning fast or slow?


  Available at SSRN 2535636 .

Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2000).       Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common stock


  investment performance of individual investors.       Journal of Finance 55 (2), 773806.

Barberis, N., M. Huang, and T. Santos (2001).           Prospect Theory and Asset Prices.    Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 116 (1), 153.

Barberis, N., M. Huang, and R. H. Thaler (2006). Individual Preferences, Monetary Gambles, and


  Stock Market Participation: A Case for Narrow Framing.           American Economic Review 96 (4),
  10691090.



Barberis, N. and W. Xiong (2009). What Drives the Disposition Eect? An Analysis of a Long-


  Standing Preference-Based Explanation.     Journal of Finance 64(2), 751784.

Barberis, N. and W. Xiong (2012). Realization Utility.        Journal of Financial Economics 104(2),
  251271.




                                                   30
Ben-David, I. and D. Hirshleifer (2012).     Beyond the disposition eect: Do investors really like


  realizing gains more than losses.   Review of Financial Studies 25 (8), 24852532.

Birru, J. (2015).   Confusion of confusions: a test of the disposition eect and momentum.      The
  Review of Financial Studies 28 (7), 18491873.

Bräuer, K., A. Hackethal, and T. Hanspal (2019). Consuming dividends.      Working Paper .

Bundesbank, D. (2013). Statistik ueber Wertpapierinvestments, mimeo.



Campbell, J. Y. (2006). Household nance.      Journal of Finance 61 (4), 15531604.

Case, K. E., J. M. Quigley, and R. J. Shiller (2005). Comparing wealth eects: the stock market


  versus the housing market.   Advances in macroeconomics 5 (1).

Chang, T. Y., D. H. Solomon, and M. M. Westereld (2016).           Looking for someone to blame:


  Delegation, cognitive dissonance, and the disposition eect.   Journal of Finance 71 (1), 267302.

Cole, S., A. Paulson, and G. K. Shastry (2014). Smart money? the eect of education on nancial


  outcomes.   Review of Financial Studies 27 (7), 20222051.

Coval, J. D. and T. Shumway (2005). Do behavioral biases aect prices?    Journal of Finance 60 (1),
  134.



Davis, M. A., M. G. Palumbo, and Others (2001).        A primer on the economics and time series
  econometrics of wealth eects, Volume 9. Divisions of Research & Statistics and Monetary Aairs,
  Federal Reserve Board.



Dorn, D. and G. Huberman (2005). Talk and action: What individual investors say and what they


  do.   Review of Finance 9 (4), 437481.

Dynan, K. E. and D. M. Maki (2001). Does stock market wealth matter for consumption?



Frydman, C., S. M. Hartzmark, and D. H. Solomon (2015). Rolling mental accounts.         Review of
  Financial Studies 31 (1), 362397.


                                                  31
Frydman, C. and A. Rangel (2014).        Debiasing the disposition eect by reducing the saliency of


  information about a stock's purchase price.    Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 107,
  541552.



Frydman, C. and B. Wang (2019). The impact of salience on investor behavior: Evidence from a


  natural experiment.   Journal of Finance, forthcoming .

Ganong, P. and P. Noel (2019). How Does Unemployment Aect Consumer Spending? Technical


  report, Working paper.



Gelman, M., S. Kariv, M. D. Shapiro, D. Silverman, and S. Tadelis (2014). Harnessing naturally


  occurring data to measure the response of spending to income.     Science 345 (6193), 212215.

Gervais, S. and T. Odean (2001). Learning to be overcondent.      Review of Financial Studies 14 (1),
  127.



Gherzi, S., D. Egan, N. Stewart, E. Haisley, and P. Ayton (2014).       The meerkat eect: Person-


  ality and market returns aect investors' portfolio monitoring behaviour.     Journal of Economic
  Behavior & Organization 107, 512526.

Jappelli, T. and L. Pistaferri (2010).    The Consumption Response to Income Changes.        Annual
  Review of Economics 2 (1), 479506.

Karlsson, N., G. Loewenstein, and D. Seppi (2009).        The ostrich eect:   Selective attention to


  information.   Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 38 (2), 95115.

Kaustia, M. and S. Knüpfer (2008). Do investors overweight personal experience? Evidence from


  IPO subscriptions.   Journal of Finance 63 (6), 26792702.

Koestner, M., B. Loos, S. Meyer, and A. Hackethal (2017). Do individual investors learn from their


  mistakes?   Journal of Business Economics 87 (5), 669703.

Koudijs, P. and H.-J. Voth (2016).   Leverage and beliefs: personal experience and risk-taking in


  margin lending.   American Economic Review 106 (11), 33673400.

                                                  32
Kuchler, T. and M. Pagel (2019). Sticking to Your Plan: Hyperbolic Discounting and Credit Card


  Debt Paydown.     Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming .

Kuhnen, C. M. (2015). Asymmetric learning from nancial information.         Journal of Finance 70 (5),
  20292062.


Linnainmaa, J. T. (2011). Why do (some) households trade so much?           Review of Financial Stud-
  ies 24 (5), 16301666.

Maggio, M. D., A. Kermani, and K. Majlesi (2018).            Stock market returns and consumption.


  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.


Malmendier, U. and S. Nagel (2011). Depression Babies: Do Macroeconomic Experiences Aect


  Risk Taking?    Quarterly Journal of Economics 126 (1), 373416.

Meng, J. and X. Weng (2017). Can prospect theory explain the disposition eect? a new perspective


  on reference points.   Management Science 64 (7), 33313351.

Meyer, S. and M. Pagel (2018).        Fully closed: Individual responses to realized capital gains and


  losses.   Working Paper .

Meyer, S., M. Pagel, and A. Previtero (2018). The consumption response to realized capital gains:


  Evidence from mutual fund liquidations.      Working Paper .

Odean, T. (1998).     Are Investors Reluctant to Realize their Losses?     Journal of Finance 53 (5),
  17751798.


of Statistics, G. F. B. (2011). Bildungsstand. URL https://www.destatis.de/DE/ZahlenFakten/GesellschaftStaat


  /BildungForschungKultur/Bildungsstand/Tabellen/Bildungsabschluss.html.


Olafsson, A. and M. Pagel (2018a).       The liquid hand-to-mouth: Evidence from personal nance


  management software.        Review of Financial Studies 31 (11), 43984446.

Olafsson, A. and M. Pagel (2018b, oct).         The Ostrich in Us:   Selective Attention to Financial


  Accounts, Income, Spending, and Liquidity. Working Paper 23945, National Bureau of Economic


  Research.



                                                    33
Pagel, M. (2018). A news-utility theory for inattention and delegation in portfolio choice.   Econo-
  metrica 86 (2), 491522.

Parker, J. A. (1999a). Spendthrift in America? On two decades of decline in the US saving rate.


  NBER macroeconomics annual 14, 317370.

Parker, J. A. (1999b). The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in Social


  Security Taxes.   American Economic Review 89 (4), 959973.

Parker, J. A. (2014). Why Don't Households Smooth Consumption? Evidence from a 25 million


  dollar experiment.    Working Paper .

Pfeer, F. T., R. F. Schoeni, A. Kennickell, and P. Andreski (2016). Measuring wealth and wealth


  inequality:   Comparing two us surveys.    Journal of economic and social measurement 41 (2),
  103120.



Poterba, J. M. (2000). Stock market wealth and consumption.     The Journal of Economic Perspec-
  tives 14 (2), 99118.

Seru, A., T. Shumway, and N. Stoman (2009). Learning by trading.         Review of Financial Stud-
  ies 23 (2), 705739.

Shefrin, H. and M. Statman (1985). The disposition to sell winners too early and ride losers too


  long: Theory and evidence.    Journal of Finance 40 (3), 777790.

Tang, T. L.-P., R. Luna-Arocas, T. Sutarso, and D. S.-H. Tang (2004). Does the love of money


  moderate and mediate the income-pay satisfaction relationship?     Journal of Managerial Psychol-
  ogy 19 (2), 111135.

Thaler, R. H. and E. J. Johnson (1990). Gambling with the house money and trying to break even:


  The eects of prior outcomes on risky choice.   Management Science 36 (6), 643660.




                                                 34
Figure 1: Screenshots of the bank's portfolio interface and notication of the repricings due to the
capital gains tax reform




Figure 2: Gain, ctitious gain, loss, and ctitious loss variables created by the experiment: example
fund



                                                35
Figure 3: Distribution of the percentage new (newly displayed since December 29, 2017, closing
price as quoted by the exchange) returns of all (top) and sold (bottom) funds' positions (returns of
the sale price or using the June 30, 2018 prices relative to the December 29, 2017, closing price)




                                                36
Figure 4: Distribution of the percentage new (newly displayed since December 29, 2017, closing
price as quoted by the exchange) returns of all (top) and only sold (bottom) funds' positions (return
of the sale price or using the June 30, 2018 prices relative to the December 29, 2017, closing price)
minus their percentage old returns (returns from their actual purchase prices to the December 29,
2017, closing price)

                                                 37
Figure 5: Fictitious loss and gain coecients for ve quintiles of new (displayed since December
29, 2018) losses in absolute Euro values and new (displayed since December 29, 2018) gains in
absolute Euro values of Specication 1 (regressing a dummy for selling security                  j   of individual   i
at time   t   on dummies for security   j   of individual   i   at time   t   being an actual winner, a ctitious
winner, or a ctitious loser controlling for individual and month-by-year xed eects and clustering
standard errors at the individual level)




                                                      38
Figure 6: Distribution of ctitious gain coecients for 100 reshuing experiments of Specication
2 (regressing consumption (ATM withdrawals plus POS transactions plus non-recurring national
wires) on ctitious capital gains controlling for individual and month-by-year xed eects as well as
the available liquidated amounts, a dummy for liquidations, and actual capital gains and losses all
aggregated to the monthly level with standard errors clustered at the individual level), the average
reshued coecient and its average standard error, and the true ctitious gain coecient with its
standard error




Figure 7: Payday responses of ATM withdrawals plus POS transactions plus non-recurring, national
wires (Lastschrift und Überweisungen) in the two weeks around salary receipt for three terciles of
income controlling for individual, day-of-week, week-of-month, and month-by-year xed eects.
Standard errors are clustered at the individual level and displayed as dashed lines




                                                39
Figure 8: Responses of ATM withdrawals and POS transactions in the two weeks around liqui-
dation of funds that were actual winners (left side) and ctitious winners (right side) controlling
for individual, day-of-week, week-of-month, and month-by-year xed eects. Standard errors are
clustered at the individual level and displayed as dashed lines




Figure 9: Sales receipt showing the current value of the liquidation gross of fees (Kurswert), the bank
fees (Provision), other exchange fees (Transaktionsentgelt Übertrags-/Liefergebühr Handelsentgelt),
the capital loss (Veräußerungsverlust), and the nal liquidation value net of fees (Ausmachender
Betrag).




                                                  40
                              Table 1: Summary statistics for all investors


                               standard        10th          25th          50th          75th          90th
                     mean
                               deviation    percentile    percentile    percentile    percentile    percentile


       male            .84        .37            0             1             1             1            1
       age             54          13           40            45            52            61            72
 PhD educated         .078        .27            0             0             0             0            0
 account tenure
                       13         3.3           11            11            11            14            19
    (in years)
    risk class         3.5        1.5            1             3             4             5            5
      wealth         51,148     93,079         5,000        20,000        45,000        45,000       175,000
     income          54,642     24,673        30,000        30,000        50,000        80,000       80,000
    number of
                      145         488            3            12            39           116           322
    purchases
    number of
                      124         434            7            15            36           101           264
       sales
    risk class
                       4.4        1.5           3.6           3.9           4.2           4.6           5
    of trades
     portfolio
                     55,836     129,607        7,425        16,577        33,586        62,808       111,841
      value
    number of
                       46          30           8.6           20            41            68            92
    securities
    HH index           .14        .15          .0083         .037          .095           .2           .35


Notes: Risk class are the value-weighted risk classes (regulated risk classication) of the investor's holdings
or trades. Wealth, income, and risk aversion are self-reported statistics in brackets (surveyed upon account
opening). Portfolio size is the average over the sample period and number of purchases and sales are the
sum over the entire sample period. Number of securities is the average over the sample period and funds
are counted as 100 securities. HH index is the Herndahl-Hirschman index measure of diversication
ranging from 0 to 1 (0 represents perfect diversication and >0.5 represents a handful of stocks).
               Table 2: Descriptive statistics for bought and sold or kept securities

                                              2018          2018            2017       2017

                                               sale        no sale          sale     no sale

                 mean purchase      funds    166.25        168.30       145.46        162.04
                      price         other     83.87         74.21       82.17         70.59

                 mean sale          funds    200.57        179.27       181.57        166.90
                   price            other     94.42         75.14       90.53         68.38

                                    funds    7152.01       9355.07     7446.56      10617.70
                 size of trade
                                    other    9887.04       7857.63     10046.56      7976.39

                 price end 2017     funds    200.96        172.56



Notes: Mean purchase prices for funds and other securities in that are sold in 2017 or 2018. For unsold
positions, we use the mean prices from January 1 to June 30, 2018 in the 2018 Column and the mean
prices in 2017 in the 2017 Column.




   Table 3: Propensity of gains realized versus propensity of losses realized as in Odean (1998)

                                             standard
                                    mean                    25th percentile        75th percentile
                                             deviation

            PGR: propensity of
                                    0.128      0.151                0.045              0.148
               gains realized

            PLR: propensity of
                                    0.077      0.131                0.020              0.077
               losses realized

             PGR minus PGL          0.050      0.148                0.004              0.082




                                                      42
Table 4: Estimation results of probability of sale on dummies for the security of being a winner, a
ctitious winner, or a ctitious loser

                   all securities      funds            funds        funds          funds         funds
                    full sample     full sample         2018          2018          2018          2018

                        sale            sale            sale          sale           sale          sale

      gain           0.0607***      -0.00312***    0.00771***     0.00797***     0.00797***     -0.00341
                    (0.000808)      (0.000732)      (0.00198)      (0.00197)      (0.00186)     (0.00251)
 ctitious gain                                      0.0409***      0.0426***      0.0426***     0.0506***
                                                    (0.00408)      (0.00407)      (0.00383)     (0.00456)
  ctitious loss                                    -0.00824***     -0.00463**    -0.00463**     -1.49e-06
                                                    (0.00211)      (0.00198)      (0.00186)     (0.00217)
   individual
  xed eects
 month-by-year
  xed eects
      funds
  xed eects

  observations      52,619,347       7,317,370       147,762        147,762        123,836       123,383
   R squared           0.019           0.003            0.261        0.092          0.234         0.278



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Speciation 1 regressing a dummy for selling security j of individual i at time t on dummies for
security j of individual i at time t being an actual winner, a ctitious winner, or a ctitios loser (as
indicated) controlling for individual, month-by-year, or funds xed eects (as indicated)




                                                   43
Table 5:    Estimation results of dierent measures of consumption on liquidiation amounts less
reinvestment of all securities, capital gains, ctitious capital gains, and ctitious capital losses

                                                  main customers                        main customers
                                 all securities                        all securities
                                                    all securities                       all securities
                                2017 and 2018                         2017 and 2018
                                                   2017 and 2018                        2017 and 2018

                                 ATM + POS          ATM + POS         ATM + POS          ATM + POS
                                      in ¤                in ¤        + wires in ¤       + wires in ¤

     ctitious gain in ¤             0.157**             0.299*           0.245**            0.490**
                                   (0.0725)             (0.157)          (0.0993)           (0.230)
      ctitious loss in ¤          -0.000116**          -0.000375*       -0.000282          -0.00122*
                                   (5.10e-05)          (0.000223)       (0.000175)        (0.000643)
            gain in ¤
            loss in ¤
      liquidation minus
      reinvestment in ¤
   individual xed eects
 month-by-year xed eects

           observations             609,693             141,442          609,693            141,442
            R squared                0.241               0.243             0.135             0.122



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Specication 2 regressing consumption (ATM withdrawals plus POS transactions plus
non-recurring national wires (as indicated)) on ctitious capital gains controlling for individual and
month-by-year xed eects as well as the available liquidated amounts and actual capital gains and losses
all aggregated to the monthly level




                                                  44
Table 6: Placebo estimation results of probability of sale on dummies for the security (non-funds
in 2017 or 2018 or funds in 2017) of being a winner, a ctitious winner, or a ctitious loser

                             non-funds     non-funds         funds        funds          funds
                               2018           2017           2017          2017          2017

                                sale           sale          sale          sale           sale

               gain          0.0173***     0.0147***        0.00203      0.000436     -0.0150***
                            (0.000700)     (0.000802)      (0.00326)    (0.00327)      (0.00376)
          ctitious gain      0.0180***     0.0155***       0.0210***    0.0191***      0.0124***
                             (0.00108)      (0.00102)      (0.00387)    (0.00398)      (0.00406)
          ctitious loss      0.000342      0.00247***      -0.00479*   -0.00563**      -0.00457*
                            (0.000759)     (0.000783)      (0.00283)    (0.00287)      (0.00273)
            individual
           xed eects
         month-by-year
           xed eects
              funds
           xed eects

           observations      1,178,397      1,177,202       146,261      146,261        143,306
            R squared          0.098          0.106          0.254        0.254          0.254


Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Speciation 1 regressing a dummy for selling security j of individual i at time t on dummies for
security j of individual i at time t being an actual winner, a (placebo as indicated) ctitious winner, or a
(placebo as indicated) ctitios loser controlling for individual, month-by-year, or funds xed eects (as
indicated)




                                                      45
Table 7: Placebo estimation results of dierent measures of consumption on liquidiation amounts
less reinvestment of all securities, capital gains, ctitious capital gains, and ctitious capital losses
in 2017


                                                   main customers                         main customers
                                  all securities                        all securities
                                                     all securities                         all securities
                                 2017 and 2018                         2017 and 2018
                                                    2017 and 2018                         2017 and 2018

                                  ATM + POS          ATM + POS          ATM + POS          ATM + POS
                                       in ¤                in ¤         + wires in ¤       + wires in ¤

      ctitious gain in ¤             0.00854             0.00731            0.0166             0.0163
                                    (0.00720)           (0.00795)          (0.0145)           (0.0174)
      ctitious loss in ¤            -0.000599           -0.00443**       -0.000988**          -0.00304
                                   (0.000657)           (0.00225)        (0.000500)          (0.00327)
           gain in ¤
           loss in ¤
      liquidation minus
      reinvestment in ¤
   individual xed eects
 month-by-year xed eects

          observations               546290               34259            546290              34259
           R squared                  0.312               0.532             0.312               0.373



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Specication 2 regressing consumption (ATM withdrawals plus POS transactions plus
non-recurring national wires (as indicated)) on placebo ctitious capital gains (sale price relative to the
December 30, 2016 price) controlling for individual and month-by-year xed eects as well as the available
liquidated amounts and actual capital gains and losses all aggregated to the monthly level




                                                   46
Table 8:    Estimation results of probability of sale on dummies for the security (2017 and 2018
January to June) of being a winner, a (placebo) ctitious winner, or a (placebo) ctitious loser
interacted with a dummy for a fund sale in 2018

                                funds              funds              funds              funds
                           2017 and 2018      2017 and 2018      2017 and 2018      2017 and 2018

                                 sale               sale               sale               sale

               gain          0.00637***         0.00636***         0.00633***         -0.00555***
                              (0.00130)          (0.00131)          (0.00164)          (0.00200)
         ctitious gain        0.0235***          0.0233***          0.0274***          0.0277***
                              (0.00231)          (0.00233)          (0.00289)          (0.00290)
         ctitious gain        0.0148***          0.0162***          0.0137***          0.0177***
            times 2018        (0.00364)          (0.00366)          (0.00386)          (0.00386)
           ctitious loss     -0.00600***        -0.00585***         -0.000929         0.00558***
                              (0.00159)          (0.00163)          (0.00216)          (0.00206)
           ctitious loss       -0.00182           0.00125          -0.00472**         -0.00607***
            times 2018        (0.00197)          (0.00210)          (0.00217)          (0.00232)
        month-by-year
           xed eects
            individual
           xed eects
              funds
           xed eects

           observations        272,510            272,510            269,591            269,189
            R squared           0.002              0.003              0.191              0.218


Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Speciation 1 regressing a dummy for selling security j of individual i at time t on dummies for
security j of individual i at time t being an actual winner, a ctitious winner, or a ctitios loser (either
the 2018 status or the 2017 placebo status) as well as an interaction for the year being 2018 controlling for
individual, month-by-year, or funds xed eects (as indicated)




                                                     47
Table 9: Estimation results of probability of sale on dummies for the security of being a winner,
a ctitious winner, or a ctitious loser for early and late 2018 as well as the interaction with an
early/late indicator

                                funds         funds           funds          funds          funds
                             early 2018     late 2018          2018           2018          2018

                                 sale          sale            sale           sale           sale

               gain          -0.0160***      0.00132        0.00773***     0.0128***      -0.00330
                              (0.00463)     (0.00416)        (0.00198)     (0.00216)     (0.00290)
          ctitious gain       0.0499***     0.0429***       0.0299***      0.00867**     0.0159***
                              (0.00618)     (0.00679)        (0.00508)     (0.00351)     (0.00354)
          ctitious loss      -0.00770**      0.00525        -0.00830***   0.00803***      -0.00342
                              (0.00359)     (0.00354)        (0.00211)     (0.00186)     (0.00251)
          ctitious gain                                                    0.0366***     0.0381***
         times late 2018                                                   (0.00445)     (0.00505)
          ctitious gain                                     0.0196***      0.0647***     0.0760***
        times early 2018                                     (0.00590)     (0.00545)     (0.00577)
         month-by-year
           xed eects
            individual
           xed eects
              funds
           xed eects

          observations          65,841        55,036         126,249        123,836       123,383
            R squared           0.329          0.346           0.271         0.235          0.278



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Speciation 1 regressing a dummy for selling security j of individual i at time t on dummies for
security j of individual i at time t being an actual winner, a ctitious winner, or a ctitios loser in either
early or late 2018 (before versus after March 31, 2018) as well as an interaction for the day being earlier
than April 1, 2018 controlling for individual, month-by-year, or funds xed eects (as indicated)




                                                       48
Table 10: Estimation results of consumption (ATM plus POS) on liquidiation amounts less rein-
vestment of all securities, capital gains, ctitious capital gains, and ctitious capital losses with
an early 2018 indicator, with each investor's rst ve and rst half trades indicator as well as an
interaction with an indicator for the frequently trading investors

                                    funds            funds            funds             funds
                                     2018             2018             2018             2018



                                             ¿                ¿                 ¿                ¿
                                ATM + POS        ATM + POS        ATM + POS         ATM + POS
                                + wires in       + wires in       + wires in        + wires in


       ctitious gain in    ¿        0.183


                           ¿
                                   (0.127)
                                         
        ctitious gain in           0.589
       early 2018 indicator        (0.299)

       ctitious gain in    ¿                         0.032


                           ¿
                                                    (0.097)
                                                          
       ctitious gain in                             0.278
          rst ve trades                             (0.131)

       ctitious gain in    ¿                                           0.095


                           ¿
                                                                      (0.081)
                                                                           
       ctitious gain in                                              0.683
        rst half of trades                                            (0.252)

       ctitious gain in    ¿                                                            0.196


                           ¿
                                                                                       (0.166)
       ctitious gain in                                                                 0.320


                       ¿
        infrequent trader                                                              (0.199)


                       ¿
             gain in


                           ¿
             loss in
        ctitious loss in


                           ¿
         liquidation minus
         reinvestment in
        liquidation dummy
          month-by-year
            xed eects
             individual
            xed eects

            observations           216513            216513           216513           216513
             R squared              0.214            0.214             0.214            0.214



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Specication 2 regressing consumption (ATM withdrawals plus POS transactions plus
non-recurring national wires) on ctitious capital gains with dierent interaction variables indicating an
early trade (before April 1, 2018), one of the rst ve trades of each individual, one of the rst half of
trades of each individual, and infrequent traders (as indicated) controlling for individual and
month-by-year xed eects as well as the available liquidated amounts, a dummy for liquidations, and
actual capital gains and losses all aggregated to the monthly level

                                                   49
                                                                                                      ¿
Table 11: Estimation results of probability of sale on dummies for the security of being a winner,


                                                ¿
a ctitious winner, or a ctitious loser for individuals with portfolio sizes of less than 50,000           and
year-to-date capital gains of less than 1,602



                                                                                                      ¿
                                                                                         funds
                          funds         funds         funds         funds
                                                                                capital gains < 801

                           sale          sale          sale          sale                 sale

          gain          0.0157***     0.0132***     0.0106***    -0.00925**           -0.00859**
                        (0.00298)     (0.00310)     (0.00310)     (0.00428)            (0.00432)
     ctitious gain      0.0394***     0.0377***     0.0410***     0.0453***           0.0422***
                        (0.00456)     (0.00450)     (0.00470)     (0.00574)            (0.00573)
     ctitious loss      0.00505*      0.00498*      0.00661**    -0.00732**            -0.00614
                        (0.00266)     (0.00266)     (0.00267)     (0.00372)            (0.00380)
     month-by-year
      xed eects
       individual
      xed eects
          funds
      xed eects

      observations        49,980       49,980        48,508         48,115              46,126
       R squared          0.003         0.003         0.283         0.332                0.331



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Speciation 1 regressing a dummy for selling security j of individual i at time t on dummies for
security j of individual i at time t being an actual winner, a ctitious winner, or a ctitios loser for
subsets of individuals with portfolio sizes of less than 50,000¿ and the year-to-date capital gains less than
1,602¿ (household's tax free allowance) or 801¿ (individual's tax free allowance) (as indicated)
controlling for individual, month-by-year, or funds xed eects (as indicated)




                                                     50
                A Additional tables for online publication

Table A.12: Estimation results of probability of sale on dummies for the security of being a winner,
a ctitious winner, or a ctitious loser for each investor's rst ve trades in 2018 versus more trades
as well as the interaction with an indicator for each investor's rst ve trades in 2018

                                    funds          funds
                                                                  funds       funds        funds
                                  rst ve      more than ve
                                                                 all 2018    all 2018    all 2018
                                   trades          trades

                                     sale           sale           sale        sale         sale

                                                                                               
                 gain              -0.022          0.000         0.017       0.015       0.003
                                   (0.011)        (0.003)         (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                               
            ctitious gain         0.108           0.046          0.013       0.017       0.018
                                   (0.019)        (0.005)         (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                                 
             ctitious loss          0.010          -0.001        0.002        -0.000     -0.002
                                   (0.010)        (0.002)         (0.001)    (0.001)      (0.001)
                                                                                               
            ctitious gain                                        0.062       0.017       0.015
        times rst ve trades                                       (0.003)    (0.003)      (0.003)
            month-by-year
             xed eects
              individual
             xed eects
                 funds
             xed eects

             observations           12705         105045         1304646     1303133     1281546
              R squared             0.232          0.159           0.002      0.069        0.106



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Speciation 1 regressing a dummy for selling security j of individual i at time t on dummies for
security j of individual i at time t being an actual winner, a ctitious winner, or a ctitios loser for the
subset of each individual's rst ve trades or later trades as well as an interaction for the trade being one
of the rst ve trades controlling for individual, month-by-year, or funds xed eects (as indicated)




                                                    51
Table A.13: Estimation results of probability of sale on dummies for the security of being a winner,
a ctitious winner, or a ctitious loser for each investor's rst half trades versus second half in 2018
as well as the interaction with an indicator for the rst half of trades

                                  funds         funds
                                                              funds       funds       funds
                                rst half     second half
                                                            all 2018    all 2018     all 2018
                                of trades     of trades

                                   sale          sale          sale        sale        sale

                                                                                          
                   gain           -0.003        -0.001      0.017       0.015        0.003
                                 (0.004)       (0.003)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
                                                                                          
              ctitious gain      0.061         0.037        0.018       0.019        0.021
                                 (0.007)       (0.006)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
                                                                                             
              ctitious loss      0.011          -0.001       0.002       -0.000     -0.002
                                 (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
                                                                                              
              ctitious gain                                 0.005        -0.002      -0.003
             times rst half                                  (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
             month-by-year
               xed eects
                individual
               xed eects
                  funds
               xed eects

               observations       58254         59290       1304646     1303133      1281546
                R squared         0.192         0.218         0.001       0.069       0.106



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Speciation 1 regressing a dummy for selling security j of individual i at time t on dummies for
security j of individual i at time t being an actual winner, a ctitious winner, or a ctitios loser for the
subset of each individual's rst half of trades within 2018 as well as an interaction for the trade being one
of the rst half of trades controlling for individual, month-by-year, or funds xed eects (as indicated)




                                                       52
Table A.14: Estimation results of probability of sale on dummies for the security of being a winner,
a ctitious winner, or a ctitious loser for active and passive investors as well as the interaction
with an active investor indicator

                                       funds        funds
                                                                funds       funds      funds
                                      passive      active
                                                               all 2018   all 2018    all 2018
                                      accounts    accounts

                                        sale         sale        sale        sale       sale

                                                                                            
                     gain              0.005       0.010      0.023       0.019       0.010
                                       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
                                                                                            
                ctitious gain         0.056         0.011      -0.001     0.010       0.013
                                       (0.010)     (0.010)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
                                                                    
                ctitious loss         -0.009       -0.007     0.006         0.001      -0.001
                                       (0.005)     (0.005)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
                                                                                            
                ctitious gain                                 0.038       0.011       0.007
           times passive account                               (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
               month-by-year
                 xed eects
                 individual
                 xed eects
                    funds
                 xed eects

                observations           36585        20193      623569      622484      602213
                 R squared             0.215        0.075       0.003       0.076       0.116



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Speciation 1 regressing a dummy for selling security j of individual i at time t on dummies for
security j of individual i at time t being an actual winner, a ctitious winner, or a ctitios loser for the
subset of infrequent versus frequent traders within 2018 as well as an interaction for the trade being made
by an infrequent trader controlling for individual, month-by-year, or funds xed eects (as indicated)




                                                    53
Table A.15: Estimation results of consumption (ATM plus POS dev from mean) on liquidiation
amounts less reinvestment of all securities, capital gains, ctitious capital gains, and ctitious capital
losses with an early 2018 indicator, with each investor's rst ve and rst half trades indicator as
well as an interaction with an indicator for the frequently trading investors

                                          funds               funds              funds              funds
                                           2018               2018               2018               2018

                                      ATM + POS          ATM + POS           ATM + POS          ATM + POS
                                         + wires            + wires             + wires            + wires
                                     dev from mean      dev from mean       dev from mean      dev from mean

                                               
          ctitious gain                  0.164
          dev from mean                   (0.031)
                                               
          ctitious gain                  0.148
       early 2018 indicator               (0.026)
          ctitious gain                                      -0.001
          dev from mean                                      (0.025)
                                                                  
          ctitious gain                                     0.163
          rst ve trades                                      (0.021)
                                                                                     
          ctitious gain                                                        0.185
          dev from mean                                                         (0.027)
                                                                                     
          ctitious gain                                                        0.117
        rst half of trades                                                      (0.029)
                                                                                                           
          ctitious gain                                                                            0.047
          dev from mean                                                                            (0.023)
                                                                                                           
          ctitious gain                                                                           0.218
        infrequent trader                                                                          (0.028)
               gain
          dev from mean
                loss
          dev from mean
           ctitious loss
          dev from mean
 liquidation minus reinvestment
          dev from mean
       liquidation dummy
          month-by-year
           xed eects
            individual
           xed eects

           observations                   216513             216513             216513             216513
            R squared                      0.125              0.125              0.125              0.126



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Specication 2 regressing consumption (ATM withdrawals plus POS transactions plus
non-recurring national wires) on ctitious capital gains with dierent interaction variables indicating an
early trade (before April 1, 2018), one of the rst ve trades of each individual, one of the rst half of
trades of each individual, and infrequent traders (as indicated) controlling for individual and
month-by-year xed eects as well as the available liquidated amounts, a dummy for liquidations, and
actual capital gains and losses all aggregated to the monthly level and all transformed into deviations
from mean values (except the liquidation dummy)
Table A.16: Estimation results of consumption (ATM plus POS plus wires) on liquidiation amounts less reinvestment of all securities, capital
gains, ctitious capital gains, and ctitious capital losses and additional control variables

                                  all securities    all securities    all securities    all securities     all securities    all securities    all securities
                                 2017 and 2018     2017 and 2018     2017 and 2018     2017 and 2018     2017 and 2018      2017 and 2018     2017 and 2018



                                               ¿                 ¿                 ¿                 ¿                  ¿                 ¿                   ¿
                                 ATM + POS         ATM + POS          ATM + POS         ATM + POS         ATM + POS         ATM + POS         ATM + POS
                                 + wires in         + wires in        + wires in        + wires in        + wires in        + wires in         + wires in

     ctitious gain in    ¿          0.520***          0.499***           0.380**           0.349**           0.332**           0.333**           0.333**


                         ¿
                                     (0.192)           (0.190)           (0.148)           (0.146)            (0.145)           (0.145)           (0.145)
      ctitious loss in             -0.000242         -0.000241          -0.000320         -0.000319         -0.000279         -0.000279         -0.000279


                     ¿
                                   (0.000208)        (0.000207)        (0.000206)        (0.000203)         (0.000173)        (0.000174)        (0.000174)


                     ¿
          gain in
           loss in


                         ¿
      liquidation minus
      reinvestment in
 month-by-year xed eects
   individual xed eects
     liquidation dummy
        salary received
      dividends received
       interest received

         observations               609,693           609,693            609,693           609,693           609,693           609,693           609,693
          R squared                   0.001             0.001             0.151             0.154              0.155             0.155                0.155



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Specication 2 regressing consumption (ATM withdrawals plus POS transactions plus non-recurring national wires) on ctitious capital gains
controlling for individual and month-by-year xed eects (as indicated) as well as the available liquidated amounts, a dummy for liquidations, actual
capital gains and losses, regular salaries, dividend payments, and interest payments (as indicated) all aggregated to the monthly level
Table A.17:      Estimation results of consumption (ATM plus POS) on liquidiation amounts less
reinvestment of all securities as well as realized and unrealized capital gains, ctitious capital gains,
and ctitious capital losses

                               funds              funds             funds              funds              funds
                          2017 and 2018      2017 and 2018      2017 and 2018     2017 and 2018      2017 and 2018



                                        ¿                   ¿                 ¿                  ¿                  ¿
                           ATM + POS          ATM + POS         ATM + POS          ATM + POS          ATM + POS
                           + wires in         + wires in        + wires in         + wires in         + wires in


       gain in   ¿             0.000
                              (0.000)
                                                  0.000
                                                 (0.000)
                                                                     0.000
                                                                    (0.000)
                                                                                       0.000
                                                                                      (0.000)
                                                                                                          0.000
                                                                                                         (0.000)

  ctitious gain in    ¿       0.219
                                    

                              (0.097)
                                                 0.219
                                                 (0.097)
                                                         
                                                                   0.215
                                                                         

                                                                    (0.097)
                                                                                      0.215
                                                                                      (0.097)
                                                                                              
                                                                                                         0.222
                                                                                                         (0.098)
                                                                                                                 



       loss in   ¿             -0.000
                              (0.000)
                                                 -0.000
                                                 (0.000)
                                                                    -0.000
                                                                    (0.000)
                                                                                       -0.000
                                                                                      (0.000)
                                                                                                         -0.000
                                                                                                         (0.000)

  ctitious loss in   ¿         -0.000
                              (0.000)
                                                 -0.000
                                                 (0.000)
                                                                    -0.000
                                                                    (0.000)
                                                                                      -0.000
                                                                                      (0.000)
                                                                                              
                                                                                                        -0.000
                                                                                                              

                                                                                                         (0.000)

 unrealized gain in   ¿                          0.000
                                                 (0.000)
                                                         
                                                                    0.000
                                                                    (0.000)
                                                                           
                                                                                      0.000
                                                                                      (0.000)
                                                                                              
                                                                                                         0.000
                                                                                                         (0.000)
                                                                                                                 




                     ¿
       unrealized                                                    0.030             0.029              0.029
  ctitious gain in                                                  (0.024)           (0.024)            (0.026)

 unrealized loss in   ¿                                                              -0.000
                                                                                            

                                                                                      (0.000)
                                                                                                        -0.000
                                                                                                              

                                                                                                         (0.000)


                     ¿
                                                                                                              
       unrealized                                                                                       -0.000
  ctitious loss in                                                                                       (0.000)


                     ¿
   liquidation minus
  reinvestment in
  liquidation dummy
    month-by-year
      xed eects
       individual
      xed eects

     observations             609693             609693             609693            609693             609693
       R squared               0.027              0.028              0.028             0.028              0.028



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Specication 2 regressing consumption (ATM withdrawals plus POS transactions plus
non-recurring national wires) on ctitious capital gains controlling for individual and month-by-year xed
eects as well as the available liquidated amounts, a dummy for liquidations, actual capital gains and
losses, and unrealized ctitious as well as actual capital gains and losses (as indicated) all aggregated to
the monthly level




                                                    56
Table A.18: Estimation results of consumption (ATM plus POS plus wires) on liquidiation amounts less reinvestment of all securities, capital
gains, ctitious capital gains, and ctitious capital losses

                                  all securities    all securities        all securities           all securities           all securities           all securities
                                2017 and 2018      2017 and 2018         2017 and 2018                 2018                  2018 early                2018 late

                                 ATM + POS          ATM + POS             ATM + POS                ATM + POS                ATM + POS               ATM + POS
                                    + wires            + wires               + wires                  + wires                  + wires                 + wires
                                 logged if > 1     rst-dierenced      deviation from mean      deviation from mean      deviation from mean     deviation from mean

        ctitious gain
  (logged, rst-dierenced,           0.348***           0.640**              0.151***                 0.151***                 0.144***                 0.171***
    deviation from mean)
                                    (0.0343)           (0.275)               (0.0179)                (0.0198)                 (0.0312)                 (0.0352)
        ctitious loss
  (logged, rst-dierenced,          -0.125***         -0.00102**             -5.11e-06                8.97e-06                 0.000334                 7.60e-06
    deviation from mean)
                                   (0.00419)         (0.000461)             (1.07e-05)              (7.78e-06)                (0.00118)               (4.90e-06)
             gain
  (logged, rst-dierenced,
    deviation from mean)
             loss
  (logged, rst-dierenced,
    deviation from mean)
      liquidation minus
         reinvestment
  (logged, rst-dierenced,
    deviation from mean)
 month-by-year xed eects
   individual xed eects
     liquidation dummy

         observations               609,693            455,009               609,693                  216,513                  99,604                  116,909
          R squared                   0.455             0.021                 0.261                    0.349                    0.506                      0.456



Standard errors (clustered at the individual level) in parentheses *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
Notes: Specication 2 regressing consumption (ATM withdrawals plus POS transactions plus non-recurring national wires (outcome variable transformed
as indicated)) on ctitious capital gains controlling for individual and month-by-year xed eects as well as the available liquidated amounts, a dummy for
liquidations, and actual capital gains and losses all aggregated to the monthly level
