                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    CAUGHT BETWEEN CULTURES:
UNINTENDED CONSEQUENCES OF IMPROVING OPPORTUNITY FOR IMMIGRANT GIRLS

                                            Gordon B. Dahl
                                             Cristina Felfe
                                             Paul Frijters
                                            Helmut Rainer

                                         Working Paper 26674
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w26674


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      January 2020




 We thank colleagues and seminar participants at several universities and conferences for valuable
 feedback and suggestions. We are grateful to the almost 20 research assistants and interns for their
 invaluable assistance with data collection. The project received generous financial support from the
 ifo Institute, University of Munich, University of St. Gallen, and University of Hamburg. The views
 expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau
 of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
 reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
 NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Gordon B. Dahl, Cristina Felfe, Paul Frijters, and Helmut Rainer. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
 that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Caught between Cultures: Unintended Consequences of Improving Opportunity for Immigrant
Girls
Gordon B. Dahl, Cristina Felfe, Paul Frijters, and Helmut Rainer
NBER Working Paper No. 26674
January 2020, Revised May 2020
JEL No. J15,J16,Z1

                                                 ABSTRACT

What happens when immigrant girls are given increased opportunities to integrate into the workplace
and society, but their parents value more traditional cultural outcomes? Building on Akerlof and Kranton's
identity framework (2000), we construct a simple game-theoretic model which shows how expanding
opportunities for immigrant girls can have the unintended consequence of reducing their well-being,
since identity-concerned parents will constrain their daughter's choices. The model can explain the
otherwise puzzling findings from a reform which granted automatic birthright citizenship to eligible
immigrant children born in Germany after January 1, 2000. Using survey data we collected in 57 schools
in Germany and comparing those born in the months before versus after the reform, we find that birthright
citizenship lowers measures of life satisfaction and self-esteem for immigrant girls. This is especially
true for Muslims, where traditional cultural identity is salient. Birthright citizenship results in disillusionment
where immigrant Muslim girls believe their chances of achieving their educational goals are lower
and the perceived odds of having to forgo a career for family rise. Consistent with the model, immigrant
Muslim parents invest less in their daughters' schooling and have a lower probability of speaking German
with their daughters if they are born after the reform. We further find that immigrant Muslim girls
granted birthright citizenship are less likely to self-identify as German, are more socially isolated,
and are less likely to believe foreigners can have a good life in Germany. In contrast, immigrant boys
experience, if anything, an improvement in well-being and little effect on other outcomes. Taken together,
the findings point towards immigrant girls being pushed by parents to conform to a role within traditional
culture, whereas boys are allowed to take advantage of the opportunities that come with citizenship.
Alternative models can explain some of the findings in isolation, while our identity model is consistent
with all of the findings simultaneously.


Gordon B. Dahl                                           Paul Frijters
Department of Economics                                  London School of Economics
University of California, San Diego                      Houghton Street
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                                  London, WC2A 2AE
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                                  United Kingdom
and NBER                                                 p.frijters@lse.ac.uk
gdahl@ucsd.edu
                                                         Helmut Rainer
Cristina Felfe                                           University of Munich
University of Würzburg                                   Ludwigstrasse 28
Sanderring 2                                             80539 Munich
97070 Würzburg                                           Germany
Germany                                                  rainer@econ.lmu.de
christina.felfe@uni-wuerzburg.de
1   Introduction
    A frequent occurrence in immigrant families is a clash between parents and children over cultural
values. This can have far-reaching consequences for the welfare of immigrant youth. For example,
in Germany, five times as many adolescent girls with Turkish roots attempt to commit suicide
compared to native girls, and many experts attribute this to conflicts that arise from immigrant
parents adhering to traditional cultural beliefs while their children want to endorse mainstream
Western values (Heredia-Montesinos et al. 2019). In a similar vein in Canada, differences in parent
and child expectations regarding religious and cultural practices is cited as the most common reason
for immigrant youth ending up homeless (McKenzie et al. 2014).
    Although this evidence is alarming in itself, it also raises the possibility that well-intentioned,
opportunity-enhancing interventions for immigrant youth could backfire by increasing the cultural
tension between generations. Take, as an example, the case study of 17-year old Havva (El-Mafaalani
and Toprak 2017, p. 89). Based on her affinity for mathematics and accounting, a supportive teacher
suggests she pursue commercial training. One challenge is that Havva wears a headscarf because
she is Muslim, but her teacher finds companies which will accommodate this. Havva receives two
offers and is initially excited, but soon tells her teacher she has changed her mind. When pressed,
Havva admits she still wants the training, but her family does not support the decision. The teacher
meets with her parents to try and persuade them, but Havva's father responds that such training is
not for their daughter. Havva reluctantly agrees not to pursue the opportunity. In this case study,
the teacher's well-meant intervention leads to a collision of two worlds of thought, and eventual
disappointment for Havva.
    Against this backdrop, this paper studies theoretically and empirically the consequences of
expanding economic and political opportunities for immigrant youth. Neoclassical economics predicts
that improving opportunities for members of a minority group should increase their welfare and
integration into mainstream society. This should be especially true for second-generation immigrant
youth, who are still at an age where they are malleable and assimilation into a host country is
arguably easier. But it is also possible that immigrant youth get "caught between cultures," where
the parents' preferences are for the child to retain the traditional norms of the original home country.
To capture this in a formal way, we build on the seminal paper of Akerlof and Kranton (2000), which
argues that (i) "choice of identity may be the most important `economic' decision people make" and
(ii) "[l]imits on this choice may be the most important determinant of an individual's economic
well-being" (p. 717). Importantly, in this class of models, policy-makers face a dilemma as it is not
possible to incentivize individuals to engage in certain activities and, at the same time, protect them
from the reactions of others for whom these activities cause discomfort and anxiety. Translated
into our intergenerational context, as economic and political opportunities increase, immigrant
youth aspire to assimilate into mainstream society, but identity-concerned parents "sabotage" their
assimilation by restricting their choices and investments. We provide some of the first causal tests
of this policy dilemma, showing that increasing opportunities for immigrant youth can lead to the
unintended consequence of making them worse off.


                                                   1
   Intergenerational identity concerns could be gender specific, especially since daughters are often
tasked with being "keepers of the culture" (Suárez-Orozco and Qin 2006). Identity spillovers should
play a larger role for daughters than sons if the parents come from origin countries where women
have different roles in society compared to the roles they are expected to have in the host country,
such as an expectation to raise large families and not work outside the home. Immigrant parents
may even have "traditional" identity concerns for girls, but "mainstream" identity concerns for
boys, where they value their son's integration into the labor market because it conforms with the
roles of men in the culture they come from. This would generate opposite effects for welfare and
assimilation based on a child's gender when economic opportunities increase.
   Testing whether parents' identity concerns matter for child well-being and assimilation is a
challenging task. The first reason is that immigrant children with more opportunities likely also
differ in other unobservable ways. In particular, immigrant youth with more opportunities to
integrate may also have parents for whom traditional identity concerns are less important. To break
this link, the ideal research design would take advantage of an exogenous shift in the opportunity
set for some immigrant youth, but not others, while at the same time not directly affecting parents.
A second challenge is that measures of well-being, career aspirations, parental investments, national
identity, and assimilation are usually not available in most datasets. An ideal dataset would include
these types of variables in a context where second-generation immigrant youth can be identified.
   In this paper, we test for intergenerational identity spillovers using a legal reform which granted
automatic citizenship to eligible immigrant children born in Germany after January 1, 2000. The
probability of being a citizen at birth jumps 52 percentage points for second-generation immigrant
children born post-reform. A nice feature of the reform is that it occurs in between school year
cutoffs. This means that immigrant youth born six months before and after the cutoff will typically
be in the same grade in school, while having different probabilities of being a German citizen at
birth. To learn more about the effects of this reform, we conducted in-class surveys of immigrant
and native students in their final year of compulsory schooling (normally 15-16 years old) in 57
German schools.
   We use this birth date cutoff as an exogenous shock to youth immigrant opportunity. Citizenship
provides new rights and possibilities, such as the ability to vote in general elections, be employed in
the public sector and work in other EU countries (but does not change access to social assistance
benefits). Prior research suggests that citizenship improves economic outcomes: naturalized adult
immigrants earn more compared to their non-naturalized peers (Chiswick 1978; Steinhardt 2012),
have higher job-finding rates (Fougère and Safi 2009; Gathmann and Keller 2018), and experience
steeper wage-tenure profiles (Bratsberg et al. 2002).
   Using this large jump in citizenship, we analyze how the reform affected youth's subjective
well-being and a host of other outcomes. Focusing on a narrow one-year window around the cutoff,
we compare second-generation immigrant children born in the months before versus after the reform.
Native German children are used to difference out any common age effects within a school year.
   Our empirical analysis yields several key findings. First, birthright citizenship lowers subjective


                                                  2
well-being for immigrant girls. Self-reported life satisfaction falls by almost a third of a standard
deviation for those born after the reform. The implied effect is similar in magnitude to the effect
of a medium-level depression on life satisfaction (Frijters et al. 2020). The estimate is robust to a
narrowing of the sample window (±6, ±5, ±4, ±3, or ±2 months around the cutoff) or the use of a
regression discontinuity design, but with larger standard errors. The effects are concentrated among
immigrant daughters in Muslim families, where cultural differences relative to German mainstream
culture are starkest. We find the same pattern using self-esteem measures, consistent with the loss
in well-being being identity driven as hypothesized by Kranton (2016) and Akerlof (2017).
      Our second main finding is that citizenship results in disillusionment for Muslim immigrant
girls, where they believe the chances of achieving their educational and career goals are lower.
Muslim immigrant girls exposed to the citizenship reform are more likely to aspire to get tertiary
schooling, but the odds they place on reaching their educational goals fall by 21 percentage points.
This finding is consistent with daughters experiencing regret when they are unable to pursue their
individually optimal choice, due to traditional parents proscribing choices. In contrast, there is no
disillusionment for immigrant boys or non-Muslim immigrant girls. We further find that for Muslim
immigrant girls, the perceived odds of having to forgo a career for family rise by 8 percentage points.
The opposite is true for non-Muslim immigrant girls, and there is no significant effect for boys.
      Third, parental investments in mainstream culture fall and in traditional culture rise for Muslim
immigrant girls. Starting with labor market investments, Muslim immigrant girls who have access
to birthright citizenship are 15 percentage points less likely to receive parental support with their
homework and learning compared to their non-naturalized peers. Turning to the transmission of
cultural heritage, Muslim immigrant parents are 7 percentage points more likely to never speak
German with their daughters born after the reform, which is a 50% increase relative to daughters
born prior to the reform.1 No such effects are found for Muslim immigrant sons. These findings are
consistent with our intergenerational identity model, where Muslim parents try to constrain the
assimilation of their daughters, but not their sons, in response to the increased opportunity set that
citizenship provides.
      Finally, we find that Muslim immigrant girls affected by the reform feel less integrated into
German society. Immigrant Muslim girls are 14 percentage points less likely to self-identify as
German if they have been granted birthright citizenship. Likewise, their belief that foreigners can
have a good life in Germany falls by a third of a standard deviation. There are no effects for
immigrant boys or immigrant girls from non-Muslim backgrounds. Bolstering these results, Muslim
immigrant girls affected by the reform are less likely to participate in after-school social activities
with natives and are less likely to have a friendship network they can turn to for support when they
experience challenges.
      The results for boys fit easily within a neoclassical framework (or with parents having "main-
stream" identity concerns for their sons), but the counterintuitive results for girls do not. Citizenship
has been argued to be an effective policy to foster social inclusion (National Academies of Sciences,
  1
      Language has been argued to be a primary measure of integration (e.g., Algan et al. 2012).



                                                          3
Engineering, and Medicine 2015), but for daughters from a traditional culture, the opposite occurs.
This gender split supports the idea that Muslim immigrant daughters are expected to adopt a more
neotraditional role compared to sons.
      While our intergenerational identity model is consistent with all of the empirical facts we
document, we also recognize that other mechanisms could simultaneously be at play. Two leading
alternatives for the drop in well-being, at least in isolation, are what we label the "unmet expectations"
and "resource shifting" hypotheses. The unmet expectations hypothesis says that Muslim girls
granted citizenship expect to be able to accomplish more, but are disappointed when they realize that
society continues to discriminate against them even though they are citizens. The resource shifting
hypothesis says that after birthright citizenship occurs, parents shift resources away from their
daughters and towards their sons, because they favor their sons succeeding above their daughters.
These possibilities are linked to different forms of cultural tension and are interesting in their own
right. However, as we discuss later in the paper, the effects we estimate for other outcomes and
supplementary analyses are not generally consistent with these alternative models. We conclude
that the sum of the results can be most easily explained by our intergenerational identity model.
      Our paper addresses an open puzzle in the literature on why birthright citizenship appears to
affect immigrant boys and girls differently. Felfe et al. (2020b) study the same reform and find that
it raised immigrant children's participation in preschool, had positive effects on early childhood
development, sped up progression through primary school, and increased the likelihood of attending
better secondary schools. While that study did not distinguish between male and female immigrants,
in subsequent work, Felfe et al. (2020a) show that the positive reform effects, not only in terms of
education but also in terms of cooperation with natives, are an entirely male phenomenon. This
prior work raises the puzzle of why boys seem to benefit but girls do not, a fact readily explained
by our identity model and empirical analysis. Three other papers look at how the reform impacts
parents, finding that parents reduce their fertility and become more culturally assimilated (Avitabile
et al. 2013, 2014), while labor market participation decreases for immigrant mothers (Sajons 2019).
      Our paper contributes to an emerging literature on the importance of identity and cultural norms
for economic outcomes. There are two strands of the literature which are particularly germane:
gender identity and immigrant identity. These two identities intersect to form the "traditional"
identity concerns of parents in our study, and the clash of cultures their daughters experience.
      Several papers have used the implications of gender identity models to help explain changes in
women's employment, education, and family choices (Goldin 2006; Bursztyn et al. 2018), relative
income within households (Bertrand et al. 2015), the division of labor within a household (Blau
et al. 2020; Ichino et al. 2019), marriage markets (Bertrand et al. 2016; Bursztyn et al. 2017, 2018),
work and fertility choices of immigrant women (Blau et al. 2013; Fernández 2007; Fernández and
Fogli 2009), and female labor market participation across countries (Fortin 2005, 2015). In addition,
several papers look at how childhood environment contributes to the shaping of preferences over
family and career (e.g., Fernández et al. 2004; Kleven et al. 2018).2
  2
      There is also a related literature on other factors which change gender roles (Goldin 1995; Fernández et al. 2004;



                                                            4
    Other work has looked at how immigrant or ethnic identity affects economic outcomes such
as employment, wages, job search, and schooling (Austin-Smith and Fryer 2005; Frijters et al.
2005; Nekby and Rödin 2007; Constant and Zimmermann 2008; Battu and Zenou 2010; Casey
and Dustmann 2010; Fryer and Torelli 2010; Pendakur and Pendakur 2011). These papers report
correlations between self-reported ethnic or country identity and labor market outcomes or academic
achievement. Some studies find that immigrants who partake in the origin country's identity do
better in the labor market, while others find no effect or even the opposite.
    Our results are also informative when viewed through the lens of the theoretical literature on
intergenerational transmission of preferences and beliefs (for pioneering work see Bisin and Verdier
2000, 2001). In this literature, cultural transmission is modeled as an interaction between direct
vertical socialization (i.e., parental influences) and oblique horizontal socialization (i.e., societal
influences). Our study highlights the consequences of intra-family conflict that can arise in this
process, and can be viewed as the first causal test of the impacts on and effects of vertical socialization
when there is an exogenous shock in horizontal socialization.
    We add to the literature by examining how parental identity concerns affect children, both
theoretically and empirically. While most research thinks about limits placed by society on an
individual's identity, we consider how parents' proscriptions on their children's choices can tighten
as opportunities to assimilate into society increase. We provide some of the first causal evidence on
the policy dilemma that can arise when identity concerns shape interdependent decision making à
la Akerlof and Kranton (2000). Our results are a sobering illustration that increased opportunities
are not offered to people in isolation of competing claims on the loyalty of a person. From a policy
perspective, the fact that immigrant girls are made unintentionally worse off and less integrated after
receiving birthright citizenship suggests other measures are needed to promote second-generation
assimilation of females.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. We begin by developing a simple model for how
increased opportunities affect child well-being in a model with intergenerational identity concerns.
In Sections 3 and 4, we describe our setting, empirical strategy, and data. In Section 5, we present
our results, followed by a discussion of alternative models in Section 6. The final section concludes.

2   Theoretical Framework
    To motivate our empirical analysis, we develop a simple model for how connecting immigrant
youth to opportunity affects their well-being. Since we will be looking at students who are in their
final year of compulsory schooling, we frame this discussion in terms of an early career effort choice,
such as investment in education. But the ideas are more general than this, and can easily be adapted
to other investments a child can make to integrate into a host country's economic and social life.
    The child chooses between two levels of effort: eH ("high") and eL ("low"). The outcome of a
child's effort can be either a high-success or low-success career: jH or jL . The probability of the
high outcome is p  (0, 1) if the child chooses eH , but p = 0 if the child chooses eL . We think of p
Blau and Kahn 2007; Alesina et al. 2013; Fernández 2013; Goldin and Olivetti 2013; Albanesi and Olivetti 2016).



                                                        5
as a parameter that captures the economic opportunities immigrants face in the host country. The
cost of effort eH (respectively, eL ) is given by c (respectively, 0).
       Within this framework, we analyze the implications of two models. First, we consider a model in
which young immigrants exhibit neoclassical preferences and decide on career effort independently
of their parents. In this model, we briefly discuss changes in welfare in response to better economic
opportunities for immigrant youth (i.e., an increase in p). Second, in the spirit of Akerlof and
Kranton (2000), we consider the same comparative static in an economic model of identity in
which the career choices of young immigrants are determined through a sequential bargaining game
between them and their parents. Crucially, in this model, we assume that children impose an
"identity externality" on parents if their career outcome deviates from the exogenous identity-based
reference point of a low-success career (i.e., a traditional career which has low returns in the labor
market, such as remaining at home to take care of children).

2.1     Individual Decision-Making with Neoclassical Preferences
       Consider first a single agent model, which we label as neoclassical, where the child makes
decisions without any interference by their parents. Suppose the preferences of a young immigrant
are given by a utility function that is additively separable into uk (k  {H, L}), which converts career
outcomes jk into utility, and the cost of effort supplied. The individual then chooses e  {eL , eH }
to maximize her expected payoff
                                          
                                          uL                         if e = eL ;
                                V (e) =                                                                      (1)
                                          pu
                                               H   + (1 - p)uL - c if e = eH .

       The resulting effort choice is then:
                                    
                                    eL        if c > c
                                                     ^
                              e =                              ^  p(uH - uL ).
                                                         where c                                             (2)
                                    e
                                        H     if c  c
                                                    ^

       The comparative static of interest is the effect of an increase in economic opportunities for
immigrants, captured by p, on their well-being. Suppose that p increases, from p- to p+ . This
has two effects. First, conditional on high effort under p- (i.e., for children with c  c
                                                                                        ^- ), better
economic opportunities for young immigrants increases their expected payoffs by (p+ - p- )(uH - uL ).
                                                 ^- to c
Second, the increase in p raises the cutoff from c                                  c- , c
                                                       ^+ , i.e., children with c  (^    ^+ ) will now
choose eH instead of eL , and increase their utility by p+ (uH - uL ) - c. Finally, for children with
  ^+ , the increase in p has no effect.
c>c

2.2     Family Bargaining with Traditional Identity-Based Preferences
       We now extend the model along four dimensions (see Figure 1). First, we assume a sequential
bargaining game between a child and her parents. In particular, since our data captures immigrant
children at an age where parents arguably still hold considerable decision-making power over them,
we assume that parents are dictators who have the last say on the child's career effort.3 The sequence
   3
    Allowing parents to be "imperfect" dictators, where parents can punish their children when they do not comply
with their parents' wishes, yields similar insights.


                                                         6
of events is as follows. In the first stage, the child proposes a career effort e  {eL , eH }. In the
second stage, the parents can either accept the child's effort proposal or reject it and enforce the
opposite effort level. In the last stage of the game, which we think of as the child's "adult stage",
career outcomes are realized.
       Second, we include frictions between immigrant identities and children's career choices. In order
to keep the model as parsimonious as possible, we only impose identity-based preferences on the
parents. In particular, we follow the prototype identity model outlined by Akerlof and Kranton
(2000), where immigrant parents have a preference for their children to pursue a low-success career
(jL ), and experience a loss of identity (I ) whenever their child's realized career deviates from this
outcome. The loss of identity comes from the child assimilating into "mainstream" culture, versus
"traditional" immigrant culture. A low success career refers to success in terms of formal labor
market returns, and could include forgoing paid work to remain at home to take care of children
and the household. More generally, immigrant parents could experience an identity loss whenever
their children assimilate in other ways into mainstream society.
       Third, to stay as close as possible to Akerlof and Kranton's identity model, and to make the
implications of parents' identity concerns as salient as possible, we abstain from making the (realistic)
assumption that parents are altruistic and care about their children's career outcomes.4 We do,
however, assume that both parents and the child incur a cost  whenever parents enforce an effort
level e  {eL , eH } which differs from the child's proposed effort level. We think of this cost as
capturing payoff losses due to intra-family conflict.
       Fourth, we assume that the child feels regret R if she has to forgo pursuing her individually
rational strategy as in the neoclassical model. For example, for a child with c  c
                                                                                 ^, it is individually
rational to choose high effort eH . If, in a subgame perfect outcome, the child either proposes eL (and
the parents accept it) or the parents enforce eL (after the child proposes eH ), the child feels regret
because the foregone effort level is individually preferable to the chosen one. A natural assumption
we make is that R is an increasing function of the career opportunities a child has to forgo by not
being able to pursue her individually rational strategy. Thus, if in equilibrium a child with c  c
                                                                                                 ^
realizes eL instead of her preferred eH , her foregone career opportunities are given by p(uH - ul ) - c,
and she experiences regret in the amount R = R(p(uH - ul ) - c). By a similar logic, if a child with
  ^ realizes eH instead of eL , she experiences regret of R = R(c - p(uH - ul )).
c>c
       Expected payoffs are given at the end nodes of the game in Figure 1. The top payoff is for the
child, and the bottom payoff for parents. Consider, for example, a child with c  c
                                                                                 ^. If the child
proposes eH (which is individually rational), and the parents accept this, then the expected payoff
of the child is puH + (1 - p)uL - c, i.e., she has a positive probability of a high-success career, but
has to incur the cost of effort c. For parents, the expected payoff is given by y - pI . It increases
with parents' exogenous income y ; however, with probability p, the child realizes a high-success
career, which causes traditional immigrant parents to suffer identity losses in amount I . If the
   4
    This could easily be relaxed by adding a term uk to parental payoffs at the end nodes of the game in Figure 1
(bottom payoff). It would not change the main gist of our results, but would come at the cost of having to make some
additional assumptions.


                                                         7
parent had instead rejected the child's proposal of eH and enforced eL instead, the child would have
no chance at a high-success career, face intra-family conflict at cost , and feel regret R because the
forgone effort level is individually preferable to the one chosen by her parents. The parent would
now face intra-family conflict , but no longer suffer an identity loss.
    To solve the game, it is useful to define the following critical value for the intensity of identity, :
                                                 ^= 
                                                 
                                                       pI
    Given this critical value, it is straightforward to verify the game has three possible subgame
perfect outcomes:

 (a) If  < ^ and c > c
                     ^, then the child proposes low effort eL , and the parents accept it.

 (b) If  < ^ and c       c
                         ^, then the child proposes high effort eH , and the parents accept it.

  (c) If     ^ , the child proposes low effort eL for any c, and the parents accept it.
             

The first two subgame perfect outcomes correspond to the neoclassical outcome described above;
they arise if parents' identity concerns are sufficiently low, relative to the cost of intra-family conflict.
The more interesting case is where identity concerns are more salient,            ^.
    In the third subgame perfect outcome, traditional parents suffer a large identity loss whenever
their child realizes a high-success career (jH ). When   ^ , parents' identity concerns are so high
that they enforce eL if the child proposes eH . Anticipating this, and to avoid intra-family conflict
(i.e., costs ), the child proposes low effort eL irrespective of whether c > c
                                                                             ^ or c           c
                                                                                              ^, which the
parents accept. From the point of view of a child with c < c
                                                           ^, the third outcome features parents
who are "under-ambitious" due to identity concerns: by enforcing low effort, parents hold their
children back to a low success career. This outcome features children who also feel regret R.
    An increase in economic opportunities for young immigrants (i.e., an increase in p) has an
ambiguous effect on their well-being, depending on how important identity concerns are for their
parents. This is illustrated in Figure 2, which considers the simple thought experiment of increasing
p from p- to p+ . In terms of the model basics, this has two effects. First, it increases the critical
           ^- to c
value from c                                               c- , c
                 ^+ : more children ­ i.e., those with c  (^    ^+ ) ­ will now find it individually
rational to supply high effort (eH ) instead of low effort (eL ). Second, it decreases the critical value
^ from 
        ^ + to ^ - : due to identity concerns, more parents ­ i.e., those with   (   ^+, ^ - ) ­ will now
enforce eL regardless of their child's proposed effort. We now provide some interpretation of the
various regions in Figure 2.
    In regions (i)-(iii) ("low identity intensity"), the identity parameter is low enough that both
initially and after the increase in p, parents do not make use of their "veto" threat, and subgame
                                                               ^+ choose low effort both initially
perfect outcomes are neoclassical in nature. Children with c > c
                                               c- , c
and after the increase in p; children with c  (^    ^+ ) choose eH instead of eL after the change,
and realize an (expected) utility gain in amount p+ (uH - uL ) - c; and children with c          ^- choose
                                                                                                 c
high effort both before and after the increase in p, and see their expected payoffs increase by
(p+ - p- )(uH - uL ).

                                                     8
      In regions (iv)-(vi) ("moderate identity intensity"), the increase in p causes some subgame perfect
outcomes to change from being neoclassical in nature to being shaped by parents' identity concerns.
In region (iv), choosing low effort remains individually optimal from the child's perspective, and
this does not conflict with parents' identity, so there is no change in outcomes or utility. But in
region (v), the increase in p makes choosing high effort individually rational now, but due to parents'
identity concerns, the child is "held back" to low effort. Thus, her expected career outcomes are
unaffected by the increase in p, but she feels regret R due to not being able to pursue what has
become her individually optimal strategy. In region (vi), if a child proposes eH as they did prior to
the increase in p, the parents no longer accept it, but threaten to enforce eL ; anticipating this, the
child immediately proposes eL (which the parents accept), and her expected payoff decreases by
c - p- (uH - uL ) - R.
      In regions (vii)-(ix) ("high identity intensity"), the parameters are such that both initially and
after the increase in p, subgame perfect outcomes are shaped by parents' identity concerns. In region
(vii), the increase in p leaves children's well-being unaffected. However, this is not the case in region
(viii), where the child initially preferred eL ; with the increase in p, the child now prefers eH over eL ,
but parents' veto threat forces the child to accept eL , i.e., she ends up in a regret equilibrium. In
region (ix), the child already had regret for not being able to pursue a high success career; after the
increase in opportunity p, this regret increases and hence the child is even worse off than before.
      Taken together, the model predicts the welfare effects of connecting immigrant youth to oppor-
tunity depend on the underlying strength of parents' identity concerns. Children whose parents
have little or no traditional identity concerns will be (weakly) positively affected by an increase in p
(positive effects in regions (ii), (iii) and no effect in (i)). In contrast, the welfare of children whose
parents have moderate to strong identity concerns will be (weakly) negatively affected (negative
effects in regions (v), (vi), (viii), (ix) and no effect in (iv), (vii)). We find support for this model,
and against the neoclassical model, for immigrant girls in the empirical work which follows.

2.3    Mainstream Identity-Based Preferences
      It is straightforward to extend the model described in subsection 2.2 to the case where immigrant
parents have mainstream identity instead of traditional identity. In this case, parents have a
preference for their children to achieve a high-success career (jH ), and experience a loss of identity
(I ) whenever their child's (realized) career outcome deviates from this reference point. As before,
both parents and the child incur a cost  whenever parents enforce an effort level which differs from
the child's proposed effort level. This happens when the child would like to choose low effort (eL )
but the parent enforces high effort (eH ) due to identity concerns.
      The expected payoffs for the case with mainstream identity are given in Appendix Figure A1.
There are three possible subgame perfect outcomes. The first two are the same as (a) and (b) listed
for the traditional case in subsection 2.2, and correspond to the neoclassical outcome. But the third
differs as follows:

 (c ) If       ^ , the child proposes high effort eH for any c, and the parents accept it.
               


                                                     9
In this third subgame perfect outcome, parents' identity concerns are so high that they enforce eH
if the child proposes eL . Anticipating this, and to avoid intra-family conflict with costs , the child
proposes high effort for any effort cost c.
      In Appendix Figure 2, we again consider the thought experiment of increasing p from p- to
p+ , as we did in Figure A2. If parents have mainstream identity concerns, an increase in youth
opportunity will, for most combination of parameter values, increase children's welfare (regions ii,
iii, v, vi, vii, viii, ix). In region (i) it remains unchanged. Only in region (iv) will child well-being
decrease. This exception is the region where parents force children to "overachieve" by making them
exert high effort eH when they would prefer to exert eL .
      In what follows, the model of traditional identity-based preferences presented in subsection 2.2
best explains our results for immigrant girls. The model of mainstream identity-based preferences
presented in this subsection is consistent with the results for immigrant boys. But so is a neoclassical
model, since we do not have direct evidence for whether parents force some boys to overachieve,
which is the only distinguishing prediction between the two models.

3     Identification Strategy
3.1    Birthright Citizenship Reform
      At the turn of the millennium, Germany undertook a major reform of its citizenship law. The
most prominent aspect of this reform related to the acquisition of citizenship at birth. We discuss
the background and details of this reform in some of our previous work (Felfe et al. 2020a,b), and so
only briefly repeat the most relevant details here. Prior to January 1, 2000, citizenship at birth was
granted according to jus sanguinis (right of blood), i.e., children became German citizens only in
cases in which at least one parent held German citizenship. The legal status of immigrant children
born to non-German citizens was either that of a temporary or a permanent resident.
      Although citizenship and permanent residency both allow individuals to live in Germany
indefinitely, the rights and benefits of the two are not the same. Permanent residents can work
in Germany and have access to the same welfare benefits. But they do not have the right to
vote in general elections, are unable to apply for civil servant positions, cannot work in other EU
countries, may lose their residency status if out of Germany for more than a year, and face the risk
of deportation if they commit a crime. Prior research has documented that the two legal statuses,
citizenship and residency, are associated with different labor market outcomes: compared with their
non-naturalized peers, naturalized immigrants earn more (Chiswick 1978; Steinhardt 2012), have
higher job-finding rates (Fougère and Safi 2009; Gathmann and Keller 2018) and experience steeper
wage-tenure profiles (Bratsberg et al. 2002).
      Starting January 1, 2000, the prevailing regime changed to a restricted version of jus soli (right
of soil), i.e., every child born on German territory gained a conditional right to German citizenship.
The conditionality attached was that at least one parent was a legal resident in Germany for eight
years or more at the time of birth of the child. If the condition was satisfied, German citizenship
was automatically registered in the child's birth record with no need for the parents to apply for it,



                                                   10
but also with no right to disclaim it.5 A transition rule applied for the year 2000, where parents
residing in Germany for at least 8 years could apply for their existing children to become citizens.
However, only a small fraction of parents took advantage of this (approximately one-sixth), possibly
due to poor publicity or a low demand by parents for their children to become German citizens.

3.2    Empirical Model
      The reform of Germany's citizenship law specifies a birth date eligibility cutoff, which creates a
discrete and plausibly exogenous shock to immigrant opportunity. We exploit the quasi-random
assignment of birthright citizenship around the cutoff using a local difference-in-differences design.
We model outcome Yi for child i as:

                     Yi = 0 + 1 Immigi + 2 Posti + 3 (Immigi × Posti ) + m +                   i                  (3)

where Immigi is an indicator for whether a child is a second-generation immigrant versus a native
and P osti is an indicator for whether a child was born in the months after January 1, 2000. The
coefficient of interest is 3 , which identifies the effect of the reform for immigrant children born
after the policy cutoff. We include a set of birth month dummies (m ) to capture any effects which
are common to both natives and immigrants within the same birth month during the year. In
extended specifications, we also include a vector of controls which contain a limited set of family
characteristics (maternal and paternal age, maternal and paternal education) and city characteristics
(city size and group-specific local unemployment rates).
      An advantage of our estimation approach is that we are comparing students in the same grade
and in the same class as each other. This eliminates many potential confounders, with the only
remaining difference being a student's age within a class. To make the estimate even more local, we
also consider robustness checks which narrow the window around the reform. For our main welfare
outcome (life satisfaction), we report what happens when the window narrows from ±6 months
around the cutoff to ±5, ±4, ±3, or ±2 months. In a related robustness check, we also estimate a
regression discontinuity model, using date of birth as the running variable. The RD estimates have
standard errors which are roughly twice as large compared to our baseline specification, and similar
to the standard errors with a window of ±2 months. There is enough precision for our main welfare
outcome that these robustness checks are informative. However, there is not enough power to use
such a small window or an RD for the majority of our secondary outcomes.
      Equation 3 captures the reduced form effect of the introduction of birthright citizenship, or
alternatively, the intention-to-treat (ITT) effect. This ITT effect is a lower-bound estimate of the
impact of citizenship at birth, since our sample includes pre-policy children who may have qualified
for citizenship at birth through jus sanguinis or the transition rule. Moreover, our sample includes
   5
     The law originally allowed children granted birthright citizenship to hold two passports until age 23. At that
point, they would be required to choose German citizenship or the citizenship of their parents. In 2014, this was
relaxed even further, so that children with birthright citizenship now have the ability to hold dual citizenship even
past the age of 23 (as long as they have lived in Germany for 8 years, attended German school for 6 years, or acquired
formal education in Germany). Many origin countries for immigrants, such as Turkey, allow for dual citizenship.




                                                         11
post-policy children whose parents did not meet the 8 year residency requirement and hence these
children were ineligible for birthright citizenship.
       To gauge the magnitude of the reform's effect on citizenship at birth, we use the German
Microcensus from 2001. This dataset has information on both parent and child citizenship around
the time of the child's birth, country of birth and length of residence. We define second-generation
immigrant children as those born in Germany to parents who are both foreign born. Using second-
generation immigrant children in the 2001 survey wave who were recently born, we find the reform
substantially increased the fraction who acquired German nationality at birth. As illustrated
in the first panel of Figure 3, 28% of second-generation children born pre-reform qualified for
citizenship either from jus sanguinis (right of blood) or the transition rule, while 80% of children
born post-policy qualified for German citizenship from jus soli (right of soil).6 In order to obtain
back-of-the-envelope estimates of the local average treatment effect of endowing immigrant children
with citizenship at birth, this gap of 52 percentage points means we need to scale our reduced form
coefficients by a factor of 1.9.
       An alternative estimate for the effect of the reform can be constructed using questions we asked
on our own survey. We asked students whether they were born in Germany, whether they are
citizens, and if so, when they acquired citizenship (at birth or later on), as well as the year each of
their parents arrived in Germany. This series of questions can be used to construct a measure of
citizenship at birth. Imputing citizenship status at birth based on combinations of the questions,
we find a similarly large jump in birthright citizenship.7 The second panel of Figure 3 shows a jump
of 43 percentage points (78%-35%).
       We view the German Microcensus estimate as more reliable (since it is based on parental reports
near the time of the birth), and will use it when we talk about how to scale our main reduced
form estimates. But an advantage of our survey measure is that it can be calculated for Muslim
versus non-Muslim immigrants. For second-generation children with a Muslim background, the
gap using our survey measure is 54 percentage points (83%-29%), while for non-Muslims the gap is
smaller at 27 percentage points (73%-46%). Taking the estimate from the German Microcensus as
accurate, and our survey measure as biased downwards, we can inflate the Muslim survey measure
by multiplying 54 percentage points by 52 divided by 43. This yields an inflated Muslim-specific
jump of 65 percentage points, implying a reduced form scaling factor of 1.5 for this group. When
reporting results in tables, we focus on the reduced form, but keep these scaling factors in mind
when interpreting the magnitudes of the estimates.
   6
     These estimates are based on families where both the mother and the father reside in the household.
   7
     We correct two obvious inconsistencies when imputing status. First, if children say they have held citizenship since
birth, but are born prior to the reform and neither of their parents fulfilled the residency requirement, we reclassify
them as not having birthright citizenship. This accounts for 3% of the the data. Second, if children say they are not
citizens, but report being born in Germany post-reform and have a parent who fulfilled the residency requirement, we
assign them citizenship-at-birth status. This accounts for 4% of the data.




                                                           12
3.3    Threats to Identification
      Since we compare individuals born earlier versus later in the same school year, a possible threat
to identification is bias due to age or season of birth effects. Age and season of birth could matter
for two reasons. First, older children might do better academically (Cascio and Lewis 2006; Black
et al. 2011; Cornelissen and Dustmann 2019) or differ on other margins such as self confidence or
competitiveness (Page et al. 2019) and these factors could influence the outcomes we study. Second,
socioeconomic characteristics of parents have been shown to change over the year (Buckles and
Hungerman 2013; Carlsson et al. 2015), so children born at different times may not have comparable
backgrounds. We perform a variety of robustness check related to age and season of birth, which we
preview here.
      Our local difference-in-differences design uses native German children (who were unaffected by
the reform cutoff date) as a control group to account for any common age and season of birth effects.
As we shall see shortly (Figure 2), there is no evidence that being born early versus late in the year
matters for the well-being of natives. This suggests, at least in our setting, that age and season
of birth are not likely to be first order confounding factors unless they are completely immigrant
specific. Consistent with this finding, the inclusion of month of birth effects has little impact on our
estimates.
      Another way to minimize age and season of birth effects is to narrow the sample window, which
we do as a robustness check. We try a range of window widths, ranging from ±2 months around
the cutoff to using our entire sample of ±6 months. We find that, if anything, the effect for our
main outcomes are larger for smaller windows, although they are also less precisely estimated.
      A conceptually distinct, but additional age-related concern, is manipulation. Since our iden-
tification strategy relies on a birth date cutoff, the worry is strategic fertility choices. Two types
of sample restrictions are useful to assess this concern. The reform was ratified in July 1999, so
narrowing the window to ±3 months or less around the cutoff limits the sample to children who
were all conceived in advance. Second, we implement a "donut" strategy that drops children born in
the 2-week window around January 1, 2000. This avoids potential selection into treatment through
birth-date manipulation by parents via the postponement of inductions or elective c-sections. Our
main outcomes are robust to both of these exercises.
      Another way to assess self-selection into treatment is by looking at whether immigrants time
their births differently compared to natives, who were not affected by the reform. We regress a
dummy variable for immigrant status on birth month dummies. The resulting p-value for the joint
test without any control variables is 0.25. Including our baseline set of controls, the p-value drops
further to 0.57. We conclude there is no evidence for differential timing of births by immigrants.

4     Survey Data
      Our analysis is based on data we collected to assess the effects of the introduction of birthright
citizenship in Germany. This data collection (i) took place between June and November 2015, (ii)
covered 15 to 16 year old students in 219 classes in 57 German schools (all in their final year of
compulsory schooling), and (iii) included both a traditional survey and a lab-in-the-field experiment

                                                   13
on cooperation. In this paper, we only draw upon our survey data. Felfe et al. (2020a) reports
results for the lab-in-the-field experiment; much of the following data description is taken from that
work, which provides more detail.

4.1    Survey Design
      Our data collection took place in 2015 in two German federal states: Schleswig-Holstein (SH),
where compulsory schooling lasts for nine years; and North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW), where compul-
sory schooling lasts for ten years. In both federal states, a school year starts in August/September
and ends in June/July. In a first step, we sought approval for our data collection from the ministries
of education in SH and NRW, respectively. In a second step, the two ministries strongly encouraged
the principals of the targeted schools to participate. In a third step, we contacted the principals
directly and asked for formal permission to conduct the experiment and survey in all ninth grade
classes in SH and in all 10th grade classes in NRW.
      Fifty-seven schools agreed to participate. We collected the data in two waves. In the first
wave from June 2 to July 16, we targeted all 9th graders from 31 schools (spread over 122 classes)
in six cities of SH. In the second wave from October 19 to November 16, we targeted all 10th
graders of 26 schools (spread over 97 classes) in two cities of NRW.8 There are five types of schools
in our sample: 10 secondary general schools ("Hauptschule"), 8 intermediate ("Realschule"), 29
comprehensive without the final years of grammar education ("Gesamtschule ohne gymnasialer
Oberstufe"), 8 comprehensive with the final years of grammar education ("Gesamtschule mit
gymnasialer Oberstufe"), and 2 grammar schools or high schools ("Gymnasium").
      Our target populations give us a single school cohort of children primarily born in 1999 and
2000. This allows us to exploit the introduction of birthright citizenship in Germany on January
1, 2000. An advantage of our design is that the introduction of birthright citizenship falls in the
middle of the school year, whereas the school starting age cutoffs occur in the summer.
      Two weeks prior to the study, school principals informed parents about the study, but not about
the objectives of the study. Parents were given an opt-out option, i.e., they could proscribe their
children's participation. Moreover, immediately before the experiment started, all students present
in class were informed by us that participation was voluntary.
      The study was run at the school class-level during two regular consecutive school periods, which
lasted 45 minutes each. One class period was used for the survey, while the other for the lab
experiment discussed in Felfe et al. (2020a). The survey was conducted in regular classrooms using
pen and paper, with the order of the survey versus the lab experiments being randomly assigned
each day. To increase privacy, mobile screens were set up between students.

4.2    Analysis Sample
      On the days we conducted the study, a total of 4,634 students were present in the 219 classes.
Parents made use of an opt-out option for 44 students (less than 1%), while 154 students (3.5%)
  8
    The cities in SH are Flensburg, Kiel, Lübeck, Neumünster, Elmshorn, and Pinneberg, with populations ranging
from 42,266 to 246,306. The cities in NRW are Duisburg and Wuppertal, with populations of 491,231 and 350,046.



                                                      14
chose to opt out themselves. Thus, 4,436 students participated in the study. Of those, 270 did not
provide the survey information necessary for our analysis (i.e., own gender, birth date, country of
birth or parental migration background). This leaves us with a baseline sample of 4,166 students.
      The survey provides information, inter alia, about participants' date of birth, country of
birth, gender, religion, well-being, aspirations, preferences and interests, personality traits, school
achievements, and family background. Two key family background variables are the birthplaces of
both parents, which we use to categorize participants into three groups: (i) native children, whose
parents are both German-born; (ii) immigrant children, whose parents are both foreign-born; and
(iii) mixed-background children, who have one German-born and one foreign-born parent. Overall,
according to our definitions, the sample comprises 2,250 native children (54%), 1,260 immigrant
children (30%) and 672 mixed-background children (16%). Roughly 77% of all immigrant children
in our sample are German-born (i.e., second-generation immigrants), while 23% are foreign-born
(i.e., first-generation immigrants).
      For the current paper, we restrict the baseline sample along several dimensions. We drop
first-generation immigrants, since the introduction of birthright citizenship only affected second-
generation immigrant children. Mixed-background children are not used in the analysis, as we
cannot determine whether they were affected by the reform. We draw upon native German children
as a control group. Since our identification strategy centers around the birthdate cutoff of January
1, 2000, we only retain second-generation immigrants and German children born in a ± 6-month
window of this cutoff. This leaves us with a sample of 598 second-generation immigrant children
and 1,535 native German children.

4.3    Summary Statistics
      Appendix Table A1 reports summary statistics for our estimation sample of native and immigrant
children, broken down by gender. Natives and immigrants differ along several dimensions. Second-
generation immigrant boys and girls have less educated and younger parents compared to their
native counterparts. Immigrant children are also concentrated in bigger cities (>100,000 residents).
      The third and fourth columns of Appendix Table A1 further break down immigrants into
two groups: those born before the cutoff date of January 1 (and hence ineligible for birthright
citizenship) and those born after. There are no statistically significant differences in any of the
background characteristics for girls in the top panel. For boys, there is a small difference in regional
unemployment and mother's education being at the middle level. The finding of two estimates
significant at the 10% level and one at the 5% level is roughly what one would expect by chance for
these 30 variables. We conclude that immigrants born pre and post reform appear to be similar to
each other on average.
      Additional summary statistics for religion and mother's country of origin are found in Appendix
Table A2. For natives, the dominant religion is Protestant, with some Catholics and some claiming
no religious affiliation. In sharp contrast, 60% of immigrants are Muslim, and only 3% claim no
religious affiliation. Turning to the mother's country of origin, the largest group of immigrant
mothers come from Turkey (42%). Other common origins include Balkan, European, and Post-Soviet

                                                  15
bloc countries. We will use both of these variables later to define "traditional" parents.
      For reference, descriptive statistics for the dependent variables can be found in Table A3. We
explain the construction of these outcome variables as we discuss our empirical findings.

5     Results for Child Well-Being
      In this section, we test the main prediction of the intergenerational model outlined in Section 2
for traditional versus mainstream identity concerns. Namely, we test whether immigrant girls' and
boys' well-being goes up or down in response to the increased opportunities offered by birthright
citizenship. We use self-reported life satisfaction as our main measure of well-being, supplementing
this with related questions on self-esteem.

5.1    Birthright Citizenship and Life Satisfaction
      A standard approach to measuring well-being in a survey is to ask respondents directly how
they think things are going in their life. Our primary measure of well-being was prefaced with the
statement: "Finally, we would like to ask you about your satisfaction with your life as a whole!"
We then asked the question: "Overall, how satisfied are you with your life?" Respondents were
given a visual scale with 11 boxes ordered on a line to chose from. The left side of the scale, which
started at 0, was labeled completely dissatisfied and the right side of the scale, which ended at 10,
was labeled completely satisfied. Respondents checked the appropriate box to indicate their answer.
We also asked two follow-up questions about life satisfaction in the future: "And what do you think,
what will it be in a year?" and "And what do you think, what will it be in five years?" These
questions were answered on the same scale. We delay talking about future life satisfaction until the
end of the paper.
      This type of life satisfaction question has the advantage of being asked as a simple, single
question. It is meant to capture a global measure of subjective well-being across all areas of one's life
and has been asked in a variety of ways.9 Life satisfaction measures have been shown to correlate
with measures of mental health, and predict future behavior such as suicide attempts.10 It is
advocated by the Sen-Stiglitz-Fitoussi report, which in general argues for the use of many indicators
in a policy dashboard, but considers life satisfaction as the best all-encompassing single measure
(see Stiglitz et al. 2017).
      We begin with a graphical comparison of how life satisfaction varies for children born before and
after the policy cutoff. To ease interpretation, we first transform the life satisfaction variable so that
it is mean 0 and has a standard deviation of 1 for the sample of natives of both genders. Average
life satisfaction for natives is 7.46 on the 0 to 10 scale, with a standard deviation of 2.27. Figure
4 plots average life satisfaction for those born before versus after the reform, separately by both
   9
     See Linton et al. 2016. Variants compared to our question introduce slight wording changes, differences in the
labeling and range of the Likert response scale, and difference in the reference time period. For example, the World
Happiness Report, which is conducted annually by the United Nations (Helliwell et al. 2019), uses a Cantril ladder
survey, where individuals are asked to think of the rungs of a ladder, with the best possible life being a 10 and the
worst possible life being a 0. Related life satisfaction measures, such as the Satisfaction with Life Scale (Diener et al.
1985), ask a series of questions and create an index based on the responses.
  10
     See Frijters et al. 2020 for key estimates from the literature on the determinants of life satisfaction.


                                                           16
immigrant status and gender. The red bars are for immigrants and the blue for natives, with light
versus dark shading indicating pre- versus post-policy. The graphs include pre-post comparisons for
various window widths around the reform date.
       Start with the largest sample window, which is ±6 months around the reform, and focus on
the top panel for girls. All of these girls are in the same grade in school, but those born in the six
months before January 1, 2000 are pre-policy observations, while those born in the six months after
January 1, 2000 are post-policy. The first thing to notice is that immigrant girls have higher life
satisfaction compared to natives girls, a pattern also observed by other researchers in recent years
(Zorlu and Frijters 2019). The second thing to notice is that native girls born before and after the
cutoff have similar life satisfaction, which is perhaps not surprising since the reform did not apply
to them. But the most important finding illustrated in this graph is that immigrant girls born after
the cutoff (dark red bar) self-report substantially lower life satisfaction compared to those born
before (light red bar). The remaining bars in the top panel of Figure 4 narrow the sample window
around the reform. As the window width shrinks, the gap in life satisfaction becomes even larger
for immigrant girls exposed to the birthright citizenship reform.
       Turning to the bottom panel of Figure 4, we find a very different pattern for boys. To start,
there is almost no gap in life satisfaction between immigrants and natives for those born in the
pre-period. Moreover, if anything, immigrant boys become better off in the post period relative to
natives. These patterns are similar across the various sample window sizes.
       Table 1 presents regression results analogous to the figures with an age window of ±6, using the
model described in equation 3. The first regression specification includes no additional controls and
confirms that immigrant girls born post-reform suffer a sizable reduction in well-being. Immigrant
girls born after the birthright citizenship reform are .31 standard deviations less satisfied with their
life, a drop which is statistically significant. To put the estimate in perspective, the drop eliminates
two-thirds of the gap in life satisfaction between immigrant and native girls. As a reminder, these
are reduced form estimates, and as discussed in Section 3.2, to get the effect of birthright citizenship,
they should be scaled up by roughly 1.9, for a scaled effect of .59 standard deviations.
       Another way to think about the size of the estimate is to calculate the change not in standard
deviation terms, but rather as the percent decrease in the raw index, which has a mean of 7.46
on a 0-10 point scale. The scaled drop is 1.34, which represents a 16 percent decrease on the raw
scale (1.34/7.46). To put this in perspective, this effect size is similar in magnitude to the effect
of a medium-level depression on life satisfaction (Frijters et al. 2020) and larger than the effect of
moving from rich to poor (Frijters et al. 2011).
       Column 1 does not account for more granular age or season of birth effects which are common to
both immigrants and natives. Adding in birth month fixed effects does little to alter the estimates
(see column 2). In columns 3 and 4, we further include a basic set of controls for family characteristics
(parental education and age) and regional characteristics (group specific local unemployment and
city size).11 These additions do not change the estimate appreciably.
  11
       While we have other family characteristics from the survey, such as whether the parents are divorced, we do not



                                                           17
      Turning to panel B for boys, we find that the introduction of birthright citizenship increased life
satisfaction by a little over one-tenth of a standard deviation. But these results are not statistically
significant. As with girls, the introduction of controls does little to change the estimates.
      In sum, the results in Figure 4 and Table 1 are consistent with parents having traditional identity
concerns for their daughters, but mainstream identity concerns for their sons. As we discuss later, in
Section 7, alternative models can also explain these findings in isolation. In particular, the well-being
results for immigrant girls could be explained by a convergence to German happiness levels, unmet
expectations about what citizenship offers, or resource shifting from immigrant daughters to sons.
These possibilities are linked to different forms of cultural tension and are interesting in their
own right. However, as we discuss in Section 7, the effects we estimate for other outcomes and
supplementary analyses are not generally consistent with these alternative models. We conclude
that the sum of the results which follow can best be explained by our intergenerational identity
model, while still recognizing that multiple factors could be in play simultaneously. But before we
get to these other outcomes and models, we first probe the robustness of our main finding, use an
alternative measure of well-being, and examine heterogeneity by religion.

5.2    Robustness
      To explore the robustness of our main finding that the introduction of birthright citizenship
decreased immigrant girls' well-being, we estimate a variety of additional specifications. To start, in
Table 2 we narrow the sample window as we did in Figure 4, and run regressions which include the
full set of controls (Table 1, column 4 specification). By narrowing the sample window, we make
the estimate more local to the cutoff, minimizing concerns that differential age or season of birth
effects between immigrants and natives are driving our results.
      In each column of Table 2 we shrink the window by 1 month on each side of the cutoff. In
the first column of panel A, with a window of ±5 months, there is little change in the estimate
and a small increase in the standard error. As we move across the columns, the standard error
continues to increase, and the estimates are larger compared to the baseline window. The estimates
remain statistically significant, but by the time we have a ±2 month window, the standard error
has increased by 75 percent (consistent with the sample size falling by almost a third). In panel B
for boys, the different windows do not materially affect the results either.
      In Table 3 we report additional robustness checks. In the first specification, we use a regression
discontinuity estimator. We limit the sample to immigrants, use birthdate in days as the running
variable, and have January 1, 2000 as the cutoff. We estimate the RD using triangular weights,
separate linear trends to the left and right of the cutoff, and the full sample window of ±6 months.
The RD estimate of the reform is -.488, which is larger than our baseline estimate appearing in
Table 1, but similar to the more local estimates in Table 2 which restrict the window to be ±4
months or less. In column 2 we estimate a difference in RDs, where we subtract the jump at the
cutoff for natives from the jump at the cutoff for immigrants. This effect is even larger, and remains
include them in the regression as controls, as they could be endogenous to the cutoff. Including these potentially
endogenous covariates has little effect on the estimates, however.


                                                       18
statistically significant.
      A natural question is why we don't use an RD specification as our baseline specification
throughout the paper. The answer is revealed by looking at the standard error of the RD estimate
in column 1, which is substantially larger compared to our baseline approach (s.e. = .255 versus
.139). To make another comparison, the standard error of the RD estimate is close to the standard
error which uses a ±2 month window in Table 2 (s.e. = .255 versus .244). While the RD estimate
for our main outcome variable of life satisfaction is precise enough to be informative in Table 3, once
we start to split the sample or look at other outcomes, the RD standard errors generally become
too large to permit a useful analysis.
      Turning to column 3, we perform a different type of robustness check. We estimate the baseline
difference-in-differences model, but use first generation immigrants as the control group since they
were not treated by the policy reform. We find a drop in life satisfaction equal to half a standard
deviation, a result which is significant at the 10% level. The estimate is imprecise because we have
few first generation immigrants in our sample. In column 4, we estimate our baseline model, but
instead of including birth month fixed effects, we control for age in days. The estimate is similar
to the baseline estimate reported in Table 1. Column 5 adds in a donut hole, where observations
within 1 week on either side of the cutoff are excluded. This is to deal with mothers who may
have strategically delayed birth to obtain citizenship for their child. The results remain virtually
unchanged. As a reminder, narrowing the sample window to be within ±3 months of the reform, as
we did in the prior table, deals with parents who may have strategically tried to time conception, as
the reform was not announced until July 1999. Finally, in column 6, we cluster our standard errors
at the school level (57 schools). This has little effect on the standard errors. We note that there is
no reason to cluster the standard errors at the school level, as the level of quasi-randomization is
at the individual level within a school. But we include them just to show this does not matter for
inference for the interested reader.

5.3    Alternative Measures of Well-Being
      We now explore an alternative set of well-being measures. In particular, we asked students a
series of questions assessing their self-esteem, which are intended to capture a person's overall sense
of self-worth or personal value. Self-esteem is particularly relevant as a measure of well-being for
teenagers. It differs conceptually from life satisfaction, in that it is meant to capture confidence and
satisfaction with oneself, rather than satisfaction with life more generally. The two measures are
related, with self-esteem being found to be a strong predictor of life satisfaction (e.g., Diener and
Diener 1995). Self-esteem has recently been argued to be a crucial component in identity theory, as
it is the esteem placed on one's own identity (Akerlof 2017; Kranton 2016).
      The self-esteem portion of our survey began with the preface "How well do the following
statements apply to you?" We listed five statements which are generally viewed as indicators of
positive self-esteem: (i) Overall, I am satisfied with myself, (ii) I have many positive character
traits, (iii) I am as capable as other people, (iv) I am a person with value and self-worth, and (v) I
have a positive attitude towards myself. Respondents were given 6 boxes ordered on a line to chose

                                                  19
from. The left side of the scale, which started at 1, was labeled "not at all accurate" and the right
side of the scale, which ended at 6, was labeled "completely accurate". Respondents checked the
appropriate box to indicate their answer.
       As we did for the life satisfaction question, for ease of interpretation we normalize the responses
to be mean 0 and standard deviation 1 relative to the population of all natives. We further create
an aggregate index which sums across these 5 normalized variables, and divides by 5. Our positive
self-esteem index has a correlation of .54 with our life satisfaction measure.
       Results using these positive self-esteem measures as outcomes can be found in Table 4. Start
with panel A, which reports results for girls. As we found for life satisfaction, the self-esteem index
is higher for immigrants compared to their native counterparts. And the index similarly falls for
immigrant girls born post-reform: self-esteem falls by one-fourth of a standard deviation, a drop
which is statistically significant. All five of the individual components entering the index have large
and negative signs, with two of the components being statistically significant.
       Turning to panel B for boys, the effect of the reform flips signs. The self-esteem index rises by
.17 standard deviation for immigrant boys born after the reform relative to their native counterparts.
And each of the components of the index has a sizable and positive estimated coefficient, although
only one is statistically significant at the 10% level.12
       This alternative measure of well-being comports well with those reported using life satisfaction.
Both sets of results are consistent with parents having traditional intergenerational identity concerns
for their daughters, but mainstream identity concerns for their sons.

5.4     Heterogeneity by Religious Background
       One of the most salient cultural identities in many countries is religion. There are particularly
stark differences in gender norms in Muslim and non-Muslim societies (Alba 2005; Bisin et al. 2008;
Ersanilli 2012). To illustrate these stark differences in the context of Germany, we draw upon the
Global Gender Gap Index constructed by the World Economic Forum. Appendix Table A4 displays
the overall gender gap index as well as the various subindices based on the mother's country of
birth. For each child in our sample, we assign them the gender index associated with their mother's
birth country, and report the average of the indices weighted by the number of children.
       For native children, whose mothers are all from Germany, the overall gender gap index is .75,
which has the interpretation that there are 25 percent fewer resources and opportunities available
to German women compared to German men. Looking at the subindices, the gender gap is larger
for access to economic opportunities and participation and political leadership, while the gap has
basically closed in terms of educational attainment and health.
       We next split second-generation immigrant children into two groups: those who report their
religion as Muslim versus non-Muslim. Non-Muslim immigrant children have mothers who stem
predominantly from Poland and Russia. Gender disparities are already more pronounced for this
  12
    In the survey, we also listed five statements which are generally viewed as indicators of negative self-esteem.
When we run similar regressions using a negative self-esteem index (a larger score here means worse self-esteem), the
post-reform x immigrant interaction term is .16 (s.e.=.15) for girls and -.11 (s.e.=.13) for boys. So while insignificant,
the results broadly line up with those for the positive self-esteem index.


                                                           20
weighted set of countries compared to Germany: the overall gender gap index amounts to .67 and the
gap is again most pronounced when it comes to access to economic opportunities and representation
in political leadership positions. The are only small disparities in terms of education or health.
    Mothers of Muslim immigrant children come predominantly from Turkey, but also commonly
from Iraq, Lebanon, and Morocco. In these countries, women's access to opportunities and resources
is severely restricted. The overall global gender index is .59, with the biggest gap existing in the
sphere of political empowerment (0.06), followed by a gap in economic opportunities (.44). There is
also a gender gap in terms of educational attainment (0.89), a gap which does not exist for native
Germans or non-Muslim immigrants.
    This large discrepancy in gender norms motivates a heterogeneity analysis by religious affiliation.
In Table 5, we repeat our baseline specification, but estimate separate regressions for second-
generation Muslim and non-Muslim immigrant children. This stratification by religion does not
reveal any interesting heterogeneities for boys. In contrast, the subgroup results for girls are
striking. The citizenship reform had at most a modest, but insignificant effect on the well-being
of non-Muslim immigrant girls. Among Muslim immigrant girls, however, it caused a significant
drop in life satisfaction of almost half of a standard deviation. In other words, the reduction in life
satisfaction observed around the introduction of birthright citizenship is an entirely Muslim-girl
phenomenon. Although not shown, a similar hetergeneity by religion shows up for the index of
positive self-esteem.
    In Appendix Table A5, we further probe the effects we found for Muslim immigrant boys and
girls. While unlikely, a possible concern is that being born before versus after the reform changes
one's religion from Muslim to something else. To explore whether this affects our results, we
use a predicted Muslim measure based on exogenous characteristics instead. Using the sample of
second-generation immigrants, we first regress the self-reported Muslim variable on dummy variables
for the countries of origin for both mothers and fathers. Using these estimated coefficients, for each
child we predict the probability they are Muslim. We then estimate the effect of the reform for the
sample of immigrant children whose probability of being Muslim is over 75%. These results are
reported in column 1. The estimate is -.412, which is slightly larger than our baseline estimate. As
a second approach, in column 2 we restrict the sample to immigrant children whose mother comes
from either Turkey or the Middle East, regions which are predominantly Muslim. The estimate of
-.362 is remarkably similar to our baseline.

6   Birthright Citizenship and other Outcomes
    Our theoretical model predicts that immigrant children whose parents have strong traditional
identity concerns will be made worse off by a policy that enhances assimilation opportunities,
whereas children of mainstream parents will be made better off. The model we laid out in Section 2
also has several other implications relating to mechanisms, which we explore in this section.
    According to the standard neoclassical model, a policy that connects immigrant youth to
opportunity increases the expected payoff to investments in human capital, and hence educational
aspirations. But with the intergenerational identity model, whether such aspirations materialize

                                                  21
depends on whether parents perceive the pursuit of a high-success career to be a desirable life path
for their child. Parents with a mainstream identity, and thus a preference for a high-success career,
will reinforce their child's increased aspirations. Parents with a traditional identity, in contrast,
have different preferences and thus objectives regarding their child's future. As such, they will not
support, and may even sabotage, their child's educational and professional aspirations.
      The prediction is that children whose parents adhere to a mainstream identity will have increased
aspirations, have confidence they will have the ability to achieve them, and will receive investments
and support from their parents. In contrast children whose parents exhibit more traditional
preferences (Muslim immigrant girls) will be less able to make use of the opportunities presented
to them, and their parents will not support their educational and labor market goals. Immigrant
parents could likewise respond to the citizenship reform by ramping up efforts to transmit traditional
culture, including speaking their home country language to their daughters rather than German.

6.1    Disillusionment and Family/Career Tradeoffs
Disillusionment. We start by looking at educational aspirations, which are analyzed in the first
two columns of Table 6. We define an indicator variable for high educational aspirations which
equals one if the child states they would like to pursue a university education. Fifty-six percent of
all native girls and 62 percent of Muslim immigrant girls born pre-reform have high educational
aspirations. Being born after the reform raises this probability by 11 percentage points for Muslim
immigrant girls. While this is a large effect, it is not statistically significant (p-value=0.16).
      Even more interesting are the results in columns 3 and 4. We asked respondents two questions:
"How likely is it that you will be able to complete the training or education required for your desired
profession?" and "How likely is it that you will be able to find a job in your desired profession?"
Respondents answered both questions on a scale which went from 0 to 100% in increments of 10%.
We create an indicator variable which equals one if the answers to both questions are greater than
50%. We think of this variable as capturing a high versus low chance of achieving one's professional
aspirations. Immigrant Muslim girls born before the reform are more optimistic compared to natives,
with 80% believing they have a high chance of reaching their professional goals compared to 67%
of natives. But this optimism falls dramatically for Muslim immigrant girls born after the reform:
their estimated coefficient falls by 21 percentage points and is statistically significant. No such drop
is found for immigrant Muslim boys, non-Muslim boys, or non-Muslim girls, where the estimates go
in the other direction and are not statistically significant.
      In columns 5 and 6, we go one step further and interact the two indicator variables used in the
first two columns. We create a variable capturing disillusionment, which is defined as having high
educational aspirations but a low perceived probability of achieving one's professional aspirations.
The baseline value of this disillusionment variable is low: 17% for natives and 10% for Muslim
immigrant girls born pre-reform. Disillusionment spikes upwards for Muslim immigrant girls born
after the reform by 19 percentage points, a result which is statistically significant. This finding
indicates that it is the same immigrant Muslim girls born post reform whose aspirations increase
who also believe they won't be able to reach them.

                                                   22
Family versus Career. In the last two columns of Table 6, we examine the tradeoff between pursuing
one's professional aspirations versus family responsibilities. We asked respondents "How likely is
it that you will have to forgo your career for family reasons, such as parenting?" Respondents
answered on a scale which went from 0 to 100% in increments of 10%. This question is tightly
linked to gender norms. As we discussed in Section 5.4, second-generation immigrants from Muslim
countries are much more likely to have mothers who come from countries where women receive
less education, participate less in politics, and work substantially less often outside the home (see
Appendix Table A4).
       Starting with girls in panel A, 48% of natives and 37% of pre-reform Muslims believe they
will have to forgo a career for family. But for Muslim immigrant girls born post-reform, the odds
of having to forgo a career to take care of a family rise by 8 percentage points, a result which is
significant at the 10% level. When scaled by the first stage, the effect is a 12 percentage point
increase. This suggests that even as birthright citizenship increases opportunities for Muslim
immigrant girls, they feel less able to take advantage of those economic opportunities relative
to family responsibilities. Interestingly, the results go in the opposite direction for non-Muslim
immigrant girls, and significantly so. Both the disillusionment and family-career estimates align well
with what we found in Section 5, where the drop in child well-being was exclusively an immigrant
Muslim girl phenomenon.

6.2       Parental Investments
       If traditional parents do not want their daughter to take advantage of the increased opportunities
provided by birthright citizenship, our model predicts they will discourage educational investments.
We investigate this using a question which asks "Do your parents support you in your homework
and learning? Students could answer that either their mother, their father, both parents or neither
parent supports them. We create an indicator for whether one or both parents provide schooling
support interacted with whether the child lives with them.13 We view this measure as capturing
parental investments in their child's education.
       The results are striking. Column 1 in the top panel of Table 7 reveals that for Muslim immigrant
daughters affected by the reform, parents' schooling investments fall by a statistically significant 15
percentage points.14 This is a sizable drop. When scaled by the first stage effect of the reform on
birthright citizenship, it implies a lowering of parental support of 23 percentage points (a 38% drop
relative to their non-naturalized peers). As we saw for the aspiration and disillusionment outcomes,
this drop is limited to immigrant Muslim girls. The other immigrant groups experience, if anything,
a rise in parental investments (with significant increases for non-Muslim immigrant boys).
       Another way parents can push their child to be more traditional, and maintain the culture of
their home country, is to speak their native tongue with their child instead of German. On our
survey we asked "What language do you speak with your mother? " and "What language do you
  13
     This definition allows for the fact that some children do not live with their mother or father, and so may not
regularly interact with them.
  14
     If we alternatively create two separate dummy variables for mother's schooling support and for father's schooling
support, there are large drops for both: -.125 (s.e.=.076) for mothers and -.185 (s.e.=.078) for fathers.


                                                         23
speak with your father?" We create a dummy variable which equals 1 if the child only speaks a
language other than German with either one or both parents interacted with whether the child lives
with them. We view this measure as capturing an investment in traditional culture. A parent's
refusal to speak German with their child transmits cultural priorities, and likely further isolates a
child from natives (for example, if they have a German-only speaking friend over to their house).
       As expected, natives rarely say they never speak German with their parents (less than .3 percent,
regardless of gender). But for Muslim immigrant girls born pre-reform, 24% never speak German
with one or both parents. This rises by 8 percentage points for Muslim immigrant girls exposed
to the birthright citizenship reform.15 Scaled by the first stage, this estimate indicates a 50%
increase in the fraction where at least one parent does not speak German with their daughter. In
contrast, there is no effect for non-Muslim girls born after the reform. Completing the picture,
there is no significant effect for Muslim sons, while for non-Muslim immigrant sons we observe a
significant increase. The latter finding might reflect an investment in sons' bilinguality, which would
be consistent with the positive effect on parental support for non-Muslim immigrant boys.
       These results, combined with those in Section 6.1, align well with our intergenerational identity
model for traditional parents. They suggest that parents of immigrant Muslim girls sabotage their
daughter's educational and professional ambitions by withdrawing support and instead pushing for
the more traditional role of being a mother and homemaker. The language results likewise point
towards a greater emphasis on traditional versus mainstream culture.

6.3     Social Integration, German Identity, and Assimilation Beliefs
       Many policymakers believe that citizenship will spur immigrants to integrate into society with
natives. Indeed, this is what a model with neoclassical or mainstream parental preferences predicts.
However, this need not be the case in our model if traditional parents attempt to reinforce home-
country values when their traditional culture is threatened by the granting of citizenship. In this
section, we assess how birthright citizenship affects social integration using measures of social
participation and support, German identity, and assimilation beliefs.

Social Participation and Social Support. Our first measure of integration is an index of social
participation based on the number of extracurricular activities a child has ever participated in. The
four activities include sports, band/orchestra, theater, and the school newspaper. Our index simply
counts the number activity types a child has ever participated in, and therefore ranges from 0 to
a maximum of 4. These voluntary activities create increased interactions with native children in
settings not directly related to normal academic studies, and arguably increase a sense of social
belonging.
       Table 8 reveals that natives have participated in .90 of these activity types on average and that
immigrant Muslim girls born in the pre-period participate in 0.18 more activities. This fraction falls
  15
    If we alternatively create two separate dummy variables for never speaking German with the mother or never
speaking German with the father, the effect is roughly twice as large for mothers (estimate=.067, s.e.=.029) as for
fathers (estimate=.034, s.e.=.027).



                                                        24
by a statistically significant .30 activities for Muslim immigrant girls born after the reform. Scaled
by the first stage, this is a drop of almost half of an activity. Muslim immigrant boys born after
the reform, in contrast, increase their participation by a statistically significant .23 activities. We
interpret these results as showing that when Muslim girls gain birthright citizenship, they participate
in fewer extracurricular activities with natives, which is opposite of the goal of many policymakers.
    To provide further insight, in columns 3 through 6 we probe how birthright citizenship affects
feelings of loneliness and one's friendship network. On the survey, we listed a series of statements
prefaced by "These statements describe your relationship with friends and other people. Please tell
us, on the following scale, how much the statements apply to you." We then listed the following
statements: (i) It's easy for me to make new friends, (ii) I often feel lonely, (iii) I want to have more
contact with others, (iv) My circle of friends and I do a lot together, and (v) I receive support from
my circle of friends when I have worries and problems. The left side of the scale, which started at
1, was labeled "not at all accurate" and the right side of the scale, which ended at 6, was labeled
"completely accurate".
    As we did for the life satisfaction question, for ease of interpretation we normalize the responses
to be mean 0 and standard deviation 1 relative to the population of all natives. We use the sum of
the first of these three normalized variables (i-iii) divided by three to create a "loneliness index"
and the last two normalized variables summed together and divided by two to create a "friendship
support" index (iv-v).
    Starting with the loneliness index, the thing that stands out is that both Muslim immigrant
girls and boys are less lonely than natives and non-Muslim immigrants. But birthright citizenship
does not increase loneliness for any of the groups enough to be detectable given our standard
errors. Turning to the friendship index, we find that immigrant Muslim girls and boys have stronger
friendship networks, with Muslim immigrant girls born before the reform scoring almost a quarter of
a standard deviation higher on average compared to natives. But this friendship support index falls
by 27 percent of a standard deviation for immigrant Muslim girls exposed to birthright citizenship;
scaled by the first stage, this is a decrease of .40 standard deviations, making them even worse off
than native girls.

German Identity. The remaining columns in Table 8 examine how birthright citizenship affects
German identity and beliefs about the assimilation of immigrants. Columns 7 and 8 are based
on a survey question which asks: "Generally speaking, how much do you identify as a German?"
Respondents could answer "fully", "mostly", "in some ways", "barely", or "not at all". We create a
dummy variable for German identity which equals one if the respondent answered fully or mostly.
    Not surprisingly, a large fraction of natives self-identify as German (87%). In contrast, only 36%
of Muslim immigrant girls born pre-reform think of themselves as German. This self-identification as
German drops even further for the Muslim immigrant girls born after birthright citizenship became
law. Fourteen percent fewer of these girls think of themselves as German, so that now only 22%
identify as German.
    This result is notable given that 83% of second-generation Muslims born after the reform were

                                                   25
German citizens at birth, compared to only 29% born before the reform. Apparently, being granted
German citizenship does not increase feelings of being German for this group of girls. This is an
unintended consequence of the reform, and is not easily explained with a standard neoclassical
model. But the result fits nicely with our identity model, where traditional parents of girls who are
given extra opportunities for assimilation react by doubling down on the cultural norms they want
their children to adopt. There is no corresponding shift in German self-identification for the other
groups in the table.

Assimilation Beliefs. We end this section by looking at how birthright citizenship affects beliefs on
how well foreigners can integrate into German society. On our survey, we asked students to indicate
their agreement with the statement "A foreigner can have a good life in Germany". Responses were
recorded on a scale from 1 to 6, where the left side of the scale was labeled "not at all accurate"
and the right side of the scale, which ended at 6, was labeled "completely accurate". As we have
done for other questions of this type, we normalized responses to be mean 0 and standard deviation
1 relative to the sample of all natives.
         Muslim immigrant girls born before the reform have a more positive view compared to natives,
with a quarter of a standard deviation higher agreement with the statement that a foreigner can
have a good life in Germany. This positive effect is flipped for Muslim immigrant girls born after
the reform, with a drop of .34 standard deviations. Scaled by the first stage, Muslim immigrant girls
granted birthright citizenship are half a standard deviation less likely to agree with the statement.
One possible reason for the increase in negativity could be the clash of cultures between parents
and children initiated by the reform.

7        Discussion of Alternative Models
         While our intergenerational identity model is consistent with all of the empirical facts we
document, we also recognize that other mechanisms could simultaneously be at play. In this section,
we discuss alternative models for our main finding, namely the drop in well-being for Muslim
immigrant girls, and whether these alternatives only work in isolation or can fit all of the findings
jointly.
         The first alternative is what we label the "unmet expectations" hypothesis, where Muslim girls
granted citizenship expect to be able to accomplish more and fit into society more easily, but
are disappointed when they realize society continues to discriminate against them.16 While this
would readily explain the drop in well-being and self-esteem we observe in our data, it does not
easily explain the drop in parental schooling investments, the increased likelihood of never speaking
German with parents, or the higher probability of having to forgo a career for family.
         To probe the plausibility of the unmet expectations hypothesis further, we turn to Table 10. We
asked two survey questions related to perceptions of what it takes to be successful in Germany. The
first presented students with the statement "In Germany, foreigners have to do a great deal to gain
    16
    The unmet expectation hypothesis has to be specific to girls and not boys, which could be the case if outward
signs such as headscarves make Muslim identity more salient for girls versus boys.



                                                       26
recognition and acceptance". Responses were recorded on a scale from 1 (not at all accurate) to 6
(completely accurate ), and normalized to be mean 0 and standard deviation 1 relative to the sample
of all natives. For Muslim immigrant girls, exposure to the reform results in a small and insignificant
reduction in the belief that foreigners have to do more to be accepted in Germany. This is not what
would be predicted according to the unmet expectations hypothesis, which predicts an increase. For
the other immigrant groups, a similar pattern emerges with negative, but insignificant, estimates.
   Another survey question asked whether "You need to be German " in order to succeed in Germany.
While this question is not as clean as the first one, since self-identification as German was affected
by the reform (see Table 8), it reveals a similar pattern. Answers were measured on a scale from 1
(completely disagree ) to 4 (completely agree ), and normalized to be mean 0 and standard deviation
1 relative to natives. The estimate for immigrant Muslim girls born post-reform is close to zero,
whereas the unmet expectations hypothesis would have predicted a positive coefficient. The estimate
is likewise near zero for immigrant Muslim and non-Muslim boys, and a statistically significant
negative for non-Muslim immigrant girls.
   A second alternative we consider is what we label the "resource shifting" hypothesis, which says
that after birthright citizenship becomes law, Muslim immigrant parents shift resources away from
their daughters and towards their sons. This would occur because traditional parents favor their
sons succeeding above their daughters, and with citizenship the returns to parental investments have
gone up. This explanation is broadly consistent with Muslim immigrant daughters experiencing a
drop in well-being after the reform, while immigrant sons report, if anything, increased well-being.
But this explanation has a more targeted prediction: Muslim immigrant girls born after the reform
should only be negatively affected if there is a younger brother in the household (who has been
granted birthright citizenship) to whom resources could be shifted. If there are only older brothers
in the household there is no reason for parents to shift resources. However, comparing columns 5
and 7, we see that the estimates for these two groups of Muslim immigrant girls are quite similar.
This is evidence against the resource shifting hypothesis.
   A third alternative for the drop in well-being for immigrant Muslim girls is convergence to
the native German level of welfare due to assimilation. Native German girls report a lower level
of well-being, and this model says that citizenship causes immigrant Muslim girls to feel similar
to natives as their integration increases. However, there is divergence for some outcomes and
overshooting of the native level for others (using the scaled estimates). Moreover, the model does
not fit with the decline in self-identification as German and the drop in speaking German at home.
   Turning to the other outcomes besides well-being, other models can explain some of the results
in isolation, but likewise have a hard time explaining the entirety of our findings. For example,
the decrease in parental schooling investments for Muslim immigrant girls could be due to parents
thinking they do not need to invest as much now that their daughter's opportunities have increased
(substitution), but this does not readily explain the drop in well-being. Moreover, this explanation
would need to be gender-specific to fit the pattern of our findings, a requirement which also applies
to each of the models discussed above.


                                                  27
    In sum, there are several interesting possibilities which can explain a portion of our findings in
isolation. However, the broader set of results and supplementary analyses are not generally consistent
with these alternative models. In contrast, the intergenerational identity model rationalizes all of our
findings within a single framework. We conclude the entirety of our results for Muslim immigrant
girls are best explained by the intergenerational identity model, while still recognizing that multiple
factors could be operating simultaneously.

8   Conclusion
    This paper studies what happens to the well-being of young immigrants, and related outcomes,
when they are automatically given citizenship. We use a change in the law whereby those born
in Germany after January 1, 2000 became roughly 50 percentage points more likely to be given
automatic citizenship. This reduces life satisfaction of immigrant girls when they are 15-16 years
old by 31% of a standard deviation, which translates to an effect of 1.34 on a 0-10 scale. These
effects are larger than the usual effects of divorce or unemployment on life satisfaction and are
similar in magnitude to the effect of a medium-level depression (Frijters et al. 2020). There are
correspondingly large drops in self-esteem, which suggests the effect on well-being came largely via
pressure on self-esteem.
    The results turn out to be driven by the effect on Muslim immigrant girls. Summarizing the
scaled estimates, those granted birthright citizenship experience a 39% drop in reporting a high
chance of obtaining the training, education, and job they aspire to, and a 33% increase in the
perception they will have to forgo a career for family. These dramatic changes are consistent with
the behavior of their parents: there is a 23 percentage point drop in parental help with homework
and learning and a 50% increase in one or both parents never speaking German to their daughter.
This is indicative of a conscious attempt by parents to counteract the pull of German culture which
increases with citizenship. The effect is that Muslim immigrant girls with birthright citizenship
engage in 40% fewer extracurricular activities, score 40% of a standard deviation lower in a measure
of friendship support, and score half a standard deviation lower on a question about whether
foreigners can have a good life in Germany. Moreover, Muslim immigrant girls granted birthright
citizenship are paradoxically 21 percentage points less likely to self-identify as German.
    None of these effects hold for immigrant boys, who experience no significant change or even
slightly better outcomes. Similarly, the negative effects for Muslim girls do not generally hold for
other immigrant girls. Taken together, our findings show Muslim parents reacted strongly against
the citizenship reform in order to keep their daughters within a traditional culture, whereas boys
were allowed to take advantage of the opportunities that come with citizenship.
    In the paper, our main outcome variable was current life satisfaction, i.e., well-being at age 15 or
16. A valid question is what happens to the rest of life, and we can address this somewhat using our
survey questions on life satisfaction in the future. In column 9 of Table 10, we report results for the
expected change in life satisfaction 5 years out relative to current life satisfaction. While Muslim
immigrant girls born pre-reform are more pessimistic about their future well-being compared to
natives, this reverses for Muslim immigrant girls born post-reform. Indeed, their expected change in

                                                  28
satisfaction five years in the future relative to today is almost two thirds of a standard deviation
higher than those born just before the cutoff. This is consistent with the idea that immigrant
Muslim girls granted birthright citizenship currently have large conflicts with their parents about
traditional culture, but feel hopeful that these parental constraints will lessen in the future as they
grow older and leave their parents' house.17 The jury is thus still out on whether the citizenship
reform is good for Muslim immigrant girls over their entire lifetime. While the indications are strong
that their current well-being and human capital investments are reduced due to the reform, their
higher hopes for changes in the future indicate it is possible there are longer-term gains yet to come.
       The German birthright citizenship reform was enacted to lower the bars to cultural and economic
assimilation. While a neoclassical model would predict that increased opportunities should increase
well-being and assimilation, for immigrant girls it paradoxically made them worse off and less
integrated. A simple model with intergenerational identity concerns can explain these otherwise
unexpected and puzzling findings. Our results are a sobering illustration that increased opportunities
are not offered to people in isolation of competing claims on the loyalty of a person. Family members
(or other social groups) will consciously take countermeasures if they feel that assimilation will
impose an identity externality. From a policy perspective, the fact that immigrant girls are made
worse off and feel less integrated after receiving birthright citizenship suggests other actions are
needed to promote second-generation assimilation of females.
  17
       Results for the expected change 1 year out go in the same direction, but are smaller and insignificant.




                                                            29
References
Akerlof, George A. and Rachel E. Kranton (2000) "Economics and identity," Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 115 (3), 715­753.
Akerlof, Robert (2017) "Value formation: The role of esteem," Games and Economic Behavior, 102,
  1­19.
Alba, Richard (2005) "Bright vs. blurred boundaries: Second-generation assimilation and exclusion
  in France, Germany, and the United States," Ethnic and Racial Studies, 28 (1), 20­49.
Albanesi, Stefania and Claudia Olivetti (2016) "Gender roles and medical progress," Journal of
  Political Economy, 124 (3), 650­695.
Alesina, Alberto, Paola Giuliano, and Nathan Nunn (2013) "On the origins of gender roles: Women
  and the plough," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (2), 469­530.
Algan, Yann, Alberto Bisin, Alan Manning, and Thierry Verdier (2012) Cultural integration of
  immigrants in Europe : Oxford University Press.
Austin-Smith, David and Roland Fryer (2005) "An economic analysis of "acting white"," Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 120 (2), 551­583.
Avitabile, Ciro, Irma Clots-Figueras, and Paolo Masella (2013) "The effect of birthright citizenship
  on parental integration outcomes," Journal of Law and Economics, 56 (3), 777­810.
         (2014) "Citizenship, fertility, and parental investments," American Economic Journal:
  Applied Economics, 6 (4), 35­65.
Battu, Harminder and Yves Zenou (2010) "Oppositional identities and employment for ethnic
  minorities: Evidence from England," Economic Journal, 542 (120), F52­F71.
Bertrand, Marianne, Patricia Cortés, Claudia Olivetti, and Jessica Pan (2016) "Social norms, labor
  market opportunities, and the marriage gap for skilled women," NBER Working Paper No. 22015.
Bertrand, Marianne, Emir Kamenica, and Jessica Pan (2015) "Gender identity and relative income
  within households," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 130 (2), 571­614.
Bisin, Alberto, Eleonora Patacchini, Thierry Verdier, and Yves Zenou (2008) "Are Muslim immigrants
  different in terms of cultural integration?" Journal of the European Economic Association, 6 (2-3),
  445­456.
Bisin, Alberto and Thierry Verdier (2000) "Beyond the melting pot: cultural transmission, marriage,
  and the evolution of ethnic and religious traits," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115 (3), 955­988.
         (2001) "The economics of cultural transmission and the dynamics of preferences," Journal
  of Economic Theory, 97 (2), 298­319.
Black, Sandra E, Paul J Devereux, and Kjell G Salvanes (2011) "Too young to leave the nest? The
  effects of school starting age," Review of Economics and Statistics, 93 (2), 455­467.
Blau, Francine D and Lawrence M Kahn (2007) "Changes in the labor supply behavior of married
  women: 1980­2000," Journal of Labor Economics, 25 (3), 393­438.
Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn, Matthew Comey, Amanda Eng, Pamela Meyerhofer, and
  Alexander Willén (2020) "Culture and gender allocation of tasks: Source country characteristics
  and the division of non-market work among US immigrants," Mimeo.
Blau, Francine D., Lawrence M. Kahn, Albert Yung-Hsu Liu, and Kerry L. Papps (2013) "The trans-
  mission of women's fertility, human capital, and work orientation across immigrant generations,"
  Journal of Population Economics, 26, 405­435.
Bratsberg, Bernt, James F. Ragan Jr., and Zafar M. Nasir (2002) "The effect of naturalization on
  wage growth: A panel study of young male immigrants," Journal of Labor Economics, 20 (3),
  568­597.
Buckles, Kasey and Dan Hungerman (2013) "Season of birth and later outcomes: Old question, new
  answers," Review of Economics and Statistics, 95 (3), 711­724.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, Thomas Fujiwara, and Amanda Pallais (2017) "'Acting wife': Marriage market
  incentives and labor market investments," American Economic Review, 107 (11), 3288­3319.
Bursztyn, Leonardo, Alessandra L González, and David Yanagizawa-Drott (2018) "Misperceived
  social norms: Female labor force participation in Saudi Arabia," NBER Working Paper No. 24736.


                                                 30
Carlsson, Magnus, Gordon B Dahl, Björn Öckert, and Dan-Olof Rooth (2015) "The effect of
  schooling on cognitive skills," Review of Economics and Statistics, 97 (3), 533­547.
Cascio, Elizabeth U and Ethan G Lewis (2006) "Schooling and the armed forces qualifying test
  evidence from school-entry laws," Journal of Human resources, 41 (2), 294­318.
Casey, Teresa and Christian Dustmann (2010) "Immigrants' identity, economic outcomes and the
  transmission of identity across generations."
Chiswick, Barry R (1978) "The effect of Americanization on the earnings of foreign-born men,"
  Journal of Political Economy, 897­921.
Constant, Amelie F and Klaus F Zimmermann (2008) "Measuring ethnic identity and its impact on
  economic behavior," Journal of the European Economic Association, 6 (2-3), 424­433.
Cornelissen, Thomas and Christian Dustmann (2019) "Early school exposure, test scores, and
  noncognitive outcomes," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 11 (2), 35­63.
Diener, Ed and Marissa Diener (1995) "Cross-cultural correlates of life satisfaction and self-esteem,"
  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68 (4), 653­663.
Diener, Ed, Robert A Emmons, Randy J Larsen, and Sharon Griffin (1985) "The satisfaction with
  life scale," Journal of Personality Assessment, 49 (1), 71­75.
El-Mafaalani, Aladin and Ahmet Toprak (2017) Muslimische kinder und jugendliche in Deutschland:
  Lebenswelten-denkmuster-herausforderungen: Eine veröffentlichung der Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung
  eV : Konrad Adenauer Foundation.
Ersanilli, Evelyn (2012) "Model (ling) citizens? Integration policies and value integration of Turkish
  immigrants and their descendants in Germany, France, and the Netherlands," Journal of Immigrant
  & Refugee Studies, 10 (3), 338­358.
Felfe, Christina, Martin G. Kocher, Helmut Rainer, Judith Saurer, and Thomas Siedler (2020a)
  "More opportunity, more cooperation? The behavioral effects of birthright citizenship on immigrant
  youth," Mimeo.
Felfe, Christina, Helmut Rainer, and Judith Saurer (2020b) "Why birthright citizenship matters
  for immigrant youth: Short- and long-run impacts of educational integration," Journal of Labor
  Economics, 38 (1), 143­182.
Fernández, Raquel (2007) "Women, work, and culture," Journal of the European Economic Associa-
  tion, 5 (2-3), 305­332.
          (2013) "Cultural change as learning: The evolution of female labor force participation over
  a century," American Economic Review, 103 (1), 472­500.
Fernández, Raquel and Alessandra Fogli (2009) "Culture: An empirical investigation of beliefs,
  work, and fertility," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 1 (1), 146­77.
Fernández, Raquel, Alessandra Fogli, and Claudia Olivetti (2004) "Mothers and sons: Preference
  formation and female labor force dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119 (4), 1249­1299.
Fortin, Nicole M (2005) "Gender role attitudes and the labour-market outcomes of women across
  OECD countries," Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21 (3), 416­438.
          (2015) "Gender role attitudes and women's labor market participation: Opting-out, aids,
  and the persistent appeal of housewifery," Annals of Economics and Statistics/Annales d'Économie
  et de Statistique (117/118), 379­401.
Fougère, Denis and Mirna Safi (2009) "The effects of naturalization on immigrants' employment
  probability (France, 1968-1999)," International Journal of Manpower, 30 (1-2), 83­96.
Frijters, Paul, Andrew Clark, Christian Krekel, and Richard Layard (2020) "A happy choice:
  Wellbeing as the goal of government," Behavioral Public Policy, forthcoming.
Frijters, Paul, David W Johnston, and Michael A Shields (2011) "Life satisfaction dynamics with
  quarterly life event data," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 113 (1), 190­211.
Frijters, Paul, Michael A Shields, and Stephen Wheatley Price (2005) "Job search methods and
  their success: a comparison of immigrants and natives in the UK," Economic Journal, 115 (507),
  F359­F376.
Fryer, Roland and Paul Torelli (2010) "An empirical analysis of "acting white"," Journal of Public


                                                 31
  Economics, 94 (5-6), 380­396.
Gathmann, Christina and Nicolas Keller (2018) "Access to citizenship and the economic assimilation
  of immigrants," Economic Journal, 128, 3141­3181.
Goldin, Claudia (1995) "The U-shaped female labor force function in economic development," in
  Schultz, Paul T. ed. Investment in Women's Human Capital, 61­90, Chicago: University of
  Chicago Press.
          (2006) "The quiet revolution that transformed women's employment, education, and family,"
  AEA Papers and Proceedings, 96 (2), 1­21.
Goldin, Claudia and Claudia Olivetti (2013) "Shocking labor supply: A reassessment of the role of
  World War II on women's labor supply," American Economic Review, 103 (3), 257­62.
Helliwell, John F., Richard Layard, and Jeffrey D. Sachs (2019) World Happiness Report 2019 : New
  York: Sustainable Development Solutions Network.
Heredia-Montesinos, Amanda, Marion C Aichberger, Selver Temur-Erman, Zohra Bromand, Andreas
  Heinz, and Meryam Schouler-Ocak (2019) "Explanatory models of suicidality among women of
  Turkish descent in Germany: A focus group study," Transcultural Psychiatry, 56 (1), 48­75.
Ichino, Andrea, Martin Olsson, Barbara Petrongolo, and Peter Skogman Thoursie (2019) "Economic
  incentives, home production, and gender identity norms," IZA Working Paper No. 12391.
Kleven, Henrik, Camille Landais, and Jakob Egholt Søgaard (2018) "Children and gender inequality:
  Evidence from Denmark," NBER Working Paper No. 24219.
Kranton, Rachel E (2016) "Identity economics 2016: Where do social distinctions and norms come
  from?" American Economic Review, 106 (5), 405­09.
Linton, Myles-Jay, Paul Dieppe, and Antonieta Medina-Lara (2016) "Review of 99 self-report
  measures for assessing well-being in adults: Exploring dimensions of well-being and developments
  over time," BMJ Open, 6 (7), e010641.
McKenzie, Kwame, Deborah Goodman, Ann Fitzpatrick, Sean Kidd, Said Dirie, Helen Thang, and
  Emma Ware (2014) Hidden in our midst: Homeless newcomer youth in Toronto--Uncovering
  the supports to prevent and reduce homelessness : Centre for Addiction and Mental Health and
  Children's Aid Society of Toronto.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (2015) The integration of immigrants
  into American society, Washington, DC: The National Academies Press, 10.17226/21746.
Nekby, Lena and Magnus Rödin (2007) "Acculturation identity and labor market outcomes," IZA
  Working Paper No. 2826.
Page, Lionel, Dipanwita Sarkar, and Juliana Silva-Goncalves (2019) "Long-lasting effects of relative
  age at school," Working Paper No. 2019-06, University of Sydney, School of Economics.
Pendakur, Krishna and Ravi Pendakur (2011) "Color by numbers: Minority earnings in Canada
  1995­2005," Journal of International Migration and Integration, 12 (3), 305­329.
Sajons, Christoph (2019) "Birthright citizenship and parental labor market integration," Labour
  Economics, 57, 1­22.
Steinhardt, Max F (2012) "Does citizenship matter? The economic impact of naturalizations in
  Germany," Labour Economics, 19 (6), 813­823.
Stiglitz, Joseph E, Amartya Sen, and Jean-Paul Fitoussi (2017) "Report by the commission on the
  measurement of economic performance and social progress."
Suárez-Orozco, Carola and Desirée Baolian Qin (2006) "Gendered perspectives in psychology:
  Immigrant origin youth," International Migration Review, 40 (1), 165­198.
Zorlu, Aslan and Paul Frijters (2019) "The happiness of European Muslims post-9/11," Ethnic and
  Racial Studies, 42 (16), 23­44.




                                                32
                                                                            Child
                                                     propose eL                                  propose eH


                                               Parents                                                   Parents


                            enforce eH                      accept eL                     accept eH                  enforce eL



                            Nature                           Nature                        Nature                      Nature


                      p  (0, 1)                            p=0                       p  (0, 1)                       p=0



              p(uH - uL ) + uL - c -  - R                 uL - (1 - )R           p(uH - uL ) + uL - c - R          uL -  - (1 - )R
                          y - pI -                                y                        y - pI                       y-


                      Interpretation of Parameters:
                      I ... identity externality
                       ... intensity of identity
                       ... cost of intra-family conflict
                                                                      ^) versus low effort cost (= 0 if c  c
                       ... indicator for high effort cost (= 1 if c > c                                    ^)
                      R ... regret; increasing function of foregone career opportunities
                      y ... parents' exogenous income

        Note: For simplicity, the figure suppresses the arguments of R (i.e., p(uH - uL ) - c if  = 0; c - p(uH - uL )
        if  = 1).

                  Figure 1. Family Bargaining with Traditional Identity-Based Preferences



              c       Parents with weak                  Parents with moderate              Parents with strong
                       identity concerns                    identity concerns                identity concerns




                                                                                                                         Kids with high
                               (i)                                (iv)                                (vii)
                                                                                                                            effort costs
                            V = 0                              V = 0                                V = 0



         ^+
         c


                              (ii)                                (v)                                 (viii)           Kids with medium
                   V = p+ (uH - uL ) - c > 0                V = -R+ < 0                          V = -R+ < 0              effort costs



         ^-
         c

                              (iii)                               (vi)                                (ix)
                  V = ( p+ - p- )(uH - uL ) > 0     V = c - p- (uH - uL ) - R+ < 0          V = -(R+ - R-) < 0           Kids with low
                                                                                                                          effort costs



                                                                                                                         
                                               ^+                                    ^-

  Notes: For simplicity, the figure uses the notation R+ = R(p+ (uH - uL ) - c) and R- = R(p- (uH - uL ) - c). Red shaded
  areas represent parameter values where an increase in p results in a reduction in children's utility. Green shaded areas
  represent parameter values where an increase in p results in an increase in children's utlity.

Figure 2. Changes in Well-Being when Economic Opportunities Increase: The Case of Traditional
                                 Identity-Based Preferences

                                                                          33
                                                                 (a) German Microcensus, 2001                       (b) Own Survey




                                                1




                                                                                                  1
             Share of Second-Generation Immigrant
                Children with Citizenship at Birth
                                                                                     0.80                                            0.78




                                                .8




                                                                                                  .8
                                                .6




                                                                                                  .6
                                                .4




                                                                                                  .4
                                                                                                             0.35
                                                                      0.28
                                                .2




                                                                                                  .2
                                                0




                                                                                                  0
                                                                  Born 1999      Born 2000                Born 1999           Born 2000

Figure 3. Citizenship at Birth: Second-Generation Immigrant Children Born Before versus After
                     the Birthright Citizenship Reform (January 1, 2000)




                                                                                              (a) Girls
                        Mean of Standardized Life Satisfaction
                           -1   -.6 -.2    .2     .6    1




                                                                  +/- 6 mo.    +/- 5 mo.       +/- 4 mo.      +/- 3 mo.        +/- 2 mo.
                                                                                            Sample Window


                                                                                              (b) Boys
                        Mean of Standardized Life Satisfaction
                           -1   -.6 -.2    .2     .6    1




                                                                  +/- 6 mo.    +/- 5 mo.       +/- 4 mo.      +/- 3 mo.        +/- 2 mo.
                                                                                            Sample Window


                                                                     Immigrants born pre-policy                 Natives born pre-policy
                                                                     Immigrants born post-policy                Natives born post-policy


 Figure 4. Life Satisfaction Among Immigrant and Native Youth Born Before versus After the
                        Birthright Citizenship Reform (January 1, 2000)
                                                                                                34
                                  Table 1
DiD-RD Estimates of the Impact of Birthright Citizenship on Subjective Wellbeing
   Table 1. Impact of Birthright Citizenship on Subjective Well-Being
     Dependent Variable:                           Standardized Life Satisfaction
                                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)


     Panel A: Girls

     Immigrant                            0.458**       0.453**     0.582**    0.559**
                                          (0.098)       (0.099)     (0.102)    (0.103)

     Post-reform*Immigrant                -0.309**      -0.297**   -0.336**    -0.320**
                                           (0.139)       (0.140)    (0.139)     (0.139)

     Observations                          1,082         1,082       1,082      1,082


     Panel B: Boys

     Immigrant                              0.054         0.054      0.069      0.058
                                           (0.091)       (0.091)    (0.095)    (0.095)

     Post-reform*Immigrant                  0.109         0.109      0.119      0.123
                                           (0.123)       (0.123)    (0.124)    (0.124)

     Observations                          1,051         1,051       1,051      1,051
     Birth Month FE                           -
     Family Characteristics                   -             -
     City-Level Controls                      -             -          -
   Notes: Estimates of equation (3) for an age window of ±6 months around January 1,
   2000. The dependent variable is normalized to be mean 0 and standard deviation 1
   relative to the population of all natives. Family characteristics include mother's and
   father's age, dummy variables for mother's and father's education (four groups each).
   City-level controls include male unemployment, female unemployment, youth unemploy-
   ment, immigrant unemployment, and a dummy variable for city size larger than 100,000.
   Standard errors reported in parentheses. **,* indicate significance at the 5% and 10%
   level, respectively.




                                            35
                                             1
                                    Table 1
    DiD-RD Estimates of the Impact of Birthright Citizenship on Life Satisfaction
                          Narrowing the Sample Window
                      Table 2. Narrowing the Sample Window
 Dependent Variable:                                 Standardized Life Satisfaction
                                           (1)             (2)           (3)        (4)
                                        ±5 months      ±4 months ±3 months ±2 months


 Panel A: Girls

 Immigrant                                0.585**        0.766**       0.883**       0.827**
                                          (0.110)        (0.122)       (0.147)       (0.195)

 Post-reform*Immigrant                    -0.326**      -0.447**       -0.570**       -0.458*
                                           (0.149)       (0.162)        (0.186)       (0.244)

 Observations                               924            759           597            388


 Panel B: Boys

 Immigrant                                 0.047          0.027         -0.018         -0.126
                                          (0.105)        (0.119)       (0.130)        (0.168)

 Post-reform*Immigrant                     0.084          0.088         0.112          0.242
                                          (0.137)        (0.155)       (0.171)        (0.218)

 Observations                               881            703           544            370
 Birth Month FE
 Family Characteristics
 City-Level Controls
Notes: Estimates similar to those in Table 1, but with different sample windows. Standard errors
reported in parentheses. **,* indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                              36
                                              Table 1
           DiD-RD Estimates of the Impact of Birthright Citizenship on Subjective Wellbeing
                                   Additional Robustness Checks
                                  Table 3. Additional Robustness Checks
  Dependent Variable:                                 Standardized Life Satisfaction
                                      (1)          (2)            (3)             (4)              (5)          (6)
                                                            1st generation
                                               Difference immigrants as Control for              Donut       Clustered
                                      RD        in RD's     control group age in days             hole         s.e.'s


  Panel A: Girls

  Post-reform                       -0.488*
                                    (0.255)

  Immigrant                                     0.862***          0.295           0.562***      0.552***     0.559***
                                                 (0.205)         (0.224)           (0.102)       (0.104)      (0.114)

  Post-reform*Immigrant                         -0.630**         -0.502*          -0.333**      -0.317**     -0.320**
                                                 (0.303)         (0.297)           (0.138)       (0.141)      (0.145)

  Observations                        326         1,081            388              1,081         1,048        1,082


  Panel B: Boys

  Post-reform                        0.135
                                    (0.212)

  Immigrant                                       -0.150          -0.068            0.054         0.055        0.058
                                                 (0.173)         (0.158)           (0.095)       (0.099)      (0.101)

  Post-reform*Immigrant                           0.077           -0.145            0.130         0.138        0.123
                                                 (0.257)         (0.234)           (0.124)       (0.127)      (0.122)

  Observations                        272         1,051            330              1,051         1,002        1,051
  Birth Month FE                        -           -                                 -
  Family Characteristics
  City-Level Controls
Notes: See notes to Table 1. Column 1 is a regression discontinuity using immigrants only, an age window of ±6 months
around January 1, 2000, separate linear trends in child age (in days) to the left and right of the cutoff, and triangular
weights. Column 2 is a difference in RDs for immigrants versus natives. Column 3 presents estimates of equation (3)
using first-generation immigrants as the control group. Columns 4-6 mirror those in found in column 4 of Table 1, except
that column 4 controls for child age in days, column 5 excludes children born ±1 week around January 1, 2000, and
column 6 clusters standard errors at the school level. Standard errors reported in parentheses. **,* indicate significance
at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                           37
                                                             Table 1
            DiD-RD Estimates of the Impact of Birthright Citizenship on Social Participation, Ethnic Identity, and Beliefs
                             Table 4. Self-Esteem as an Alternative Measure of Subjective Well-Being
       Dependent Variable:               Index of                                        Standardized components of
                                        self-esteem                                               the index

                                                              I am          I have many          I am as      I am a person         I have a
                                                            satisfied          positive         capable as      with value      positive attitude
                                                           with myself     character traits    other people   and self-worth    towards myself
                                             (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)             (5)                (6)

       Panel A: Girls

       Immigrant                          0.445**            0.650**           0.374**           0.529**          0.223**            0.449**
                                          (0.080)            (0.107)           (0.103)           (0.102)          (0.107)            (0.105)

       Post-reform*Immigrant              -0.252**           -0.420**           -0.098          -0.370**           -0.223             -0.147




1
                                           (0.108)            (0.145)          (0.140)           (0.137)          (0.145)            (0.142)




38
       Observations                        1,038               1,038            1,038             1,038            1,038              1,038

       Panel B: Boys

       Immigrant                            -0.073            0.0091            0.001             -0.103         -0.257**             -0.016
                                           (0.075)            (0.096)          (0.099)           (0.104)          (0.110)            (0.099)

       Post-reform*Immigrant               0.167*              0.149            0.125             0.194            0.125             0.241*
                                           (0.098)            (0.125)          (0.129)           (0.135)          (0.142)            (0.129)

       Observations                        1,011               1,011            1,011             1,011            1,011              1,011
       Birth Month FE
       Family Characteristics
       City-Level Controls
     Notes: See notes to Table 1. Each component of the index is normalized to be mean 0 and standard deviation 1 relative to the population of all
     natives. The aggregate index of self-esteem sums across the 5 normalized variables, and divides by 5. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
     **,* indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                                            Table 1
DiD-RD Estimates of the Impact of Birthright Citizenship on Life Satisfaction by Religious Affiliation
                          Table 5. Muslim vs. Non-Muslim Immigrants
                   Dependent Variable:                      Standardized Life Satisfaction
                                                               (1)             (2)
                                                            Muslim       Non-Muslim


                   Panel A: Girls

                   Immigrant                                0.822**            0.222
                                                            (0.126)           (0.146)

                   Post-reform*Immigrant                    -0.474**           -0.087
                                                             (0.167)          (0.206)

                   Observations                                953              881


                   Panel B: Boys

                   Immigrant                                  0.165            -0.065
                                                             (0.120)          (0.137)

                   Post-reform*Immigrant                      0.052            0.191
                                                             (0.153)          (0.183)

                   Observations                                942              888
                   Birth Month FE
                   Family Characteristics
                   City-Level Controls
                   Notes: See notes to Table 1. Standard errors reported in parentheses. **,*
                   indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                      39
                                                                Table 1
                                    Table
                                DiD-RD     6. Disillusionment
                                       Estimates                and
                                                 of the Impact of    Forgoing
                                                                  Birthright             for
                                                                                a Careeron
                                                                             Citizenship     Family
                                                                                           Disillusionment

      Dependent Variable:                    Aspires to                High vs. low odds          Interaction of high          Odds of having
                                          pursue tertiary           of achieving educational      aspirations and low          to forgo career
                                             education                     aspirations                success odds                for family
                                         (1)          (2)              (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)
                                        Muslim Non-Mus.             Muslim       Non-Mus.        Muslim Non-Mus.             Muslim Non-Mus.

      Panel A: Girls

      Immigrant                           0.063       0.159**       0.134**         0.027          -0.066        0.078        -10.73**       0.971
                                         (0.059)      (0.067)       (0.057)        (0.066)        (0.045)       (0.053)        (3.561)      (3.992)

      Post-reform*Immigrant               0.110         0.051       -0.210**        0.012         0.194**        -0.001       8.198*        -16.77**
                                         (0.078)       (0.094)       (0.076)       (0.093)        (0.060)       (0.074)       (4.759)        (5.671)




1
      Observations                        952            880           934           865            933           864           931           867




40
                                                                                      Panel B: Boys

      Immigrant                         0.171**       0.190**         -0.033       -0.126*         0.059        0.118**        -4.912       -9.467**
                                        (0.065)       (0.074)        (0.059)       (0.068)        (0.040)       (0.047)       (3.713)        (4.198)

      Post-reform*Immigrant               0.009         -0.050        0.073         0.034          -0.034        -0.040        4.822         6.902
                                         (0.084)       (0.099)       (0.076)       (0.091)        (0.051)       (0.062)       (4.744)       (5.639)

      Observations                        942            888           920           866            920           866           930           876
      Month of Birth Fixed Effects
      Family Characteristics
      City-Level Controls
     Notes: See notes to Table 1. Columns 1-6 report results for binary outcomes, while columns 7-8 report results for an outcome measured as a percent.
     Standard errors reported in parentheses. **,* indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                                             Table 1
Joint Outcomse: Lives with one or both parents interacted with receives schooling support from one or
                  Table   7. Parental speaks
                    both parents/never  Schooling
                                              German    Language
                                                   andwith  one or Investments
                                                                    both parents

             Dependent Variable:               Receives schooling           Never    speaks
                                               support from one           German     with one
                                                or both parents            or both   parents
                                               (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)
                                              Muslim Non-Mus.            Muslim      Non-Mus.

             Panel A: Girls

             Immigrant                        -0.129**       -0.217**     0.239**      0.232**
                                               (0.052)        (0.061)     (0.025)      (0.023)

             Post-reform*Immigrant            -0.154**        0.066       0.079**        -0.031
                                               (0.074)       (0.087)      (0.034)       (0.032)

             Observations                       935            868          923          856

             Panel B: Boys

             Immigrant                        -0.262**       -0.363**     0.439**      0.127**
                                               (0.061)        (0.069)     (0.029)      (0.023)

             Post-reform*Immigrant              0.060        0.232**       0.030       0.143**
                                               (0.081)       (0.095)      (0.038)      (0.031)

             Observations                       931            876          921          868
             Month of Birth Fixed Effects
             Family Characteristics
             City-Level Controls
            Notes: See notes to Table 1. Outcome variables are defined as whether one or both
            parents support their child in school or never speak German with their child interacted
            with whether the child lives with them. Standard errors reported in parentheses. **,*
            indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.




                                                         1

                                                      41
                                                                              Table 1
                                        Table
                            DiD-RD Estimates    the Social
                                             of 8.   ImpactIntegration,
                                                            of Birthright German   Identity,
                                                                          Citizenship        and
                                                                                      on Social  Assimilation
                                                                                                Participation,  Beliefs
                                                                                                               Ethnic Identity, and Beliefs

      Dependent Variable:                 Index of social                 Index of                    Index of                  Self-identify            Believe a foreigner can
                                           participation                 loneliness              friendship support              as German              have good life in Germany
                                         (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)           (7)           (8)             (9)            (10)
                                        Muslim Non-Mus.             Muslim Non-Mus.             Muslim Non-Mus.             Muslim Non-Mus.             Muslim        Non-Mus.

      Panel A: Girls

      Immigrant                          0.183          0.004       -0.280**        -0.038      0.227**         0.028       -0.507**      -0.361**       0.251*           0.200
                                        (0.119)        (0.136)       (0.075)       (0.092)      (0.071)        (0.115)       (0.049)       (0.070)       (0.127)         (0.154)

      Post-reform*Immigrant             -0.298*         -0.074        0.076         0.076       -0.268**        -0.224       -0.137*        -0.009      -0.343**          -0.112
                                        (0.158)        (0.192)       (0.108)       (0.109)       (0.106)       (0.175)       (0.069)       (0.010)       (0.150)         (0.195)




1
      Observations                        953           881            923           858           934           867           953           881           916             850




42
      Panel B: Boys

      Immigrant                          0.020        -0.215*       -0.170**        0.029         0.166         0.031       -0.619**      -0.391**       0.363**         0.354**
                                        (0.104)       (0.115)        (0.080)       (0.099)       (0.125)       (0.158)       (0.056)       (0.064)       (0.126)         (0.163)

      Post-reform*Immigrant             0.233*          0.112         -0.040        -0.125        0.170         0.023         0.057         -0.039        -0.045          -0.010
                                        (0.133)        (0.153)       (0.117)       (0.137)       (0.159)       (0.154)       (0.055)       (0.086)       (0.160)         (0.183)

      Observations                        942           888            907           859           917           865           942           888           903             851
      Birth Month FE
      Family Characteristics
      City-Level Controls
     Notes: See notes to Table 1. The social participation index ranges from 0 to 4, counting the number of extracurricular activities (sports, band/orchestra, theater, school
     newspaper) a child has ever participated in. The loneliness index is the equally weighted sum of three normalized variables (mean 0 and standard deviation 1 relative to the
     population of natives). The friendship support index is the equally weighted sum of two similarly normalized variables. Columns 7-10 are binary outcomes. Standard errors
     reported in parentheses. **,* indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.
                                                                             Table 1
                                             Table
                            DiD-RD Estimates of      9. Intergenerational
                                                the Impact of Birthright Citizenship  Model
                                                                             Identityon Socialversus  Alternatives
                                                                                               Participation, Ethnic Identity, and Beliefs

       Dependent Variable:                Foreigners have to                 Need to                  Life satisfaction           Life satisfaction          Expected change in life
                                          do a great deal to               be German                with younger sibling         with older sibling           satisfaction 5 years
                                            be recognized                   to succeed                 of opposite sex             of opposite sex                in the future
                                          (1)          (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)           (7)           (8)             (9)           (10)
                                         Muslim Non-Mus.              Muslim Non-Mus.              Muslim Non-Mus.              Muslim Non-Mus.              Muslim Non-Mus.

       Panel A: Girls

       Immigrant                           0.138          0.070         0.000        0.116**        0.771**         0.250        0.954**        0.295*       -0.679**         -0.115
                                          (0.135)        (0.141)       (0.024)       (0.041)        (0.142)        (0.210)       (0.215)        (0.163)       (0.131)        (0.148)

       Post-reform*Immigrant               -0.045         -0.143        -0.006       -0.127**      -0.509**         -0.138       -0.573*         -0.138       0.646**         0.150
                                          (0.158)        (0.240)       (0.033)        (0.055)       (0.182)        (0.268)       (0.294)        (0.296)       (0.174)        (0.208)




1
       Observations                         913            845           942            869           517            464           436            417           938            867




43
       Panel B: Boys

       Immigrant                          0.443**         0.116         0.052          0.051         0.029          -0.057       0.327**         -0.019        0.088          0.075
                                          (0.161)        (0.163)       (0.045)        (0.057)       (0.189)        (0.161)       (0.149)        (0.190)       (0.130)        (0.145)

       Post-reform*Immigrant               -0.198         -0.334        0.053          -0.023        0.195          0.235         -0.111         0.008         -0.118        -0.344*
                                          (0.214)        (0.230)       (0.063)        (0.070)       (0.207)        (0.220)       (0.201)        (0.246)       (0.167)        (0.193)

       Observations                         899            846           928            874           488            457           454            431           932            881
       Birth Month FE
       Family Characteristics
       City-Level Controls
     Notes: See notes to Table 1. Columns 1-4 are binary outcomes, columns 5-8 is standardized life satisfaction, and columns 9-10 is the standardized difference (mean 0 and
     standard deviation 1 relative to the population of natives) between life satisfaction five years in the future and life satisfaction now. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
     **,* indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.
    For Online Publication: Appendix Figures and Tables
"Caught between Cultures: Unintended Consequences of Improving Opportunity for
                               Immigrant Girls"

           by Gordon B. Dahl, Christina Felfe, Paul Frijters, and Helmut Rainer




                                                          Child
                                     propose eL                               propose eH


                               Parents                                               Parents


                enforce eH                  accept eL                  accept eH                 enforce eL



                Nature                       Nature                     Nature                       Nature


           p  (0, 1)                       p=0                    p  (0, 1)                      p=0



      p(uH - uL ) + uL - c -  - R         uL - (1 - )R         p(uH - uL ) + uL - c - R        uL -  - (1 - )R
            y - (1 - p)I -                    y - I                  y - (1 - p)I                    y -  - I


           Interpretation of Parameters:
           I ... identity externality
            ... intensity of identity
            ... cost of intra-family conflict
                                                           ^) versus low effort cost (= 0 if c  c
            ... indicator for high effort cost (= 1 if c > c                                    ^)
           R ... regret; increasing function of foregone career opportunities
           y ... parents' exogenous income

   Note: For simplicity, the figure suppresses the arguments of R (i.e., p(uH - uL ) - c if  = 0; c - p(uH - uL )
   if  = 1).


      Figure A1. Family Bargaining with Mainstream Identity-Based Preferences
        c       Parents with weak                  Parents with moderate                    Parents with strong
                 identity concerns                    identity concerns                      identity concerns




                                                                                                                        Kids with high
                         (i)                                (iv)                                    (vii)
                                              V = -[c - p+ (uH - uL )] - R+ < 0        V = ( p+ - p- )(uH - uL )
                                                                                                                           effort costs
                      V = 0
                                                                                             +[R- - R+]     >0

   ^+
   c


                        (ii)                                (v)                                    (viii)              Kids with medium
             V = p+ (uH - uL ) - c > 0            V = p+ (uH - uL ) - c > 0              V = ( p+ - p- )(uH - uL )        effort costs
                                                                                                  +R- > 0


   ^-
   c

                        (iii)                               (vi)                                    (ix)
            V = ( p+ - p- )(uH - uL ) > 0       V = ( p+ - p- )(uH - uL ) > 0          V = ( p+ - p- )(uH - uL ) > 0     Kids with low
                                                                                                                          effort costs



                                                                                                                        
                                         ^+                                       ^-

Notes: For simplicity, the figure uses the notation R+ = R(c - p+ (uH - uL )) and R- = R(c - p- (uH - uL )). Red
shaded areas represent parameter values where an increase in p results in a reduction in children's utility. Green
shaded areas represent parameter values where an increase in p results in an increase in children's utlity.


Figure A2. Changes in Well-Being when Economic Opportunities Increase: The Case of
                      Mainstream Identity-Based Preferences
                                                 Table 1
                                 Table A1.
                              Descriptive       Descriptive
                                          Statistics          Statistics
                                                     for Estimation Samples

                                                                   Immigrants        Immigrants
                                        Natives   Immigrants     born pre-policy   born post-policy    p-value
                                         (1)         (2)               (3)               (4)           (3)-(4)


  Panel A: Girls

  Family Characteristics
    Education Mother: Low                 .23         .37              .38                .36            .66
    Education Mother: Medium              .44         .18              .18                .19            .87
    Education Mother: High                .20         .15              .13                .18            .29
    Education Mother: Unknown             .13         .29              .31                .28            .61
    Mother's Age                         45.24       43.51            44.03              42.96           .17
    Education Father: Low                 .26         .29              .27                .32            .29
    Education Father: Medium              .33         .23              .24                .21            .54
    Education Father: High                .24         .15              .15                .16            .65
    Education Father: Unknown             .18         .33              .35                .31            .41
    Father's Age                         49.23       48.02            48.77              47.24           .16
  City-Level Controls
    City Size>100,000                     .25         .10              .08                .11            .39
    Male Unemployment                    11.12       11.24            11.31              11.17           .34
    Female Unemployment                  10.09       10.73            10.89              10.57           .23
    Immigrant Unemployment               24.92       24.94            25.10              24.78           .29
    Youth Unemployment                    8.75        8.78            8.85               8.70            .29

     Observations                         756         326              166                160


  Panel B: Boys

  Family Characteristics
    Education Mother: Low                 .22         .28              .31                .25            .31
    Education Mother: Medium              .42         .22              .16                .27            .02
    Education Mother: High                .24         .15              .16                .14            .72
    Education Mother: Unknown             .13         .35              .37                .33            .46
    Mother's Age                         46.15       44.38            44.50              44.28           .85
    Education Father: Low                 .25         .25              .26                .24            .63
    Education Father: Medium              .31         .23              .21                .25            .46
    Education Father: High                .27         .17              .14                .19            .31
    Education Father: Unknown             .17         .35              .39                .33            .31
    Father's Age                         50.04       48.71            48.84              48.61           .86
  City-Level Controls
    City Size>100,000                     .27         .12              .12                .12           1.00
    Male Unemployment                    10.98       11.07            11.26              10.93          .10
    Female Unemployment                   9.93       10.60            10.86              10.40          .14
    Immigrant Unemployment               24.49        24.6            24.74              24.5           .54
    Youth Unemployment                    8.64        8.66            8.84               8.51           .06

     Observations                         779         272              119                153
Notes: Sample restricted to a ±6-month window centered around the reform's cut-off date. Natives are children
whose parents are both German-born. Immigrants are children who are German-born but whose parents are both
foreign-born (second generation immigrants). Pre-policy and post-policy refer to immigrants who are either born
before (in 1999) or after (in 2000) the reform's cut-off date. Parents with low, medium, and high education have
completed, respectively, at most lower secondary school (Hauptschule), at most intermediate secondary school
(Realschule), and upper secondary school (Gymnasium) or university. All unemployment measures are based on
unemployment rates at the city level measured in 2015, the year of our survey.




                                                       1
Table A2. Descriptive Statistics for
             Table 1: Descriptive    Religious
                                  Statistics     Affiliation Samples
                                             for Estimation  and Country of Origin

                                                        Natives          Immigrants
                                                     Girls Boys          Girls Boys
                                                      (1)     (2)         (3)   (4)


         Religion
           Catholic                                  0.14     0.15        0.19     0.15
           Protestant                                0.61     0.49        0.08     0.09
           Muslim                                    0.03     0.01        0.60     0.60
           None                                      0.19     0.30        0.03     0.07
           Other, Missing                            0.04     0.06        0.10     0.09

         Mother's Country of Origin
          Germany                                    1.00     1.00          -        -
          Turkey                                       -        -         0.42     0.43
          Balkan                                       -        -         0.11     0.11
          Eastern Europe                               -        -         0.12     0.12
          Post-Soviet                                  -        -         0.11     0.12
          Southern Europe                              -        -         0.05     0.02
          Central and Northern Europe                  -        -         0.01     0.01
          Middle East                                  -        -         0.05     0.07
          Asia                                         -        -         0.03     0.05
          Africa                                       -        -         0.08     0.06
          Rest of World                                -        -         0.01     0.01
          Unidentified                                 -        -         0.02     0.01

         Observations                                 756     779         326      272
        Notes: Sample restricted to a ±6-month window centered around the reform's cutoff
        date. Natives are children whose parents are both German born. Immigrants are
        children who are German born but whose parents are both foreign born (second
        generation immigrants).
                                                   Table 1
                        Table Statistics
                    Descriptive A3. Descriptive   Statistics
                                         for Dependent       for Dependent
                                                       Variables,            Variables
                                                                  Values for Native Children

                                                                            Girls and Boys             Girls              Boys
                                                                            Mean      SD          Mean       SD      Mean      SD
                                                                             (1)      (2)          (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)


  Standardized Variables
    Life satisfaction                                                           7.46     2.27
    I am satisfied with myself                                                  4.41     1.29
    I have positive character traits                                            4.46     1.12
    I am as capable as other people                                             4.35     1.14
    I am person with value and self-worth                                       4.47     1.43
    I have a positive attitude towards myself                                   4.41     1.45
    It's easy for me to make new friends                                        4.16     1.44
    I often feel lonely                                                         2.07     1.38
    I want to have more contact with others                                     3.08     1.49
    My circle of friends and I do a lot together                                4.59     1.34
    I receive support from my friends when I have worries and problems          5.03     1.31
    Foreigners can have good life in Germany                                    4.39     1.24
    Foreigners have to do a great deal to be recognized                         3.23     1.47
    Change in future life satisfaction                                          0.71     1.89

  Non-Standardized Variables
   Wants to pursue tertiary education (1/0)                                                       0.56       0.50     0.44    0.50
   High vs. low odds of achieving aspirations (1/0)                                               0.67       0.47     0.76    0.43
   Interaction of high aspirations/low predicted odds (1/0)                                       0.15       0.36    0.084    0.28
   Odds of having to forgo career for family (0-100%, 10% increments)                             47.73      29.21   35.85   26.90
   Receives schooling support from one or both parents (1/0)                                      0.74       0.44     0.71    0.45
   Never speaks German with one or both parents (1/0)                                             0.00       0.05     0.00    0.05
   Social Participation (count of no. of extracurricular activities, 0-4)                         0.90       1.00     0.59    0.76
   Strong vs. weak identification with Germany (1/0)                                              0.87       0.34     0.87    0.34
   Beliefs that one needs to German to succeed (1/0)                                              0.07       0.26     0.08    0.27


Notes: For standardized variables, we report the mean and standard deviation for all native children (born pre- and post-policy).
For non-standardized variables, we report the mean and standard deviation for native children born pre-policy.




                                                Table A4. Gender Norms

                                       WEF
                                     Gender Gap      Economic         Political        Educational    Health &
                                       Index        Participation   Empowerment        Attainment     Survival


                    Natives             0.752          0.669            0.366             0.995           0.979

                    Immigrants:

                      Non-Muslim        0.674          0.635            0.104             0.979           0.976

                      Muslim            0.589          0.442            0.056             0.887           0.969

                 Notes: Source data come from the 2018 Global Gender Gap report provided by the World
                 Economic Forum. Each subindex measures the gap between men and women, where the
                 highest possible score is 1 (full equality) and the lowest is 0 (full inequality). The WEF
                 Gender Gap Index is the average of the four subindices. We assign each child in our sample
                 the gender indices associated with his or her mother's birth country. The numbers reported
                 above correspond to the respective means for the subgroup of native, Muslim immigrant,
                 and non-Muslim immigrant children.




                                                               1
                                            Table 1
                    Table
DiD-RD Estimates of the    A5.
                        Impact of Alternatives  Measures
                                  Birthright Citizenship onof Traditionality
                                                            Life Satisfaction by Religious Affiliation

          Dependent Variable:                              Standardized Life Satisfaction
                                                          (1)                        (2)
                                                   Prob. Muslim.75 Turkey & Middle East


          Panel A: Girls

          Immigrant                                       0.777***                    0.738***
                                                           (0.125)                     (0.143)

          Post-reform*Immigrant                           -0.412**                     -0.362*
                                                           (0.168)                     (0.190)

          Observations                                       952                         903


          Panel B: Boys

          Immigrant                                         0.143                       0.179
                                                           (0.119)                     (0.131)

          Post-reform*Immigrant                             0.046                       0.001
                                                           (0.153)                     (0.168)

          Observations                                       944                         911
          Birth Month FE
          Family Characteristics
          City-Level Controls
        Notes: See notes to Table 1. Column 1 shows results for the sample of children whose predicted
        probability of being Muslim is over 75%. To predict the probability children are Muslim, we regress
        the self-reported Muslim variable on dummy variables for the countries of origin for both mothers
        and fathers. Column 2 shows results for the sample of children whose mother comes from either
        Turkey or the Middle East, regions which are predominantly Muslim. Standard errors reported in
        parentheses. **,* indicate significance at the 5% and 10% level, respectively.
