                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




MONETARY POLICY AND SOVEREIGN RISK IN EMERGING ECONOMIES (NK-DEFAULT)

                                       Cristina Arellano
                                            Yan Bai
                                      Gabriel P. Mihalache

                                      Working Paper 26671
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26671


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




 We thank our discussants Luigi Bocola, Satyajit Chatterjee, Giancarlo Corsetti, Juan Carlos
 Hatchondo, Radek Paluszynski, and Vivian Yue for insightful comments and suggestions. The
 views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
 Bank of Minneapolis, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Gabriel P. Mihalache. All rights reserved. Short
 sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
 provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Monetary Policy and Sovereign Risk in Emerging Economies (NK-Default)
Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Gabriel P. Mihalache
NBER Working Paper No. 26671
January 2020
JEL No. E52,F34,F41

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper develops a New Keynesian model with sovereign default risk (NK-Default). We focus
on the interaction between monetary policy, conducted according to an interest rate rule that
targets inflation, and external defaultable debt issued by the government. Monetary policy and
default risk interact since both affect domestic consumption, production, and inflation. We find
that default risk amplifies monetary frictions and generates a tension for monetary policy, which
increases the volatility of inflation and nominal rates. These monetary frictions in turn discipline
sovereign borrowing, slowing down debt accumulation and lowering sovereign spreads. Our
framework replicates the positive comovements of spreads with nominal domestic rates and
inflation, a salient feature of emerging markets data, and can rationalize the experience of Brazil
during the 2015 downturn, with high inflation, nominal rates, and spreads.


Cristina Arellano                                Gabriel P. Mihalache
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis              S633, Social and Behavioral Sciences Bld.
Research Department                              Department of Economics
90 Hennepin Avenue                               Stony Brook University
Minneapolis, MN 55401                            Stony Brook, NY 11794
and NBER                                         gabriel.mihalache@stonybrook.edu
arellano.cristina@gmail.com

Yan Bai
Department of Economics
University of Rochester
216 Harkness Hall
Rochester, NY 14627
and NBER
yanbai06@gmail.com
1     Introduction
Inflation and sovereign risk are important markers for the credibility of governments in emerging
markets. Since the early 2000s, following the steps of advanced economies, many central banks in
emerging markets have achieved independence from the central government and have increased
their credibility by conquering their historically high inflation. Monetary policy in these countries
now largely consists of setting nominal interest rates to target inflation, and the toolkit for central
banks is the New Keynesian monetary model with pricing frictions. These models analyze the
transmission of interest rate policies to inflation and output but are silent on the interactions
with sovereign risk because they have been formulated for advanced open economies, where
sovereign risk is not a primary concern.1 This paper develops a New Keynesian model with
sovereign default and analyzes the interactions between monetary policy and sovereign default
risk. We find that the efficacy of interest rates rules in managing inflation depends on sovereign
risk.
    In our framework default risk shapes monetary distortions and affects monetary policy, which
is conducted according to a nominal interest rate rule that targets inflation. High default risk
leads to low domestic consumption and production as well as high inflation, creating a tension
for monetary policy and resulting in an amplification of the volatility of inflation and nominal
rates. Monetary policy affects in turn default risk because the presence of monetary distortions
curbs government borrowing and leads to lower sovereign spreads. Our NK-Default framework
combines the workhorse New Keynesian monetary model of Galí and Monacelli (2005) with a
standard sovereign default model and can deliver the positive correlations of sovereign spreads
with inflation and nominal rates, which we document as a hallmark of emerging markets data.
    The small open economy model we consider consists of households, firms, a monetary
authority, and a government that borrows internationally. Households value consumption of do-
mestic and foreign goods. They supply labor to intermediate goods firms that produce domestic
varieties. The intermediate goods firms are subject to productivity shocks and face frictions in
setting their prices, in the tradition of Rotemberg (1982). Final goods firms are competitive and
use intermediate goods varieties to produce domestic output, which is consumed by domestic
households and exported to the rest of the world. The monetary authority sets nominal interest
rates in local currency using an interest rate rule to target domestic inflation. As in standard New
Keynesian models, monetary policy and firms' pricing frictions generate monetary frictions,
which result in volatile inflation and inefficient production.
    The government borrows internationally by issuing long-term bonds denominated in foreign
currency and transfers the proceeds from these operations to households. The government lacks
commitment to repay its debt and can choose to default. Default is associated with a decline in
productivity, which reduces consumption and production and increases inflation. The price of
bonds compensates risk-neutral lenders for the risk of default. In this environment, equilibrium
default events lead to time-varying default risk and sovereign spreads.
    Default risk in our model amplifies monetary frictions and makes it harder for the monetary
    1 For example, the influential paper by Galí and Monacelli (2005) analyzes monetary policy in the context of
perfect financial markets.



                                                       1
authority to stabilize inflation. We measure these frictions with inflation deviations from tar-
get and a monetary wedge, recovered from the markup in the New Keynesian Phillips Curve
(NKPC). The new insight from our model is that inflation and the monetary wedge also in-
crease with default risk, a mechanism we label default amplification. High default risk triggers
expectations of future high inflation and recession, and results in high inflation, recession, and a
worsening of the monetary wedge now. High expected inflation tends to increase current infla-
tion through the NKPC and low expected consumption lowers current consumption through
intertemporal consumption-smoothing. Default risk matters for monetary outcomes.
    We consider a Markov problem for the government, which internalizes how its borrowing
and default decisions affect the private economy, the monetary policy response, and the resulting
monetary frictions. The additional costs from high default risk imposed by monetary frictions
result in borrowing wedges in the optimal borrowing condition for the government. Borrowing
wedges are positive when monetary wedges are positive and expectations of future inflation are
high. In these states, they reduce sovereign borrowing incentives and discipline the government's
default risk, a mechanism labeled monetary discipline. Lowering debt is useful in our model
because the government overborrows and experiences too frequent costly defaults.2
    We establish that monetary policy interacts with sovereign risk both theoretically, in simpli-
fied versions of our model, and quantitatively, in our general model parameterized to Brazil. We
also find that these interactions are robust to alternative interest rate rules and to the currency
denomination of sovereign debt.
    Our theoretical results highlight the tension that default risk presents for monetary policy and
identify the mechanisms for default amplification and monetary discipline. We first characterize
the default amplification result with simplified preferences that are separable and quasi-linear
with respect to foreign goods consumption. We show that if default events are associated with
high inflation and low consumption, high default risk leads to increases in inflation and a
worsening of the monetary wedge, creating a tension for monetary policy. Following the interest
rate rule, nominal rates rise and mute inflation but further increase the monetary wedge. We then
move to a two-period example with perfectly rigid prices and characterize these interactions in
closed form. Here we establish that default events are indeed associated with low consumption,
and high default risk decreases domestic consumption and exports and raises the monetary
wedge. We also show that these monetary frictions reduce government borrowing and default
risk.
    Our NK-Default quantitative model produces patterns for spreads, inflation, and nominal
domestic rates that resemble the data of emerging markets. We parameterize our model by
setting parameters controlling default, the interest rate rule, and the volatility of productivity
shocks such that our model replicates the volatility of sovereign spreads, inflation, and output in
Brazil. The model can closely match the target moments and contains additional implications
that are consistent with the data. Our model delivers a strong positive comovement of spreads
with nominal rates and inflation as in the data.3 The model is further consistent with the
   2 Hatchondo  et al. (2016) find that sovereign default models with long-term defaultable bonds give the govern-
ment incentives to overborrow and dilute existing bondholders, and that such dilution incentives are large and
important for explaining the sizable spreads in emerging economies.
   3 We document that the positive correlations of spreads with inflation and nominal domestic rates are a robust



                                                        2
evidence on comovements with spreads: a negative correlation with output, and positive ones
with the trade balance and the nominal exchange rate, with magnitudes similar to the data. Our
model also generates comovements of these variables with output present in emerging markets:
output is negatively correlated with inflation, nominal rates, the trade balance, and the nominal
exchange rate.
    To measure the interactions between monetary and default risk frictions, we compare
our benchmark model with two reference models: an NK-Reference monetary model without
sovereign default risk, similar to Galí and Monacelli (2005), and a real Default-Reference model in
the tradition of the sovereign default literature, as in Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), but with
two goods and production.4 The amplifying effects of sovereign risk on monetary policy lead to
higher volatility of inflation and nominal rates in our benchmark NK-Default model, relative to
the NK-Reference model. Nominal domestic rates are almost twice as volatile because of default
risk. Yet, the disciplining effects of monetary frictions lower equilibrium spreads. The mean
spread in our benchmark model is about .5% lower than in the Default-Reference model because
the monetary frictions in the NK-Default model slow down debt accumulation. These reference
models also fail to deliver the empirically strong positive comovement of spreads with inflation
and nominal rates.
    We use an event analysis to further quantify the interactions between monetary frictions and
default risk. We compare the time paths predicted by our model with the event in Brazil around
the 2015 recession and evaluate a counterfactual monetary policy scenario. During the event,
output fell in Brazil by about 6%, inflation and the nominal domestic rate increased by about 4%,
and spreads increased by about 3%. We apply our model to this event by feeding a sequence
of productivity shocks to reproduce the dynamics of output. Our model delivers time paths
for inflation, nominal rates, spreads, and nominal exchange rates that resemble those in Brazil.
A decline in productivity in our model leads to an increase in the probability of default and
hence an increase in sovereign spreads. Inflation rises because lower productivity increases the
unit costs of production and because of the rise in default risk. This increase in inflation causes
a depreciation of nominal exchange rates. Nominal interest rates increase as monetary policy
tightens, in response to the high inflation. We then perform a counterfactual experiment that
considers looser monetary policy during the event. In the counterfactual, output decreases less
but inflation and spreads increase substantially more. We infer that the increase in nominal rates
in Brazil during the event not only controlled inflation but also moderated the debt crisis.
    We evaluate the robustness of our results in three extended models. In the first extension,
we change the currency denomination of sovereign debt to local currency. We find that the
amplifying effects of default risk on monetary policy are robust. The volatilities of inflation
and nominal domestic rates in this model with default risk are quite similar to those in our
benchmark model and higher than in the NK-Reference model. Sovereign spreads, however, are
lower in this model relative to the benchmark (and much lower than in the Default-Reference
model) because high depreciation rates in recessions make local currency debt a better hedge.
feature in 10 emerging markets with central banks that target inflation.
    4 Several studies have incorporated multiple goods and production in real models of sovereign default, such as

Mendoza and Yue (2012) and Arellano et al. (2018).



                                                        3
The second and third extensions consider alternative interest rate rules. We evaluate a rule that
places more weight on inflation deviations as well as a rule that adds an output gap term. Our
results on the interactions between monetary policy and sovereign risk are unaltered. These rules
produce less volatile inflation and nominal domestic rates than the benchmark and comparable
spreads.
    Finally, we evaluate the welfare implications of the benchmark model, reference models,
and extended models. Our NK-Default model has two sources of inefficiencies arising from
monetary and default risk frictions. A comparison of welfare across these models is shaped
by how the details of the sovereign debt market and monetary rules interact with these two
frictions. Across the models with default risk, we find that welfare can be higher with monetary
frictions than without monetary frictions. In two specifications, when the interest rate rule
weights inflation heavily and when debt is denominated in local currency, welfare is higher with
monetary frictions. The combination of lower spreads and low volatility of inflation in these
monetary economies dominates the higher spreads and nil volatility of inflation in the economy
without monetary frictions.

Related Literature Our project builds on two distinct literature on emerging markets business
cycles: the work on sovereign default and the work on New Keynesian monetary policy. We
construct a quantitative sovereign default model, in the tradition of Eaton and Gersovitz (1981),
as in Aguiar and Gopinath (2006) and Arellano (2008) but with long-term debt, as in Hatchondo
and Martinez (2009) and Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012). We expand this framework to
incorporate production and an import-export structure. Our domestic monetary environment is
close to the workhorse framework of Galí and Monacelli (2005). One methodological difference
between our project and standard monetary models is that we use global methods rather than
local approximations around the steady state to compute the model. Furthermore, we focus on
a simple interest rate rule that captures features of the inflation-targeting policies in emerging
markets and do not address optimal monetary policy, along the lines of Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe
(2007) or Corsetti et al. (2010).
    The literature on sovereign default has recently turned to questions raised by nominal
rigidities. Several papers have considered environments with defaultable sovereign debt and
downward rigidity of nominal wages. Na et al. (2018) first introduced this friction in a model
of sovereign default and emphasize that exchange rate pegs are costly because they prevent
devaluations that would adjust real wages to their efficient level. Optimal policy in their
environment delivers the joint incidence of devaluations and defaults. Bianchi et al. (2018) study
the role of downward rigidity of nominal wages for procyclical fiscal policies, which result from
a tradeoff between fiscal policy stimulating demand but possibly increasing default risk. Bianchi
and Mondragon (2018) find the incidence of self-fulfilling debt crises for economies that lack
monetary independence increases when nominal wages are rigid downward. Our project shares
the emphasis in these papers on the interaction between sovereign risk and monetary frictions
but differs in important ways. First, price frictions in our model arise from optimal price setting
by firms which result in a standard New Keynesian Phillips Curve, where expectations of future
inflation matter for current inflation and output. These papers, in contrast, directly impose that


                                                4
nominal wages are downwardly rigid and abstract from the role of inflation expectations in
affecting current inflation and output. Second, our modeling of monetary policy focuses on a
positive theory that resembles the practice of many emerging markets central banks, which set
interest rates to target inflation.5
    A large literature, following Calvo (1988), studies the incentives of governments to default
on debt that is denominated in local currency with inflation. Aguiar et al. (2013) analyze the
tradeoffs generated by monetary policy credibility in a dynamic continuous-time model of self-
fulfilling default crises and show that monetary policy credibility helps suppress self-fulfilling
debt crises but hinders the benefits of state-contingent payments induced by inflation.6 Hur
et al. (2018) and Sunder-Plassmann (2018) also study the interaction between inflation and
defaultable debt denominated in local currency. The former considers exogenous inflation, for
given covariance structures with fundamentals, whereas the latter builds on a cash-and-credit
model with constant money supply. Nuno and Thomas (2019) build a continuous-time model
with local currency debt and default and a discretionary choice of inflation, whereas Engel and
Park (2019) analyze how default and inflation incentives shape the composition of sovereign
debt between local and foreign currency. In contrast with these papers, we emphasize the joint
dynamics of endogenous inflation and sovereign risk, with a monetary authority that uses
interest rate rules, hence abstracting from the incentives of using monetary policy to inflate away
the debt. We view this work as complementary to ours and important especially for emerging
markets that have not been able to achieve central bank independence.
    Finally, our model's implications for the terms of trade, nominal and real exchange rates,
and government borrowing raise a natural comparison with the work on capital controls and
exchange rates in small open economies, such as Farhi and Werning (2012), Fanelli (2017), and
Devereux et al. (2019).


2     Model
We consider a small open economy composed of households, final good producers, intermediate
goods firms, a monetary authority, and a fiscal government. There are three types of goods:
final domestic goods, domestic intermediate varieties, and foreign imported goods. The final
good is produced using all varieties of differentiated intermediate goods and consumed by both
domestic and foreign households. Each intermediate good variety is produced with labor.
    Foreign demand for domestic goods (export demand) is given by
                                                                -
                                                        Ptd
                                               Xt =                 ,
                                                         t Pt
    5 The statutory objectives, given by the legislature to central banks in inflation-targeting emerging markets,
center on controlling inflation. For example, the only objective for the Monetary Policy Committee of the Central
Bank of Brazil is the achievement of the inflation targets set by the National Monetary Council.
    6 Concerning the multiplicity of equilibria and the role inflation can play in selecting among them, Corsetti and

Dedola (2016) focus on unconventional monetary policy whereas Bacchetta et al. (2018) analyze how interest rate
rules can be used to prevent the self-fulfilling crises in the environment of Lorenzoni and Werning (2019).



                                                         5
where Ptd is the price of domestic goods in local currency, Pt the price of foreign goods in foreign
currency,  the level of overall foreign demand,  the trade elasticity, and  t the nominal exchange
rate. An increase in  t represents a depreciation of the home currency. We assume that the law of
                                                                                      f
one price holds, so we can write the price of the foreign good in local currency as Pt =  t Pt . The
terms of trade et equal
                                                 f
                                               P       t P
                                          et = td = dt .                                          (1)
                                               Pt      Pt
Hence, the foreign demand for domestic goods is a function of the terms of trade and the level
of overall foreign demand  :
                                               
                                        Xt = e t  .                                        (2)
We normalize the foreign price Pt to one in all periods.


2.1   Households
                                                                              f
Identical households consume domestic goods Ct and foreign goods Ct and supply labor Nt .
Their preferences are given by
                                            
                                             t u(Ct ,
                                                           f
                                       E0               Ct , Nt ),                                 (3)
                                            t =0
               f
where u(Ct , Ct , Nt )
                     is the per-period utility function and  is the discount factor of households.
   Taking prices as given, households choose consumption, labor supply, and holdings of
domestic bonds Btd . These domestic bonds are denominated in local currency and can only be

traded by domestic households. Households own firms and receive their profits t . They also
earn labor income Wt Nt and receive government transfers Tt . Their budget constraint is given
by
                                          f f
                     Ptd Ct + (1 +  f ) Pt Ct + qd  d             d
                                                 t Bt+1  Wt Nt + Bt + t + Tt                   (4)
where qd
       t is the nominal price of domestic discount bonds and  f is a constant consumption tax
that households pay on imports. We can characterize households' choices with the following
optimality conditions:
                                       u N ,t
                                      -         = wt ,                                             (5)
                                        u C ,t
                                       u C f ,t
                                                =(1 +  f )et ,                                     (6)
                                       u C ,t
                                                         u C ,t +1
                                        u C ,t = i t  Et           .                               (7)
                                                           t +1

The real wage is wt = Wt / Ptd , the gross domestic goods inflation, hereafter inflation, is t =
Ptd / Ptd                                                                                           d
        -1 , and the nominal domestic interest rate is the yield of the discount bond price it  1/ qt .




                                                   6
2.2     Final Goods Producers
The final good is produced using a unit measure of differentiated intermediate goods y jt , j  [0, 1],
under perfect competition,
                                                                                     
                                                                  1        -1        -1
                                                                           
                                                    Yt =              y jt dj              ,                           (8)
                                                              0
where  is the elasticity of substitution between intermediate goods. The optimization problem
of the final goods producers yields the standard demand function
                                                                                -
                                                                      p jt
                                                     y jt =                         Yt ,                               (9)
                                                                      Ptd
where p jt is the price of intermediate good j at time t. The price of domestic goods Ptd is the price
                                  1
                   1    1-       1- 
index   Ptd   =   0    p jt dj         .


2.3     Intermediate Goods Producers
Each differentiated intermediate good is produced with labor n jt , using a constant returns to
scale production function with productivity zt :
                                                           y jt = zt n jt .                                           (10)
Productivity depend on the aggregate shock z          ~t and also on the credit standing of the government
t such that zt = z(z        ~t , t ). As we see below, when credit standing is good productivity is equal
to the shock and when credit standing is bad productivity is lower.
      Intermediate goods firms are monopolistically competitive and set the prices for their prod-
ucts, taking as given the demand (9). These firms, however, face price-setting frictions in that
they have to pay a quadratic adjustment cost when they change their prices away from the target
inflation rate  , as in Rotemberg (1982). Taking as given the wage Wt and the final good price
Ptd , an intermediate firm j chooses labor and its price to maximize the present discounted value
of profits,
                                                                                          
                                                                                    2
                                                                          p jt
                                                                                          
                 max E0  Qt,0 p jt y jt - (1 -  )Wt n jt -                             d
                                                                               -  Pt Yt ,
               {n jt , p jt }      t
                                                                    2 p jt-1              

subject to the production function (10). Firms discount profits using the stochastic discount
                                           u   Pd
factor of households, Qt,0 = t u C,t P0d , and get a labor subsidy  .7 The first-order condition for
                                            C,0 t
each firm, after imposing symmetry across all firms ( p jt = Ptd ), results in
                  wt   -1 1                                                     uC,t+1 Yt+1
      (1 -  )        =   +                  (  t -  )  t - Et                                (  t +1 -  )  t +1   .   (11)
                  zt                                                             uC,t Yt
This equation is a standard New Keynesian Phillips Curve (NKPC) that relates inflation to a
measure of contemporaneous unit cost, (1 -  )wt /zt , and expected inflation.
   7 We  follow the standard practice in the New Keynesian literature by introducing a constant subsidy designed
to alleviate average inefficiencies induced by market power.


                                                                      7
2.4    The Monetary Authority
The monetary authority conducts policy using a nominal interest rate rule. The nominal domestic
rate it depends on a long-run value i and responds to the deviation of inflation from target, t
relative to  , and to monetary shocks mt such that
                                                         t    P
                                                it = i            mt .                                           (12)
                                                         
In our benchmark model the interest rate rule targets domestic goods inflation.8 Later we will
also analyze a rule that adds an output gap term.


2.5    Government and External Debt
The fiscal government engages in international borrowing using long-term bonds denominated
in foreign currency and can default on its debt. To keep long-term debt tractable, we consider
random maturity bonds, as in Hatchondo and Martinez (2009). The bond is a perpetuity that
specifies a price qt and a quantity t such that the government receives qt t units of foreign
currency in period t. The following period, a fraction  of the debt matures and the government's
debt is the sum of legacy debt that has not matured (1 - ) Bt and the new issuance t such that
Bt+1 = (1 - ) Bt + t . Each unit of debt calls for a payment of r  +  every period.9
    The government can default on its debt, and depending on its default history, it is in good
or bad credit standing, which is encoded in t . When the government repays the debt, Dt = 0,
credit standing is good t = 0 and the government borrows and decides on the level of debt
next period Bt+1 . When the government defaults, Dt = 1, it avoids paying the debt but receives
a direct utility cost t and a temporary bad credit standing, t = 1. The utility costs t are i.i.d.
enforcement shocks that control the enforceability of debt. With a bad credit, the government loses
access to financial markets and productivity is depressed z(z     ~ t ,  t = 1)  z ~t . A government in
bad credit standing, regains good credit with probability , and reenters financial markets with
zero debt obligations.
    The government transfers Tt to households which equal the net receipts from its operations.
Its budget constraint in local currency conditional on having a good credit standing and repaying
its debt is
                                                                                  f f
                   Tt + Wt Nt =  t [qt ( Bt+1 - (1 - ) Bt ) - (r  + ) Bt ] +  f Pt Ct ,            (13)
where the net capital inflow from debt operations is multiplied by the nominal exchange rate  t
to convert it to domestic currency. When the government is in bad credit standing, its budget
constraint is as in (13) with Bt = Bt+1 = 0. The tax rates for labor and foreign goods consumption,
 and  f , are set as in standard New Keynesian models, to correct the markup in goods markets
                                                                                                            -1
and allow for a static optimal tariff on imports in steady state, such that (1 -  ) =                            and
   8 We  focus on a rule that targets domestic inflation because Galí and Monacelli (2005) find this rule most closely
approximates the optimal policy in their setting and due to computational limitations. Targeting a consumer price
inflation would require keeping track of the previous period's terms of trade as an additional state variable.
    9 We normalize the debt service payment of the bond to r  +  so that the default-free bond price for this

instrument equals 1.


                                                          8
              10
(1 +  f ) =  - 1 . Using the definition of the terms of trade (1), the government budget constraint
in units of domestic goods is
                                                                                             f
                     tt +  wt Nt = et [qt ( Bt+1 - (1 - ) Bt ) - (r  + ) Bt ] +  f et Ct .                      (14)

     The government's objective is to maximize the present discounted value of the flow utility
                                                                                      f
derived from consumption and labor by households, E0  t
                                                      g u (Ct , Ct , Nt ). The government's
                                                                      t =0
discount factor  g can differ from that of the households, . The government borrows from
competitive risk-neutral international lenders that discount the future at a foreign currency rate
r  . The bond price is such that they break even in expectation, thus receiving compensation for
any expected losses from default:

                                    1
                            qt =       
                                        Et [(1 - Dt+1 )(r  +  + (1 - )qt+1 )] .                                 (15)
                                   1+r
In states where the government does not default, Dt+1 = 0, each unit of the discount bond
makes a payment r  + , and the fraction that does not mature has market value (1 - )qt+1 . In
states of default, the associated payoff for lenders is zero. We define the government spread as
the difference in the yield-to-maturity of the bond and the international rate r  , such that

                                                                  1
                                        spreadt = (r  + )            -1 .
                                                                  qt

3      Equilibrium
We consider a Markov equilibrium where the government takes into account that its states and
default and borrowing policies affect the allocations of the private equilibrium and the monetary
authority's response. The exogenous states are the productivity and monetary shocks s = {z  ~ , m },
and the enforcement shock, . The endogenous states for the private and monetary equilibrium
are the level of debt B, the credit standing , and borrowing B . Recall that the government
chooses borrowing B only when it has good credit.
   When the government enters the period with good credit standing -1 = 0 and has en-
dogenous state of debt B, it chooses whether to default or repay the debt. The default decision
determines the end-of-the-period credit standing . If it enters the period with bad credit
-1 = 1, the government draws a random variable  following a Bernoulli distribution. With
probability ,  = 1 and the government regains good credit  = 0 if it chooses not to default.
The evolution of credit standing is given by
                                         
                                         0 if (-1 = 0 and D = 0) or
                                         
                    ( s ,  , B ,  -1 ) =      (-1 = 1 and  = 1 and D = 0)                      (16)
                                         1 otherwise .

    10 Such
          tariff neutralizes the potential incentive of the government to use debt to exert market power with respect
to the downward-sloping demand for the country's exports. See for example Corsetti and Pesenti (2001) for details.


                                                         9
   The private and monetary equilibrium depends on the shocks, the endogenous state for
debt B, the credit standing , and the choice for borrowing B , because these variables affect
government transfers and productivity. Let S = {s, B, , B } be the end-of-period state. The
private and monetary equilibrium also depends on the government policy functions for future
default D = HD (s ,  , B ), borrowing B = HB (s , B ), and the corresponding credit standing
 (s ,  , B , ), because of the forward looking nature of the equilibrium.
Definition 1. Private and Monetary Equilibrium. Given state {S}, the government policy functions
for default HD (s ,  , B ), borrowing HB (s , B ), the evolution of credit standing  (s ,  , B , ), and
the transfer function t(S) consistent with the government budget constraint, the symmetric private and
monetary equilibrium consists of
    · Households' policies for domestic goods consumption C (S), foreign goods consumption C f (S),
      labor N (S), and domestic debt Bd (S),

    · Intermediate and final goods firms' policies for labor n(S), inflation  (S), and final domestic goods'
      output Y (S) and exports X (S),

    · The wage w(S), nominal domestic rate i (S), and the terms of trade e(S)
such that: (i) the policies for households satisfy their budget constraint and optimality conditions (5),
(6), (7); (ii) the policies of intermediate and final goods firms satisfy their optimization problem (8), (9),
(10), and (11); (iii) export demand (2) is satisfied; (iv) the nominal domestic rate satisfies the monetary
authority's interest rate rule (12); and (v) labor, domestic goods, and domestic bond markets clear, and the
balance of payments condition is satisfied.
   The labor market clears so that labor demanded by firms equals labor supplied by households
n = N . Domestic bonds are in zero net supply in the economy, reflected in the market clearing
condition Bd = 0. The resource constraint for domestic goods requires that domestic final goods'
output equals domestic consumption and exports net of the adjustment costs,
                                                 
                            C ( S ) + X ( S ) + (  -  )2 Y ( S ) = Y ( S )                  (17)
                                                 2
where aggregate output Y (S) = z(z   ~ ,  ) N ( S ).
   The balance of payments condition requires that net imports equal net capital inflows, which
here equal the government transfer plus the labor subsidy,
                           e(S)C f (S)(1 +  f ) - X (S) = t(S) +  w(S) N (S).                            (18)

The Monetary Wedge. The presence of price rigidities leads to inefficient use of labor, as
monopolistic firms set time-varying markups. We will make use of a monetary wedge to measure
these distortions in production, defined as
                                                        ~,  )
                                                      z(z          ~,  ) uC ( S )
                                                                 z(z
                         1 + monetary wedge                   =-                  .                      (19)
                                                       w(S)          u N (S)
This wedge captures deviations from production efficiency and depends on the dynamics of
current and future inflation, as seen in the NKPC equation (11). Production efficiency requires
that the marginal product of labor z equals the wage w, which is the marginal rate of substitution
between labor and consumption for households -u N /uC .

                                                     10
3.1   Government Recursive Formulation
We now describe the recursive problem of the government, which borrows long-term bonds
in international financial markets and can default. The bond price, q(s, B ), is an endogenous
function that compensates lenders for default risk. It depends on the shocks s and the borrowing
level B , because these affect the probability to default. The bond price schedule that satisfies the
break-even condition for lenders depends on the default and borrowing policy functions of the
government,

                             1
            q ( s, B ) =         E (1 - HD (s ,  , B ))(r  +  + (1 - )q(s , HB (s , B )) .              (20)
                           1 + r
    By consolidating the equilibrium conditions and the government budget constraint, the
private and monetary allocations can be summarized with the decision rules for domestic and
foreign goods consumption {C (S), C f (S)}, labor N (S), inflation  (S), the nominal domestic
rate i (S), and the terms of trade e(S), which satisfy the following system of dynamic equations:
                                                       
                           C (S) + e(S)  = 1 -           (  ( S ) -  )2 z ( z
                                                                            ~,  ) N ( S )               (21)
                                                       2

              e(S)  = e(S)[C f (S) + (1 - )((r  + ) B - q(s, B )( B - (1 - ) B))]                       (22)

                                            uC f (S )   
                                                      =    e(S)                                         (23)
                                            uC (S )     -1

                              -1              u N (S)                     
      ( (S) -  )  (S) =               -                    -1 +                         F ( s, B ,  )   (24)
                                            ~,  ) uC ( S )
                                          z(z                             ~,  ) N ( S )
                                                                uC (S )z (z

                                        u C ( S ) = i ( S )  M ( s, B ,  )                              (25)

                                                                 P
                                                          (S)
                                           i (S) = i                 m,                                 (26)
                                                          
where the functions F and M are the expectations in the firms' pricing condition (NKPC) and
the households' Euler condition given by

                      F ( s, B ,  ) =E z ( z
                                           ~,  ) N ( S ) uC ( S )  ( S ) -   ( S ) ,                    (27)
                                        uC (S )
                     M ( s, B ,  ) =E           .                                                       (28)
                                         (S )

The future state S = (s , B ,  (s ,  , B , ), HB (s , B )) depends on the future government poli-
cies and the evolution of credit standing given by (16). Note that when  = 1, the expectations
on the right-hand-side of (27) and (28) also include the probability of regaining a good credit .
    The equilibrium conditions (21) to (26) are analogous to those arising in the standard New
Keynesian small open economy of Galí and Monacelli (2005). The difference in our model is that
the government understands that its choice of default D and borrowing B affect the state S and

                                                        11
the equilibrium. Moreover, the government's choices determine next period's state variables,
which means that future allocations and prices also depend on the government's current choices.
These future effects are encoded in the functions q(s, B ), F (s, B , ), and M (s, B , ).
   We can now set up the recursive problem of the government. Let V (s, , B) be the value with
the option to default such that

                     V (s, , B) = max           ( 1 - D )W ( s , B ) + D W d ( s ) -    ,                (29)
                                      D {0,1}


where W (s, B) is the value from repaying debt, and W d (s) -  is the value from defaulting.
Specifically, the value of repaying is

                    W (s, B) = max u(C (S), C f (S), N (S)) +  g EV (s ,  , B )                          (30)
                                  B

subject to the private and monetary equilibrium, with S = {s, B,  = 0, B } and characterized
by conditions (21) through (26), and also subject to the break-even condition for the bond price
schedule (20).
   If the government chooses to default, the debt B is eliminated, productivity is reduced, and
the government suffers the utility cost . After default, with probability , the government
regains access to the international financial markets and re-enters with zero debt. The defaulting
value W d net of the enforcement cost is given by

          W d (s) = u(C (S), C f (S), N (S)) +  g E V (s ,  , B = 0) + (1 - )W d (s )                    (31)

subject to the private and monetary equilibrium with S = {s, B = 0,  = 1, B = 0}.
   It is convenient to write the default decision of the government as a cutoff rule based on
the default cost . Given that default costs are i.i.d., the default decision D (s, , B) can be
characterized by a cutoff cost  (s, B) at which the repayment value is equal to the default value
such that
                                    ( s, B ) = W d ( s ) - W ( s, B ),                       (32)
and the sovereign is indifferent between the two options. Then D (s, , B) = 1, whenever
   (s, B) and zero otherwise. Let  be the cumulative distribution of , such that default
probability given s equals ( (s, B)).
   We now define the recursive equilibrium for the economy.

Definition 2. Equilibrium. Given the aggregate state {s, , B}, a recursive equilibrium consists of
government policies for default D (s, , B) and borrowing B (s, B), and government value functions
V (s, , B), W (s, B), and W d (s) such that

   · Taking as given future policy and value functions HD (s ,  , B ), HB (s , B ), V (s ,  , B ), W (s , B ),
     and W d (s ), government policies for default and borrowing and value functions solve its optimiza-
     tion problem.

   · Government policies and values are consistent with future policies and values.

                                                       12
3.2     Government Borrowing
To illustrate the forces shaping debt accumulation, we manipulate the government's problem
and derive its optimality condition. In this derivation we have assumed that all functions in
the government problem are differentiable.11 Optimal foreign borrowing satisfies the following
Euler equation

                 dq                          X     C
      uC f q +        B - (1 -  ) B     (1 - m ) - m
                 dB                                                                                          (33)
                                                                                               X
                                         =  g E (1 - D ) u C f r +  + (1 -  ) q            1 - m        .

which relates the marginal utility of foreign goods consumption across periods to the bond
price schedule q(s, B ), future default and borrowing decisions D and B , future bond prices
q(s , B ), and the borrowing wedges m   X and  C . Appendix A contains the explicit derivation of
                                              m
this equation.
    The borrowing wedges m     X and  C arise only due to monetary frictions and capture the
                                       m
Lagrange multipliers associated with the NKPC and domestic Euler equations. These wedges
depend on B and are present in this Euler equation because the government internalizes the
consequences of its borrowing and default decisions for the monetary frictions. When the NKPC
and domestic Euler are slack, these multipliers are zero and so are the borrowing wedges.
    Equation (33) reflects the government's borrowing incentives, which are affected by three
major forces. The first is the incentive to smooth and tilt the time path of foreign goods con-
sumption. This force is present in standard models without default risk, like Galí and Monacelli
(2005), which exhibit the following undistorted international Euler equation

                                 q u C f =  g E u C f (r  +  + (1 -  ) q ) .                                 (34)

Here, borrowing smooths the marginal utility of foreign goods consumption against shocks and
achieves the right tilting of consumption over time, given q and  g .
   The second force affecting borrowing is the endogenous bond price schedule q and the
presence of legacy long-term debt (1 - ) B as emphasized by Arellano and Ramanarayanan
                                                                                       q
(2012). Bond prices decrease with borrowing due to the increased risk of default,  B  0,
and a higher legacy debt (1 - ) B incentivizes borrowing because lower prices dilute this
        q
debt, -  B (1 - ) B  0. Such debt dilution incentives leads to overborrowing, as established
by Hatchondo et al. (2016). A lower discount for the government,  g < , also leads to
overborrowing as discussed by Aguiar et al. (2019).12
   The third force works through the borrowing wedges m    X and  C and is unique to our model
                                                                  m
with sovereign risk and monetary frictions. Positive borrowing wedges lower incentives to
borrow. The borrowing wedges tend to be large when the monetary wedge or inflation is high.
As we explore below, when default is likely, the expectations terms in the NKPC and domestic
   11 We  do not require this assumption for the computation of the model, nor do we employ the Euler equation
derived in this section for the numerical implementation.
   12 Cuadra and Sapriza (2008) and Hatchondo et al. (2009) model such additional discounting as arising from high

political turnover.


                                                       13
Euler equations tend to be high, which depress activity and lead to a high monetary wedge and
high inflation. As a consequence, the borrowing wedges are high, giving the government an
incentive to reduce B . Lowering B reduces default risk, which lowers the monetary wedge and
inflation. An additional benefit of reduced borrowing is that it leads to a depreciation of the
terms of trade and a boost in exports which lowers the monetary wedge. In the next section we
provide a sharper characterization of these interactions of monetary frictions and default risk
and relate them to our two main mechanisms, default amplification and monetary discipline.


4      Interactions of Monetary Frictions with Default Risk
This section contains theoretical results on the interactions of monetary frictions and default
risk in simplified versions of our framework. We show that default risk creates a tension for the
monetary policy rule between costly inflation and inefficient production. In response to high
default risk, an interest rate rule that targets inflation is unable to achieve both inflation stability
and production efficiency. We also show that default risk amplifies monetary frictions and
leads to larger monetary wedges. These monetary frictions in turn discipline the government's
borrowing and lower default risk.


4.1     Monetary Tradeoffs with Default Risk13
In our environment rising default risk generates a tradeoff between costly inflation variability
and inefficient production. As a consequence, aggregate responses are amplified by the presence
of default risk, resulting in more volatile inflation, nominal domestic rate, and the monetary
wedge. To illustrate this tradeoff, we revisit the key equilibrium NKPC pricing condition:

                                    -1           uN        
                    ( -  )  =                -       -1 +     E Y uC  -   .                                     (35)
                                                 zuC      YuC

Firms increase inflation when the monetary wedge is low (-u N /zuC is high) or future expected
inflation  and marginal utility of consumption uC are high.14 We want to analyze how an
increase in default risk impacts inflation incentives. Recall that during a default event, inflation
is high and consumption is low due to low productivity. Hence, if the risk of a default next
period is high, expectations for future inflation and the marginal utility of consumption are high,
which increases the expectation term of the NKPC. Such rise in future expectations from high
default risk gives firms incentives to raise current inflation.
    In response to these inflationary pressures, the monetary policy rule calls for higher interest
rates, tight monetary policy. These high nominal domestic rates, however, depress consumption
further through the domestic Euler equation, which reduces production and increases the
monetary wedge. Therefore, high default risk leads to inefficient low production, high monetary
wedge, and muted inflation due to the tight monetary policy.
    13 This subsection draws heavily from the insightful discussion of Luigi Bocola.
    14 We find that uC and Y tend to move in opposite directions but that the net effect is dominated by the marginal
utility term and that the covariance between Y uC and  tend to be positive.


                                                         14
   To understand the tradeoff confronting monetary policy, it is useful to consider a case where
nominal interest rates do not respond to inflation. Faced with high default risk that increases
expectations of future inflation, firms would increase current inflation. The unresponsive
monetary policy would support production and dampen the increase in the monetary wedge.
With this counterfactual monetary response, improvements in production efficiency come at the
cost of additional inflation. Next, we characterize formally this tension between rising inflation
and widening monetary wedges, generated by default risk.
   We simplify the model by assuming that preferences are quasi-linear in foreign goods
consumption and are given by
                                                                            1+ 1
                                                                     N 
                             u(C, C f , N ) =  log C + (1 -  )C f -        .                                (36)
                                                                    1 + 1/

We evaluate the responses of the model to an increase in default risk Es ( (s , B )) from
higher government borrowing B .15 With these preferences consumption of foreign goods fully
adjusts to accommodate net capital inflows from debt operations. Higher borrowing only affects
the private and monetary equilibrium through its impact on default risk, which changes the
expectation terms in the pricing condition (24) and the domestic Euler (25). Recall, that these
expectation terms are the functions F (s, B , ) and M(s, B , ) defined in (27) and (28). We
assume that F (s, B , ) and M (s, B , ) are differentiable and increase with borrowing, and then
analyze how changes in borrowing affect the equilibrium using a first-order Taylor expansion.

Assumption 1.  F (s, B , )/ B  0 and  M(s, B , )/ B  0 , and the parameters satisfy the
restriction a0  ( M (s, B , )/ B )/( F (s, B , )/ B ), with a0 =
                                                                   
                                                                 1
                                                                                 where
                                                                            ( -1) 1+  (C +(1-C )) i 
C is the share of domestic consumption in output at the approximating point in the Taylor expansion.

    These assumptions imply that expected inflation and marginal utility of consumption rise
with default risk as B rises. These properties, that hold in our quantitative model, feed through
the equilibrium and affect current allocations and prices. The following proposition characterizes
up to first-order the effects on default risk, inflation, the nominal domestic rate, and the monetary
wedge from increased borrowing under Assumption 1 and preferences given by (36).

Proposition 1. Higher borrowing increases default risk, inflation, the nominal domestic rate, and the
monetary wedge.

Proof. See Appendix B.1

   High borrowing increases default risk, which in turn affects current outcomes for inflation
and the monetary wedge. High default risk increases expectations of future inflation and
marginal utility. Given monetary policy i, the NKPC calls for an increase in current inflation
and the domestic Euler equation calls for a decline in current consumption, which increases
the monetary wedge. The interest rate rule that target inflation generates an increase in the
nominal domestic rate which dampens the rise in inflation but amplifies the increase in the
  15 We could consider other shocks that increase default risk, such as news about future productivity or default
costs. Our results are robust to these other sources of variation.


                                                       15
monetary wedge. Default risk acts akin to a cost-push shock, simultaneously increasing inflation
and depressing output. A monetary policy that targets inflation will generate sizable monetary
wedges and their associated loss of output and consumption, due to default risk.
    The effects of government borrowing on inflation and the monetary wedge in Proposition 1
crucially relies on the presence of default risk. In environments without default risk, it is easy
to show that higher borrowing would have no effect on inflation, the nominal domestic rate,
domestic consumption or output. With quasi-linear preferences, fluctuations in borrowing and
capital flows would be simply absorbed by foreign goods consumption.


4.2    Default Amplification and Monetary Discipline: A Two-Period Example
This section considers a two-period example to characterize sharply the mechanisms for default
amplification and monetary discipline. In this setting we can show that default events are indeed
associated with low domestic consumption, in line with Assumption 1, and we prove two main
results. The first one, which resembles Proposition 1, establishes that high default risk leads to
high monetary wedges and inefficient production. The second result shows that the presence
of monetary frictions induce the government to borrow less and reduce default risk. All the
derivations and proofs are relegated to Appendix B.2.
    In period 1, the government starts with no debt and can issue one-period bonds B in inter-
national markets. Productivity is 1 in period 1 and z in period 2, which is known in period
1. We abstract from inflation costs but preserve pricing frictions by assuming that in period
1 prices are perfectly rigid, while in period 2 they can be changed costlessly, and the nominal
domestic rate in period 1 is set at i. The only shock is the utility cost from default , which
hits the economy in period 2 and shapes the default decision. The shock  is drawn from a
distribution with cumulative and probability density functions () and (), respectively, with
a strictly increasing hazard function h() = ()/(1 - ()). Default in period 2 induces a
productivity loss zd  z. Household preferences are given by (36).
    We solve the model working backwards. The equilibrium in period 2 depends on B and the
                                                                                                 f
default decision of the government. Conditional on repaying, the private equilibrium {C2 , C2 ,
N2 , e2 } satisfies the following conditions:
                                                          1
                                                                                    f
      C2 + e2 = zN2 ,       C2 =                e ,     N2 C2 =  z,     e2 = e2 C2 + B .        (37)
                                   ( - 1)(1 -  ) 2
The terms of trade e2 depend only on the level of domestic goods consumption C2 . Moreover,
                                                                                     f
C2 , N2 , and e2 are independent of the level of debt B, which is fully absorbed by C2 . The
                                          f
private equilibrium in default {C2d , C2d , N2d , e2d } satisfies the same conditions, with B = 0 and
productivity zd . The default decision is governed by a threshold  ( B) that is linear in B and
the probability of default is given by ( ( B)). In this case, the bond price schedule and its
derivative are
                              1                         q( B)      1
                  q( B) =         [1 - ( ( B))],              =-       ( ( B)).                 (38)
                            1 + r                       B        1 + r
The following Lemma characterizes conditions under which default risk increases.

                                                   16
Lemma 1. Default risk ( ) increases with debt B and decreases with second-period productivity z.

   We now analyze the problem in period 1. With rigid prices, the efficient labor market
condition -u N1 = uC1 is not satisfied in general. Instead the equilibrium is shaped by the
domestic Euler condition,
                                   1    i          1 - ( ( B)) ( ( B))
                                      =                       +        .                                          (39)
                                   C1   ~
                                                       C2       C2d

which links the marginal utility of domestic goods consumption across periods to default risk
( ( B)), monetary policy i, and expected period 2 inflation, assumed fixed at a constant       ~.
Note that any value of ~ does not generate resource costs or distortions in the second period.
  We characterize the private equilibrium and establish a main result on default amplification.

Proposition 2. Higher default risk ( ) increases the monetary wedge in period 1.

    A higher default risk increases the future marginal utility of consumption, since the ex-
pectation in the domestic Euler equation (39) places more weight on default states in which
consumption is lower, C2d  C2 , because of lower productivity, zd  z. In response to this low
expected future consumption, consumption in period 1, C1 , declines. The lower C1 also leads
to a real appreciation, e1 decreases, which reduces exports. Labor is lower because of lower
demand in both domestic and export markets.16 As a result, the monetary wedge increases.
    We now analyze the optimal borrowing for the government and associated default risk. With
utility linear in C f , only  shocks, and one period debt, the government's optimal borrowing
condition (33) becomes simpler and is given by
                                                          C ( B)
                                                          m
                               1 - h( ( B)) B -                   =  g (1 + r  ),                                 (40)
                                                      1 - ( ( B))

where m  C ( B ) is the borrowing wedge. When  C ( B ) = 0, the government borrows up to the point
                                                   m
the marginal benefit of borrowing net of the exposure to default risk, captured by the hazard
function scaled by the level of debt, 1 - h( ( B)) B, is equal to the desire to tilt consumption,
 g (1 + r  ) < 1. A positive monetary wedge reduce the incentive to borrow and default risk
because the borrowing wedge m      C ( B ) inherits the sign of the monetary wedge.17

    Next we set monetary policy to generate a positive monetary wedge and show that it
disciplines government borrowing and default risk. To this end, we compare our model to a
flexible price version. These two models have identical equilibria in the second period, for a
given level of debt B, leading to the same default cutoff  ( B) and default probability ( ( B)).
In the flexible price model, the domestic Euler condition (39) is replaced by an efficient labor
   16 In the next section, we show that in our full model high default risk continues to be associated with an increase
in the monetary wedge but with an exchange rate depreciation.
    17 The expression for  C ( B ) is given by
                            m


                       C               u N1 ( B)   [1 + ( - 1)e1 ( B)-1 ] i ( ( B))(uC2d - uC2 )
                       m ( B) =   1+
                                       uC1 ( B)                      uC1 ( B)~

where the sign of the first term is given by that of the monetary wedge and the second term is positive.


                                                           17
market condition -u N flex = uCflex . The government's optimal borrowing condition is then given
                           1         1
by equation (40) with m  C ( B ) = 0 due to the absence of monetary frictions. Let the optimal
                                                 and  =  (  ( B )), respectively.
borrowing and the associated default risk be Bflex         flex          flex
   It is useful to define the real interest rate in this flexible-price economy, rflex , implicitly
                                                                              
                                                                          1-flex        
                                                                                       flex
                                                          1
determined by the domestic Euler condition               flex
                                                        C1
                                                                = rflex     C2     +   C2d    . This real rate tend
to be low with high default risk flex
                                  because domestic consumption in default is low. The

following assumption sets monetary policy such that the real rate is higher in our model.

Assumption 2. The nominal domestic rate satisfies i  ~ rflex .

     This high nominal rate can be welfare enhancing for households because, as we show below,
                                                                                            in
it lowers excessive default risk.18 With Assumption 2, if the government were to choose Bflex
our model, domestic consumption and labor would be lower than in the flexible economy and
the monetary wedge would be positive. When B  Bflex      , default risk increases and, according

to Proposition 2, such high borrowing induces an even higher monetary wedge and a positive
borrowing wedge m    C ( B ). These forces are summarized in the next lemma.

                             C ( B )  0 for all B  B .
Lemma 2. The borrowing wedge m                      flex

    When the borrowing wedge is positive, equation (40) implies that optimal borrowing B will
                 . Lemma 2 shows that  C ( B ) indeed is positive when B exceeds B , leading
be lower than Bflex                      m                                         flex
                                                           and lower default risk    .
to a lower optimal borrowing with pricing frictions B  Bflex                             flex
The follow proposition establishes our main theoretical result on monetary discipline.

Proposition 3. Equilibrium default risk is lower with price frictions,   flex
                                                                          .


   The analysis of this section illustrates that default risk worsens monetary wedges, leading to
default amplification, which in turn disciplines government borrowing and default risk. In the
next section, we show that these forces are quantitatively important in the general model.


5     Quantitative Analysis
We now conduct the quantitative analysis of our model. We document key patterns of inflation,
nominal domestic rates, and spreads in emerging market data. We then describe the parameteri-
zation of the model, discuss decision rules and impulse responses, and compare the model's
implications with the data and reference models.


5.1     Spread, Inflation, Nominal Domestic Rate, and Output in the Data
Many emerging markets have adopted inflation-targeting regimes as their monetary policy
since the early 2000s. This effort has been largely successful in bringing inflation down to
    18 Households welfare is actually hump-shaped in i, reaching its maximum at a level that exceeds ~ rflex because
default risk in equilibrium is excessive.



                                                        18
                                Mean                                  Correlation with Spread

                   CPI Inflation     Govt Spread       CPI Inflation      Nominal Domestic Rate           Output

 Brazil                  5.9               2.6                59                       59                   -62
 Chile                   3.0               1.4                30                       39                   -49
 Colombia                5.2               3.2                74                       76                   -60
 Indonesia               6.6               2.8                17                       75                   -62
 Korea                   2.6               1.1                44                       74                   -30
 Mexico                  4.3               2.3                48                       27                   -54
 Peru                    2.8               3.0                50                       55                   -33
 Philippines             3.9               2.9                17                       82                   -26
 Poland                  3.0               1.7                59                       52                   -11
 South Africa            5.8               1.9                54                       20                   -49

 Mean                    4.4               2.4                45                       58                   -38

                     Table 1: Emerging Market Inflation Targeters, Key Statistics

single digits.19 We collect data on inflation, spreads, nominal domestic rates, and output for
10 emerging markets that are inflation targeters. The sample of emerging markets consists of
those in the JP-Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI). Table 1 reports key statistics on
the joint behavior of these data, using quarterly series. The data start in 2004, by which point all
countries considered had adopted inflation targeting, and run through 2017. Because of data
availability, we focus on inflation based on the consumer price index (CPI) and compute it as
the log difference in the index relative to four quarters prior.20 The spreads are EMBI-based
and are measured as the difference in yields between foreign currency government bonds of
these emerging markets and a comparable U.S. government bond. Domestic nominal rates are
short-term rates in local currency from either interbank markets or government instruments, the
shortest maturity available. Output is the four-quarter difference in log gross domestic product.
We highlight several salient features of the data that will inform our quantitative work.
    Inflation is low for these inflation-targeting emerging markets, on average 4.4%. These
single-digit inflation patterns contrast sharply with the historical experience of these countries,
which have featured several episodes of hyperinflation. Emerging markets bond yields continue
to exhibit a sizable spread, on average 2.4%.
    We also report correlations of spreads with inflation, nominal domestic rates, and output.
As documented in many studies, spreads are negatively correlated with output for this sample,
with an average correlation of -38%. Correlations of spreads with nominal rates are strongly
  19 See  Roger (2009) and Ha et al. (2019) for more details on the implementation and performance of inflation
targeting in emerging markets.
    20 We have confirmed that the main moments for domestic goods (producer price index) inflation are very similar

to the CPI ones, for the countries where both are available.


                                                        19
positive, on average 58%. Note that the underlying bonds from which spreads and nominal
rates are constructed are in different currencies, and hence these comovements reflect positive
correlations between inflation and default risk. The correlation between spreads and inflation is
positive, with a sample average of 45%.


5.2   Functional Forms and Parameterization
We assume separable preferences between a CES composite of domestic goods C and imported
goods C f and labor N such that the per-period utility function is given by
                                                                         1+1/
                                     f                     f           Nt
                           u(Ct , Ct , Nt ) = log H (Ct , Ct ) -              ,                               (41)
                                                                       1 + 1/
                                                                                                 
                                                                  -1                       -1    -1
               f                                     f                                f
where H (Ct , Ct ) is the CES composite H (Ct , Ct ) =      Ct         + (1 -  )(Ct )                 . Here  con-
trols the share of imports in consumption and  is the trade elasticity. We can derive the con-
sumer price index (CPI) as the price of the bundle of domestic and foreign goods consumption,
                               1
P CPI = Pd   + (1 -  ) e1-    1- 
                                    , and the resulting CPI inflation,
                                                                           1
                                     P CPI     + (1 -  )  e 1-            1- 
                             CPI    = CPI =                                1
                                                                                ,
                                     P-1                    1-            1- 
                                               + (1 -  )  e -1

where the subscript -1 denotes the previous period's value. The rate of depreciation of the
nominal exchange rate is
                                         e Pd        e
                                     =       d
                                                 =       ,                             (42)
                                  -1    e-1 P- 1
                                                   e - 1

which depends on inflation and the depreciation of the terms of trade.
   We assume that productivity shocks z  ~t follow an AR(1) process log z
                                                                        ~t = z log z
                                                                                   ~t-1 + z  t
with  t  N (0, 1). Following Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012), we assume that while in default,
productivity suffers a convex penalty max 0, 0 z       ~2 with 0  0  1 , such that
                                                 ~ + 1 z

                                         ~
                                         z                             , if  = 0
                         ~,  ) =
                       z(z
                                         ~ - max 0, 0 z
                                         z                  ~2
                                                      ~ + 1 z          , otherwise.

We abstract from monetary shocks m for the benchmark model parameterization, but incorporate
them in a later section to analyze the monetary transmission with counterfactuals.
    The model also contains enforcement shocks  that control the relative values of repayment
and default. We integrate these shocks into our computational technique following Dvorkin
et al. (2018) and Gordon (2019). This computational technique consists of augmenting the model
with taste shocks in the discrete choice tradition. The taste shocks slightly perturb the borrowing
B and the default-repayment choices and help with numerical stability and robust convergence
in models with long-term defaultable debt. The taste shocks are shaped by two parameters, B

                                                    20
and D . The B parameter controls the shock to the taste for borrowing and is set to 1e-6 , which
is the smallest value that guarantees convergence for a wide range of parameter values while
at the same time keeping choice probabilities quite tight. The shocks to the default-repayment
decisions map into the model's enforcement shocks  as a logistic distribution with location 0
and scale 1. The parameter D controls the relative importance of the enforcement shocks for the
default decision. Appendix F details the structure of taste shocks and their numerical properties,
as well as the algorithm for the computation and simulation of the model.

                        Assigned Parameters

                          Frisch elasticity                          = 0.33
                          Trade elasticity                              =5
                          Domestic consumption weight                = 0.62
                          Varieties elasticity                          =6
                          International risk-free rate            r  = 0.5%
                          Market reentry probability               = 4.17%
                          Price adjustment cost                         = 58
                          Persistence of productivity shock         z = 0.9
                          Export demand level                           =1
                          Interest rate rule intercept              i = /


                        Parameters from Moment Matching

                          Private discount factor                 = 0.9866
                          Government discount factor             g = 0.9766
                          Inflation target                         = 1.015
                          Interest rate rule coefficient            P = 1.4
                          Volatility of productivity shock       z = 0.95%
                          Productivity in default               0 = -0.17
                                                                  1 = 0.19
                          Enforcement shock                        D   = 1 e -4

                                    Table 2: Parameter Values


   We consider a quarterly model and set parameters based on other studies and as part
of a moment-matching exercise, to replicate properties of the data of Brazil. The first set of
parameters, assigned directly, includes the Frisch elasticity  , the trade elasticity , the weight of
domestic goods in consumption  , varieties' elasticity  , the international interest rate r  , the
probability of return to financial markets after default , the Rotemberg adjustment cost , and
the persistence of the producivity shock z . For the Frisch elasticity, we choose a value of 0.33

                                                  21
                                                              Data     NK-Default

                            Mean inflation                       5.9            5.9
                            Mean nominal domestic rate         11.2            11.1
                            Volatility of inflation              1.8            1.8
                            Volatility of output                 1.9            1.9
                            Volatility of consumption            1.8            2.0
                            Mean spread                          2.6            2.6
                            Volatility of spread                 0.9            0.9
                            Output, spread correlation         -62             -60

                                              Table 3: Model Fit


following Galí and Monacelli (2005). This is a conservative value in line with the open economy
New Keynesian literature. The trade elasticity  is set at 5, as in Devereux et al. (2019). This
number is within the range of estimates in the trade elasticity literature. We set  to get Brazil's
imports as a share of consumption in the balanced-trade steady state of 15%, which implies
 = 0.62, given the value of the trade elasticity. The elasticity of substitution between varieties
 is 6, standard in the literature, inducing a 20% markup. The international risk-free rate is
2% annually, consistent with U.S. Treasury yields, implying r  = 0.5%. We target an average
length of market exclusion of roughly six years, which is an average duration of sovereign
defaults based on Cruces and Trebesch (2013). We set the Rotemberg adjustment cost using
the well-known first-order equivalence between Calvo and Rotemberg pricing frictions: our
varieties' elasticity of  = 6 and a Calvo frequency of price changes of roughly once per year
(once every fourth quarter) imply a value for  of 58.21 Given that we are considering a short
horizon of the data, it is difficult to precisely estimate the persistence of the productivity process.
Instead, we set the persistence parameter z to a reference value of 0.9, comparable with many
international real business cycle studies. Finally, we set the intercept of the interest rate rule to
the steady-state condition i =  /  and normalize the level of export demand  to 1.
    The second set of parameters is chosen to match a set of moments of Brazil. These eight
parameters are the discount factor of the private sector  and of the government  g , the inflation
target  , the interest rate rule coefficient  P , the volatility of the productivity innovations z , the
parameters of the default cost function {0 , 1 }, and the parameter governing the importance of
the enforcement shock D . The moments we target are the mean and volatilities for CPI inflation
and spreads, mean nominal domestic rate, the volatility of output and consumption, and the
correlation between the spread and output. Most parameters affect all moments, yet some
moments are more informative of certain parameters. The average CPI inflation rate in the data
is the most informative on  . The weight on inflation in the interest rate rule  P heavily affects
the volatility of CPI inflation. The volatility of productivity shocks is the main driver of that of
  21 See,   for example, Miao and Ngo (2018) for the mapping between the Calvo and Rotemberg parameters.


                                                      22
output. As in standard sovereign default models, the productivity default cost parameters, the
borrower's discount  g , and the enforcement shock parameter D are crucial for the dynamics of
spreads and the volatility of consumption. The discount factor of the private sector  controls
the average real domestic rate. We collect the values of all the parameters in Table 2.
    Table 3 contains the results of the moment-matching exercise. CPI inflation, nominal domestic
rates, and spreads are reported annualized. The model matches quite closely the moments in the
data. In the model and data, CPI inflation is about 5.9%, spreads are 2.6%, and nominal domestic
rates are about 11%. The volatilities for CPI inflation, output, and consumption are a bit under
2%, and the volatility of spreads is just under 1%. Output is negatively correlated with spreads,
with a correlation close to -60%.


5.3   Reference Models
To measure the interactions between monetary frictions and default risk, we compare our
findings with two reference models. The first reference model, labeled NK-Reference, is a
version of the Galí and Monacelli (2005) model with nominal rigidities and without default. The
second reference model, labeled Default-Reference, is our sovereign default model without
monetary frictions.
    The equilibrium of the NK-Reference model is characterized by conditions (21­26), inter-
national Euler condition (34), and an exogenous debt-elastic bond price schedule to close
the model, as in Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe (2003). The debt-elastic bond price schedule is
q ( B)-1 =  +  exp( B - B) - 1 , with  set to 1e-5 , which gives a very loose borrowing sched-
ule, and B set to give the same average debt level as our baseline. We solve the NK-Reference
model with a first-order log-linear approximation of the equilibrium conditions, for the same
parameters as the benchmark.
    In Appendix E we also solve a version of our model calibrated to have ample borrowing and
no default risk in equilibrium, with global methods. It displays very similar properties to the
NK-Reference model because absent default risk the borrowing wedges in (33) are quantitatively
unimportant.
    The Default-Reference model is a real sovereign default model with flexible prices. The
allocations of this model can be implemented in a monetary model, when monetary policy
pursues a "strict inflation target" policy. Under such policy, inflation is always at target and
nominal domestic rates equal the real interest rates in the flexible price economy plus the inflation
target. The private equilibrium of this model is characterized by conditions (21­23) and an
efficient labor allocation -u N /uC = z. We compute the Default-Reference model with the same
global methods and for the same parameters as for the baseline NK-Default.


5.4   Default Risk Amplifies Monetary Frictions
Before analyzing the model-generated time series, we illustrate the main mechanisms relating
default risk to monetary distortions. High default risk is associated with large monetary wedges,
high inflation, and high nominal rates. The sensitivity of nominal domestic rates to default risk
is an additional source of volatility for monetary policy.

                                                 23
 120                                                       70           12

 100                                                       60

                                  Default Probability                   10
                                                           50                                      Nominal Rate
  80
                                             (Right)
                                                           40
  60                                                                     8
                                                           30
  40                                                                                   Inflation
              Equilibrium Spreads                          20
                                                                         6
  20                         (Left)                        10

   0                                                       0             4
        0.3       0.35    0.4      0.45     0.5     0.55                     0.3    0.35     0.4      0.45   0.5   0.55
                                Debt                                                               Debt

          (a) Spreads and Default Risk                                   (b) Nominal Domestic Rate and Inflation

100.4                                                                100.4

100.2                                                                100.2

                                                                       100
 100
                                                                      99.8
 99.8
                                                                      99.6
 99.6
                                                                      99.4
 99.4                                                                 99.2

 99.2                                                                   99
        0.3       0.35    0.4      0.45     0.5     0.55                      0.3   0.35     0.4      0.45   0.5   0.55
                                Debt                                                               Debt

                         (c) Output                                          (d) Domestic Goods Consumption

 110                                                                  101


                                                                     100.5

 105
                                                                      100


                                                                      99.5
 100

                                                                       99


  95                                                                  98.5
        0.3      0.35     0.4      0.45    0.5     0.55                      0.3    0.35    0.4       0.45   0.5   0.55
                                Debt                                                               Debt

        (e) Foreign Goods Consumption                                                (f) Terms of Trade


                                                   Figure 1: Policy Rules




                                                                24
    Figure 1 presents policy rules as a function of government debt B relative to mean exports
for the median level of productivity and focus on the behavior conditional on not defaulting.
Panel (a) plots the one-period-ahead default probability (right axis) and spreads (left axis) as a
function of debt. Default probabilities increase with current debt B because debt due next period
B = HB (s, B) increases with B, which makes default more likely. We emphasize two regions: a
high default zone, for B roughly above 0.5, and a low default zone, for lower levels of debt. As is
typical in sovereign default models, in the high default zone, the probability of default sharply
increases in the current debt level. The figure also plots spreads, which with long-term debt
reflect not only one-period-ahead default probabilities but also the default risk at all horizons,
increasing with debt. Panels (b) through (f) in Figure 1 display key variables of the private and
monetary equilibrium. We describe these policy rules in the high default zone first, then turn to
the low default zone.

High Default Zone Policies. The behavior of variables in the zone of high default risk is largely
driven by expectations of allocations and prices during actual default events. As explained
in the simplified models in Section 4, the two intertemporal conditions in the private and
monetary equilibrium, the NKPC and the domestic Euler equation, link current allocations, prior
to default, to expected future allocations in default. Greater default risk is associated with a
decline in domestic goods consumption and output, as seen in panels (c) and (d), because of
the increasing expectations of future inflation and recessions during defaults. When the risk of
default increases, the domestic Euler equation for households calls for a reduction in current
consumption and hence output, given the expectations of low future consumption in default
and an unresponsive nominal domestic rate. Inflation and nominal rates remain elevated in this
zone, as seen in panel (b), because although output and consumption fall, firms do not reduce
contemporaneous inflation because of high expected inflation next period, in case of default.
Foreign goods consumption in panel (e) declines with debt even though the economy borrows
fairly aggressively at increasingly high spreads. The terms of trade in panel (f) are fairly flat as
domestic and foreign goods consumption fall with debt at comparable rates.

Low Default Zone Policies. When default risk is low, debt affects allocations mainly through
its impact on foreign goods consumption and the terms of trade. As debt rises foreign goods con-
sumption falls sharply because the tight bond price schedule limits the availability of borrowing,
as seen in panel (e). The decline in foreign goods consumption leads to a depreciation in the
terms of trade, which in turn boosts exports.22 In response to this increased export demand, firms
increase production and prices. Nominal domestic rates rise to fight the higher inflation, which
depresses domestic consumption. We abstracted from these effects in the simplified models
of Section 4, where the quasi-linear preferences disconnect the terms of trade from imported
consumption.
  22 As  Blanchard et al. (2017) discuss, in the workhorse open-macro model a reduction in capital inflows is
expansionary because it depreciates the exchange rate. Our model features these expenditure switching effects
in the low default zone because with default risk capital inflows decline with debt. In the high default zone, the
additional forces arising from expectations of future inflation reverse these effects.



                                                       25
                      2.5                                                               70


                                                                                        60
                      2.0

                                                                                        50
                      1.5

                                                             Monetary Wedge             40
                      1.0                                               (Left)
                                                                                        30

                      0.5
                                                                                        20

                      0.0
                                   Default Probability                                  10
                                                (Right)
                      -0.5                                                              0
                             0.3    0.35        0.4          0.45      0.5       0.55
                                                      Debt



                 Figure 2: The Monetary Wedge and the Probability of Default

The Monetary Wedge. We now turn to describing the monetary wedge. To highlight the
interactions between the monetary wedge and default risk, in Figure 2 we plot both the monetary
wedge (left axis) and the one-period-ahead default probability (right axis) as a function of debt.
    In the high default zone, the monetary wedge increases rapidly with debt because both
consumption and output fall: rising default risk sharply depresses domestic consumption,
leading to inefficiently low demand and a depressed level of activity. In the low default zone,
the monetary wedge is decreasing in the level of debt because the increase in output dominates
the decline in domestic consumption. The economy produces more to export because the terms
of trade depreciate with the decline in foreign goods consumption.
    Default risk is essential for the dependency of the monetary wedge and monetary policy
on debt. In Figure 3 we compare the consequences of debt in the NK-Default baseline model
with the NK-Reference model without default risk. Panel (a) compares monetary wedges, and
panel (b) shows domestic nominal interest rates. In the reference model, debt does not distort
the level of activity; the monetary wedge is flat at zero. The NK-Reference model has a very
loose borrowing schedule, which allows foreign goods consumption and the terms of trade
to be insensitive to debt. Such ample borrowing possibilities disconnect domestic allocations
and prices from the indebtedness of the economy. Moreover, absent default, the intertemporal
channels in the high default zone of the NK-Default model are not operative.
    Panel (b) of Figure 3 shows that nominal domestic rates in the NK-Reference model do not
vary with debt, in contrast to our baseline model. Nominal rates in each of the models mirror the
dynamics of inflation. The responsiveness of nominal rates and inflation to debt is the additional
source of volatility for these variables in our baseline NK-Default model.


5.5   Monetary Frictions Discipline Borrowing
We have shown in Section 4.2 that the presence of monetary frictions disincentivizes borrowing
in a simplified version. We illustrate these forces in the context of our quantitative results by
comparing borrowing and spreads in our NK-Default model to those of the Default-Reference

                                                      26
      2.5                                                                           12.5

      2.0                                                                            12

                                                                                    11.5
      1.5                                             NK-Default
                                                                                     11                                   NK-Reference
      1.0
                                                                                    10.5
      0.5
                 NK-Reference                                                        10
                                                                                                            NK-Default
      0.0                                                                            9.5

      -0.5                                                                            9
                   0.3     0.35      0.4       0.45     0.5        0.55                    0.3      0.35    0.4       0.45    0.5    0.55
                                           Debt                                                                    Debt

                         (a) The Monetary Wedge                                                  (b) Nominal Domestic Rate


                             Figure 3: The Monetary Wedge and Nominal Domestic Rates

model.

       0.5                                                                            20
                 Default-Reference
       0.4
                                                                                      15

       0.3                                                                                                 Default-Reference
                                                                                      10
       0.2

                           NK-Default                                                  5
       0.1
                                                                                                                                NK-Default
         0                                                                             0
             0              5                10               15          20               0.3      0.35     0.4      0.45     0.5   0.55
                                           Quarter                                                           Debt Choice

                          (a) Debt Accumulation                                                      (b) Spread Curves

                                                  Figure 4: Debt Paths and Spread Curves

    Panel (a) of Figure 4 compares the pattern of debt accumulation in the two models: both
are simulated starting with zero debt, keeping productivity at median throughout. In both
models, the government accumulates debt and settles at a level that is similar. However, in the
NK-Default model, this accumulation is slower than in the Default-Reference model because of
monetary frictions. Along the transition, borrowing wedges are positive and associated with
large monetary wedges, disincentivizing borrowing.
    Panel (b) of Figure 4 plots spread schedules in the two models, NK-Default and Default-
Reference, for arbitrary B . Spreads are lower for each level of B in the NK-Default model.
Lenders offer a more favorable bond price schedule since slower debt accumulation results in
less debt dilution.


5.6    Impulse Response Functions
In Section 5.4 we described the policy rules as a function of debt. Here, we analyze responses
of the main variables of interest to productivity shocks z. We construct the impulse response


                                                                               27
functions (IRFs) in our nonlinear model following Koop et al. (1996). We simulate a panel of
50, 000 units for 5, 000 periods. For the first 4,950 periods, the shocks follow their underlying
Markov chain so that the cross-sectional distribution converges to the ergodic distribution of
the model. In period 4,951, the impact period, normalized to 0 in the plots, we reduce the
shock realizations by 1.3%, about half of the standard deviation of the shock. From period 4,952
onward, shocks resume their Markov chain processes. The impulse responses plot the average
across the time series.23 We also contrast the IRFs of our baseline model to those from the two
reference models.
    Figure 5 plots the responses of output, domestic goods consumption, foreign goods con-
sumption, terms of trade, inflation, the nominal domestic rate, spreads, and debt. The blue
lines are the IRFs of our baseline NK-Default model; the dashed red lines are the IRFs of the
NK-Reference model. First we describe the responses of our baseline model.
    Declines in productivity lead to a decline in output of about 1.14%, which is quite similar to
the decline in the shock. Consumption declines a bit more; consumption of domestic and foreign
goods falls by 1.33% and 1.25%, respectively. The terms of trade appreciate mildly, especially
over the medium run because domestic goods consumption recovers more slowly than foreign
goods consumption.
    As is typical in sovereign default models, low productivity tightens the bond price schedule
because default is more likely in recessions, and with persistent shocks, low productivity makes
future recessions more likely. The tight bond price schedule leads to higher spreads and a
reduction in debt. Spreads rise about 0.8%, and debt contracts slowly by about 3%. Inflation rises
about 1.2% on impact, because of the high unit cost from low productivity and the increased
default risk. Nominal domestic rates rise in response to the elevated inflation, about 1.6%. These
dynamics illustrate that productivity shocks lead to strong, positive comovements of spreads
with inflation and nominal rates.
    The responses of the NK-Reference model are also shown in Figure 5. Output and domestic
consumption responses are similar to those of our baseline. Foreign goods consumption, in
contrast, expands during the downturn. The increase in imported consumption reflects the ample
possibilities for insurance with external borrowing. Recall that preferences are non-separable
between domestic and foreign goods, and hence smoothing the marginal utility of foreign
goods requires an increase in imported consumption, given the drop in domestic consumption.
Inflation and nominal rates also rise in the NK-Reference model because of the higher unit cost
for production, but their responses are much more muted, about half of the responses in the
NK-Default baseline. Terms of trade appreciate sharply in the NK-Reference model because of
uncovered interest parity forces: high nominal domestic rates and unchanged foreign interest
rates lead to an expected depreciation, which in turn implies that the exchange rate appreciates
on impact. The appreciation depresses exports and output, consistent with the more muted rise
in inflation. Borrowing expands significantly to support the consumption of foreign goods and
the spreads are always zero.
    These IRF comparisons highlight the role of default risk in monetary policy. Default risk
  23 The  impulse responses are computed over all units, including those with defaults. Discarding defaults from
the cross-sectional average does not alter the properties of the IRFs.



                                                      28
  0                                                               0

                                                                                         NK-Reference
                          NK-Default
-0.5                                                            -0.5




 -1                                                              -1

                             NK-Reference                                                    NK-Default

-1.5                                                            -1.5
   -10      -5        0         5        10      15   20           -10      -5       0       5        10        15        20


                     (a) Output (Y                                     (b) Domestic Goods Consumption (C)

  2                                                               0

                                    NK-Reference                -0.1
  1
                                                                -0.2
                                                                                                           NK-Default
                                                                -0.3
  0

                                                                -0.4

 -1                             NK-Default                      -0.5                          NK-Reference

                                                                -0.6
 -2
  -10       -5        0         5        10      15   20           -10      -5       0       5        10        15        20


       (c) Foreign Goods Consumption (C f )                                      (d) Terms of Trade (e)

1.2                                                               2

  1
                                                                                           NK-Default
                                                                1.5
0.8                                 NK-Default
0.6
                                                                  1
0.4
                                                                                                           NK-Reference
0.2
                                                                0.5
  0                       NK-Reference
-0.2                                                              0
   -10      -5        0         5        10      15   20          -10       -5       0       5        10        15        20


                    (e) Inflation ( )                                     (f) Nominal Domestic Rate (i)

0.8                                                              25

                                                                 20
0.6
                            NK-Default                                             NK-Reference
                                                                 15
0.4
                                                                 10
0.2
                                                                  5

  0                                                                                               NK-Default
                                                                  0
                 NK-Reference
-0.2                                                             -5
   -10      -5        0         5        10      15   20          -10       -5       0       5        10        15        20


                       (g) Spread                                                    (h) Debt ( B)

                   Figure 5: Impulse Responses: Compared with NK-Reference


                                                           29
  0                                                                                0

                                      NK-Default
                                                                                                            NK-Default
-0.5                                                                            -0.5




 -1                                                                               -1


                                        Default-Reference                                                        Default-Reference
-1.5                                                                            -1.5
   -10              -5         0         5          10           15   20           -10       -5         0         5         10        15   20


                              (a) Output (Y )                                           (b) Domestic Goods Consumption (C)

0.5                                                                             0.04

                                                                                0.02

                                                                                    0
  0
                                                                                -0.02
                                                         NK-Default
                                                                                -0.04
                                                                                                                         NK-Default
-0.5                                                                            -0.06

                                                                                -0.08

                                                                                 -0.1
 -1
                                                                                -0.12

                                                                                -0.14      Default-Reference
                                      Default-Reference
-1.5                                                                            -0.16
                                                                                     -10     -5         0         5         10        15   20
   -10              -5         0         5          10           15   20


          (c) Foreign Goods Consumption (C f )                                                    (d) Terms of Trade (e)

 1.2                                                                               2

   1             NK-Default
                                                                                 1.5                           NK-Default
 0.8


 0.6                                                                               1

 0.4
                                                                                 0.5
 0.2

                                                                                   0
   0
                                             Default-Reference                                         Default-Reference
-0.2                                                                            -0.5
    -10             -5         0         5          10           15   20           -10       -5         0         5         10        15   20


                              (e) Inflation ( )                                            (f) Nominal Domestic Rate (i)

          10-3
 15                                                                                1
                                                                                                               Default-Reference
                                                                                   0
 10                                    Default-Reference

                                                                                  -1

  5
                                                                                  -2
                                                                                            NK-Default
           NK-Default

  0                                                                               -3
  -10               -5         0         5          10           15   20           -10       -5         0         5         10        15   20


                                   (g) Spread                                                           (h) Debt ( B)

                         Figure 6: Impulse Responses: Compared with Default-Reference


                                                                           30
and tight borrowing conditions raise spreads and induce additional volatility in inflation and
aggregate consumption. These larger swings in inflation call for more aggressive monetary
policy with stronger responses of nominal domestic rates.
    We also compare the IRFs in the NK-Default baseline to the Default-Reference model. Figure
6 plots the IRFs for the same variables, normalizing each panel to the level in period -1 in the
NK-Default model. The responses of output and domestic consumption in the Default-Reference
model are quite similar to those in our baseline. The decline in foreign goods consumption
is somewhat larger because default risk is higher in this model and borrowing conditions are
tighter. Spreads are higher on average in the Default-Reference model and increase on impact
by about the same amount as in our baseline. Debt is higher on average and also decreases in
the downturn. Domestic goods inflation is zero by construction and nominal domestic rates
equal the domestic real interest rate implied by the domestic Euler equation. Domestic interest
rates rise in the recession because consumption is expected to grow after the downturn; their
response, however, is more modest than in our baseline, with a response on impact of about
one-third of the baseline. These IRF comparisons show that monetary frictions lead, on average,
to lower spreads and debt and to more volatile inflation and nominal rates.


5.7   Second Moments
Table 4 reports first and second moments for Brazilian data and simulated data from our baseline
NK-Default model and the two reference models. The data consist of the series reported in
Section 5.1, for CPI inflation, nominal domestic rates, spread, and output, as well as the trade
balance, reported relative to output, and trade-weighted nominal exchange rate depreciation.
All moments are reported in percentage points.
    Overall, the moments in the baseline model resemble the Brazilian data. The mean CPI
inflation, nominal domestic rate, and spread as well as the volatility of inflation, output, and
spreads are targets in our moment-matching exercise. The model delivers a volatility of the
nominal rate that is close to the data, whereas it underestimates the volatility of the trade balance
and misses the high volatility in nominal exchange rates. In our model, exchange rates are about
30% more volatile than output, reflecting the common disconnect between exchange rates and
fundamentals in much of international business cycle theory.
    The model delivers the positive correlations of inflation and nominal domestic rates with
spreads in the data, with magnitudes of about 60%. These correlations arise in our model
because, across both state variables, namely, productivity z and debt B, inflation and spreads
comove positively.
    The model also features the countercyclicality of inflation, nominal domestic rates, nominal
depreciations, spreads, and the trade balance present in the Brazilian data. As explained with
the IRFs, inflation and nominal rates tend to rise with low productivity. The nominal exchange
rate depreciates because its dynamics are mainly driven by inflation. Spreads are countercyclical
because recessions are associated with high default risk. The trade balance is also countercyclical
because the high spreads in recessions lead to a reduction in international borrowing. These
properties induce the positive correlations of spreads with the trade balance and nominal
depreciation rates, that are present in the data. These findings are consistent with Na et al.

                                                 31
                                       NK-          NK-     Default-
Mean                          Data   Default   Reference   Reference

  CPI inflation                5.9       5.9         6.1         0.0
  Nominal domestic rate       11.2      11.1        11.5         5.3
  Spread                       2.6       2.6         --          3.2

Standard Deviation

  CPI inflation                1.8       1.8         1.0         0.6
  Nominal domestic rate        2.2       2.5         1.3         1.8
  Spread                       0.9       0.9         --          0.8
  Output                       1.9       1.9         2.4         2.1
  Consumption aggregate        1.8       2.0         2.0         2.2
  Trade balance                0.9       0.3         1.9         0.5
  Nominal depreciation rate   14.7       2.4         2.0         1.9

Correlation with Spread

  CPI inflation                 59       60          --          -1
  Nominal domestic rate         59       64          --          18
  Output                      -62       -60          --         -42
  Trade balance                 61       35          --          33
  Nominal depreciation rate     51       45          --          -1

Correlation with Output

  CPI inflation               -16       -88         -81           7
  Nominal domestic rate       -23       -96         -98         -60
  Trade balance               -77       -18          62         -23
  Nominal depreciation rate   -18       -62         -28           7

    Table 4: Moments: Data, NK-Default, and Reference Models




                                32
(2018), who find in their work that default risk is correlated with depreciation rates in emerging
countries.
    Table 4 also reports the moments from the NK-Reference model, which by construction is
silent on default risk. Average CPI inflation and the nominal domestic rate are the same as in the
benchmark, largely reflecting the common parameters  and i. The volatilities of the nominal
interest rate and CPI inflation are, however, only about half of those in the NK-Default baseline.
Default risk makes inflation more volatile because it affects inflation and the monetary wedge,
as discussed in Section 4 and illustrated in the IRFs. This comparison shows that an emerging
market central bank targeting inflation must implement a more volatile interest rate policy as a
result of sovereign default risk.
    As in our baseline model, the NK-Reference model also features countercyclical inflation,
nominal domestic rates, and nominal depreciation, but the cyclicality of the trade balance is
positive, in contrast with the data. With well-functioning financial markets, the country increases
borrowing in recessions to smooth consumption.
    The final column of Table 4 reports moments for the Default-Reference model. Recall that
CPI inflation in this model fluctuates only because of changes in the terms of trade, and nominal
domestic rates are equal to the real rates implied by consumption dynamics. The means and
volatilities of CPI inflation and nominal rates are substantially lower than in the benchmark
model, whereas output and consumption volatility are comparable. Mean spreads, however,
are higher than in the benchmark by about 0.5%, because of the disciplining role of monetary
frictions on borrowing. Another manifestation of the greater propensity to borrow in the Default-
Reference model is its more volatile trade balance, with a standard deviation almost twice that
of the baseline.
    Absent nominal frictions, the Default-Reference model fails to generate the strong positive
comovement of spreads with either CPI inflation or the nominal depreciation rate. Here these
series are essentially uncorrelated. The model does exhibit a positive but quantitatively modest
correlation of spreads with the domestic rate, less than a third of the value in the baseline. Finally,
CPI inflation and the nominal depreciation rate are essentially acyclical, in contrast with the
strong countercyclical pattern of NK-Default, whereas nominal domestic rates and the trade
balance cyclical patterns are negative, as in the baseline model.


5.8   Brazil Event and Counterfactual
Now we perform an event analysis and compare our model with the Brazilian 2015 recession.
We find that our model produces similar time paths as in the data, with increases in nominal
domestic rates, inflation, and spreads. We also conduct a counterfactual experiment where
nominal rates are kept low during the recession. In this counterfactual, the downturn is milder
but inflation and spreads increase even more.
    For the event analysis, we feed in a path of productivity shocks such that the time path of
output in the model replicates the one in the data. We fix the initial level of debt to its mean
in the limiting distribution. We then compare the predictions of the model for CPI inflation,
nominal domestic rates, spreads, and nominal exchange rates with the data.
    The dashed blue lines with circle markers in Figure 7 represent the series in the data. Brazil

                                                  33
experienced a recession from 2014 to late 2016, with output contracting from 3% above trend to
3% below trend, a 6% decline in total. It then recovers starting in 2016Q3. During this period,
CPI inflation increases by 3.8%, the nominal domestic rate increases by 3.3%, and spreads rise
from about 2% to 5%. When output recovers after 2017, inflation, the nominal rate, and spreads
all fall.
    The solid red lines in Figure 7 are the corresponding series in the model. To match the
dynamics of output, the model requires that the underlying productivity shock decreases from
2014 to late 2016. The recession drives up sovereign spreads. The declining productivity and
rising spreads lead to an increase in inflation. Monetary policy responds to this high inflation
with hikes in the nominal domestic rate. Quantitatively, the model matches the rise in inflation
and spreads during the recession, around 4.2% for inflation and 3% for spreads. After the
recovery from 2016Q3 onward, the model also reproduces the inflation decrease of about 4%
and the drop in spreads of about 3%.
    In terms of exchange rates, the model delivers a depreciation in the nominal exchange rate
of about 20% during the recession, starting from 2015Q1 onward. In the data, the overall
depreciation in the nominal exchange rate during this period is also about 20%, but with a much
higher volatility that we miss. Although our model matches the overall depreciation, it fails to
replicate the large depreciation in Brazil in 2016.
    To evaluate the effects of the hikes in nominal rates on the Brazilian economy during this
event, we conduct a counterfactual experiment with a dovish central bank. In this alternative
scenario, instead of tightening in response to high inflation, the central bank keeps a low nominal
domestic rate, similar to its 2015 level, following the start of the recession.
    We implement these counterfactual interest rates through the use of the monetary shock m in
the interest rate rule (12). In the parameterization for the main quantitative results, we abstracted
from these shocks. We now allow for low probability, i.i.d. m shocks and compute the model
over a wide range of values for m. In the counterfactual, we feed in the appropriate level for
m such that the nominal domestic rate remains at its 2015 level. We also confirm that the main
quantitative properties of our model are unaltered with these small variance monetary shocks
and illustrate the transmission of these monetary shocks by constructing impulse response
functions, displayed in Appendix C.
    The counterfactual series are plotted in black lines in Figure 8 and the baseline results are
again in solid red lines. The expansionary monetary shocks in the counterfactual induce lower
nominal domestic rates and thus stimulate consumption and output. This higher demand
increases the unit cost of production, which in turn generates high inflation. Lower nominal
rates also lead to increased spreads, about 2.5% higher, since low rates reduce monetary frictions
and incentivize the government to increase borrowing. The higher default risk further increases
inflation. Overall, in late 2016, the inflation rate in the counterfactual scenario would be about
2% higher than in the benchmark case. This counterfactual highlights the disciplining role of
monetary frictions for sovereign borrowing and default risk.
    In summary, our model matches the patterns of inflation, nominal domestic rates, and
spreads during the Brazilian downturn of 2015. The counterfactual analysis highlights the role
of monetary frictions in limiting borrowing and moderating crisis events.


                                                 34
0.03                                                              18


0.02                                                                                                 Model
                                                                  16
                                   Model
0.01
                                                                  14

    0
                                                                  12               Data
-0.01                    Data
                                                                  10
-0.02

                                                                    8
-0.03


-0.04                                                               6
    2012   2013   2014      2015     2016   2017    2018           2012         2013        2014     2015     2016   2017    2018



                    (a) Output                                                  (b) Nominal Domestic Rate

  11                                                              5.5

  10                                                                5
                                                                                                                     Model
                          Data
    9                                                             4.5

    8                                                               4

    7                                                             3.5
                                                                                          Data
    6                                                               3

    5                                                             2.5

    4                                                               2

    3                    Model                                    1.5

    2                                                               1
   2012    2013   2014      2015     2016   2017    2018           2012         2013        2014     2015     2016   2017    2018



                   (c) Inflation                                                                 (d) Spread

                                   1.8

                                   1.7

                                   1.6

                                   1.5

                                   1.4
                                             Data
                                   1.3

                                   1.2

                                   1.1
                                                                        Model

                                     1
                                    2012    2013    2014   2015    2016         2017        2018



                                            (e) Nominal Exchange Rate


                                     Figure 7: Event Analysis for Brazil




                                                           35
0.03                                                                                  17

                                                                                      16                      Model
0.02
                                                                                      15
0.01
                                                                                      14

    0                                                                                 13
                                          Counterfactual
-0.01                                                                                 12

                                                                                      11                              Counterfactual
-0.02
                                                                                      10
-0.03                           Model
                                                                                       9

-0.04                                                                                  8
    2012   2013   2014          2015         2016          2017      2018             2012   2013   2014      2015     2016       2017   2018



                    (a) Output                                                               (b) Nominal Domestic Rate

  12                                                                                   8

  11                     Counterfactual                                                7
                                                                                                    Counterfactual
  10
                                                                                       6
    9

    8                                                                                  5

    7                                                                                  4

    6
                    Model                                                              3              Model
    5
                                                                                       2
    4

    3                                                                                  1
   2012    2013   2014          2015         2016          2017      2018             2012   2013   2014      2015     2016       2017   2018



                   (c) Inflation                                                                       (d) Spread

                                          1.45

                                           1.4
                                                                            Counterfactual
                                          1.35

                                           1.3

                                          1.25

                                           1.2
                                                                  Model
                                          1.15

                                           1.1

                                          1.05

                                             1
                                            2012       2013         2014    2015      2016   2017   2018



                                                           (e) Nominal Exchange Rate


                                           Figure 8: Counterfactual Experiment




                                                                            36
6      Extensions, Robustness, and Welfare
In this section we study the robustness of our findings to extensions of the baseline model. We
analyze two main variations. The first extension considers an environment with government
debt denominated in local currency. The second extension considers alternative specifications
for the interest rate rule. Here we perform a comparative static exercise over the weight on
inflation and also extend the interest rate rule to respond to output. We also compare welfare
across these alternative models and our benchmark.


6.1     Local Currency Government Debt
Governments in emerging markets increasingly borrow in local currency, as documented in
Du and Schreger (2016) and Ottonello and Perez (2019). Here we explore the implications of
sovereign debt denominated in local currency for our NK-Default model. Domestic monetary
policy in this framework, of course, directly affects the real liabilities of the central government
because domestic inflation alters the real value of the debt. In our model, however, inflating
away the debt is not a consideration for monetary policy because the nominal interest rate
rule responds only to inflation deviations from target. We find that in our environment, the
denomination of government debt has only minor effects on the dynamics of inflation, spreads,
or nominal domestic rates.
   To analyze the case with local currency government debt, we modify the government's
budget constraint (13) in the baseline model. The nominal government budget constraint in local
currency is
                                                                                            f   f
                                      lc
                     Tt + Wt Nt = qt Bt               lc
                                        +1 - (1 -  ) Bt  - (r  + ) Bt
                                                                    lc
                                                                       +  f Pt Ct ,                             (43)

where nominal local currency government debt is Bt   lc .
                                                      +1
   We deflate this budget constraint by the price of domestic goods Ptd and combine it with the
budget constraint of households to obtain the balance of payments condition,
                                       f             Bt                            Bt
                           et  = et Ct + (r  + )
                             
                                                        - qt     Bt+1 - (1 - )          ,                       (44)
                                                     t                             t
where real government debt, in terms of domestic goods, is Bt = Bt        lc / Pd . This expression
                                                                                t -1
makes it explicit that inflation t affects the real value of government debt.24
   The private and monetary equilibrium of the model with local currency debt consists of
equations (21­26) with the balance of payments condition (22) replaced by (44). The bond pricing
condition is also modified, as international lenders arbitrage the foreign currency risk-free return
r  with the foreign currency return on the local currency government debt. This arbitrage implies
that lenders need to be compensated not only for default risk, but also for the expected nominal
exchange rate depreciation. The bond price for local currency bonds is
                              1       et    1
                      qt =       
                                  E              (1 - Dt+1 )(r  +  + (1 - )qt+1 ) .                             (45)
                             1+r    e t +1  t +1
    24 Withabuse of notation Bt in this extension refers to debt in domestic goods, whereas in the baseline model, it
refers to debt in foreign currency.


                                                         37
For our definition of sovereign spreads with local currency debt, we follow Du and Schreger
(2016) and measure them with the local currency credit spread. This credit spread is the difference
in yield-to-maturity between defaultable and default-free bonds, both for instruments that are
denominated in the same currency and have equal duration.25 We compute the model with local
currency government debt using the same parameter values as in the baseline model.
    The second column of Table 5 reports the results for the model with local currency government
debt and shows that the properties of this version of the model are very similar to those in
the baseline model. The only significant difference is that mean spreads are lower when debt
is denominated in local currency, which we elaborate on below. Importantly, the standard
deviations of nominal domestic rates and inflation, as well as their correlations with spreads, are
unchanged relative to the baseline. In Appendix D, we also show that the impulse response to
productivity shocks and the behavior of the monetary wedge and nominal rate as functions of
debt are similar to the ones in the baseline model.
    The similar volatilities in nominal domestic rates across debt denomination highlight the
robustness of our first finding: default risk amplifies monetary frictions. The volatility in nominal
rates of 2.5 is larger than the volatility of 1.3 in the NK-Reference model with no default in Table
4.26
    Our second main finding, that monetary frictions discipline government default risk, is also
robust across debt denomination. The local currency debt specification also delivers a lower
mean spread of 1.9 relative to the mean spread of 3.2 in the Default-Reference model in Table 4. In
fact, with local currency, spreads are even lower than in the baseline model because the inflation
dynamics induce state-contingent debt repayments that are a good hedge for the sovereign:
high inflation in recessions means that the real burden of debt falls when income is low. These
desirable properties of local currency debt alleviate financial frictions and default risk, leading
to a lower average spread.
    Average credit spreads are also lower with local currency debt because lenders price the
product of nominal devaluations ee      1
                                          and future default risk, encoded in future prices q , which
implies that the covariance between these two variables alters the bond price. In our model, this
covariance is positive: high prices are associated with low nominal devaluation rates, which
boosts the average price of local currency bonds (or lowers the mean credit spread). We find,
nevertheless, that this effect is quantitatively small.


6.2       Variants on Interest Rate Rules
We now turn to our second extension of the baseline model that evaluates variations in the inter-
est rate rule. We consider two variations: one that increases the weight on inflation deviations
  25 In   our model, the foreign currency price of a default-free local currency bond is

                                           1       et    1
                                   qt =       
                                               E              (r  +  + (1 -  ) q t +1 ) .
                                          1+r    e t +1  t +1

  26 For  brevity, we focus only on the comparisons with the NK-Reference model with foreign currency because
results from an NK-Reference model with local currency debt are almost identical.



                                                            38
                                            Local       Rule with   Rule with
Mean                          Benchmark    currency     larger  P   output gap

  CPI inflation                      5.9        5.9           6.0          5.7
  Nominal domestic rate             11.2       11.3          11.2         11.0
  Spread                             2.6        1.9           2.9          2.7

Standard Deviation

  CPI inflation                      1.8        1.9           0.9          1.5
  Nominal domestic rate              2.5        2.5           1.6          2.2
  Spread                             0.9        0.4           0.9          0.9
  Output                             1.9        2.0           2.0          2.0
  Consumption aggregate              2.0        2.0           2.1          2.0
  Trade balance                      0.3        0.4           0.4          0.4
  Nominal depreciation rate          2.4        2.5           1.8          2.3

Correlation with Spread

  CPI inflation                       60        57             45          72
  Nominal domestic rate               64        61             62          76
  Output                            -60        -57           -63          -79
  Trade balance                       35        26             34          29
  Nominal depreciation rate           45        41             20          45

Correlation with Output

  CPI inflation                     -88        -86           -61          -84
  Nominal domestic rate             -96        -95           -91          -90
  Trade balance                     -18             5        -21          -12
  Nominal depreciation rate         -62        -58           -22          -48

                     Table 5: Moments: Extended Models




                                    39
and another that adds an output gap term.

Larger Weight on Inflation We have seen that our model generates sizable volatility in inflation
and nominal domestic rates relative to both reference models: NK-Reference and Default-
Reference. As in standard New Keynesian models, the volatilities of these variables are affected
by the weight on inflation deviations in the interest rate rule. We consider a comparative static
exercise that increases the weight on inflation  P to 2.5, from 1.4 in the benchmark. All other
parameters remain unchanged in this experiment.
    In Table 5, we report the first and second moments for this comparative static exercise. Higher
 P lowers the volatility of inflation, nominal domestic rates, and nominal devaluations. Spreads
in this model, however, increase modestly on average and display similar variability as in the
benchmark. All other volatilities and correlations are similar to the benchmark, including the
positive correlations of spreads with nominal rates and inflation. This comparative static exercise
maintains the same two-way interactions of monetary policy and default risk in the benchmark:
default risk amplifies monetary frictions, as seen by the higher volatility in nominal rates of 1.6
relative to the NK-Reference of 1.3, and monetary frictions continue to discipline default risk, as
seen by the lower mean spread of 2.9% relative to the Default-Reference of 3.2%.27

Weight on Output Gap The monetary policy rule in the baseline model has nominal domestic
rates responding only to inflation deviations. In this subsection, we expand the rule to include an
output gap term. We modified the baseline model by replacing the interest rate rule in equation
(12) with
                                                           Y
                                          t P        Yt
                                    i=i                      mt .                              (46)
                                                    Ytflex
The output gap is defined as the ratio of output in the model Yt relative to output in the model
with flexible prices Ytflex . Flexible output is defined as the average output in the Default-Reference
model conditional on the realization of the shock zt and also on whether or not the economy is
in default.28 We set the weight on the output gap to 0.5, which is the value in the rule of Taylor
(1993) and maintain all other parameters as in the benchmark model.
    In Table 5 we report results for this variation and show that the properties of our model
change very modestly. The mean and volatility of spreads remain practically unchanged, the
volatilities of inflation and nominal domestic rates are a bit lower, and the correlations of spreads
with nominal rates and inflation continue to be positive. In Appendix D, we present impulse
response functions to productivity shocks for this model as well as the monetary wedge and
nominal rates as a function of debt and show that they behave similarly to the benchmark model.
This robustness exercise shows that adding an output gap term to the interest rate rule does not
   27 The difference in the volatility of nominal rates arising from default becomes larger when we recompute the
NK-Reference model with a larger weight on inflation of 2.5, where the volatility of nominal rates is 0.9%.
   28 We average output across debt to smooth any potential differences in output arising from varying tightness in

financial frictions across debt levels because such tightness is not the same across models. Results nevertheless are
similar if we condition flexible output on all states and choices S = {s, B, , B }.




                                                         40
alter the interactions between monetary policy and default risk: default risk amplifies monetary
frictions, and monetary frictions discipline default risk.


6.3   Welfare
The paper has established that monetary policy interacts with sovereign default risk. We have
shown that in our benchmark model, as well as in the extensions presented in Table 5, interest
rate rules affect not only inflation but also the properties of sovereign spreads. Here we discuss
how welfare varies across these economies and focus on household welfare, as defined in (3). The
benchmark economy has two sources of inefficiency: pricing frictions and lack of commitment
to repay its debt, or default risk. Monetary policy affects both frictions, and therefore welfare
comparisons across monetary rules depend on how these rules interact with the two frictions.
Across model economies, the volatility of inflation and the mean spread are measures of the
costs of price frictions and default risk.

                                                                              Welfare (%)

                      NK-Default (monetary frictions)

                         Benchmark                                                    -.019
                         Rule with higher  P                                          +.009
                         Rule with output gap                                         -.007
                         Local currency debt                                          +.018

                      Default-Reference (no monetary frictions)                         .000

                            Table 6: Welfare, Relative to Default-Reference

    In Table 6 we compare welfare across models with different monetary and financial en-
vironments. We report gains and losses in consumption equivalence terms relative to the
Default-Reference model, which has no pricing frictions but features default risk.29 We evaluate
welfare at the mean level of productivity and zero debt. As is standard in the business cycle liter-
ature, including monetary economies, welfare differences are small across models. Nevertheless,
we find that, for some monetary rules, welfare is higher with pricing frictions than without.
    The top part of the table reports welfare for the NK-Default model, our benchmark together
with the alternative monetary rules considered in the previous section. It shows that welfare
in our benchmark specification is lower than in the Default-Reference model. Consumption
equivalent welfare is .019% lower in our benchmark model because, although our model has
lower spreads, it has higher inflation variability. This welfare ranking depends crucially on the
coefficient on inflation in the interest rate rule  P . With a larger  P coefficient, welfare becomes
higher in our NK-Default model than in the Default-Reference model, even though this latter
model does not suffer from pricing frictions: for  P = 2.5, consumption equivalent welfare
  29 Consumption equivalent, C E , is computed from household welfare V h   using log utility as C E = exp[(1 - )V h ].


                                                       41
is .009% higher. The ranking arises because the disciplining benefits of monetary frictions on
borrowing compensate for the costs arising from inflation volatility. We find that welfare in
our benchmark model is actually non-monotonic with respect to the coefficient  P , reaching a
maximum at  P = 2.5. The rule with an output gap term performs better than the benchmark
but worse than the Default-Reference model and the high  P case because inflation remains
quite volatile.
    The table also illustrates the importance of the denomination of sovereign debt for the welfare
effects of monetary policy. Welfare is about .018% higher when sovereign debt is denominated
in local currency in our environment with pricing frictions than in the Default-Reference model.
Interestingly, our results show that local currency debt is superior to foreign currency debt by
about 0.037% of consumption, as seen by the difference in welfare between the local currency
debt model and the benchmark. The benefits of local currency debt come from lower spreads
and the insurance-like properties discussed in Section 6.1.
    Finally, we compare these welfare results with those in Galí and Monacelli (2005). A main
finding in that paper is that the optimal monetary policy completely stabilizes domestic inflation
and replicates the flexible price model. These results do not hold in our model when the
government lacks commitment to repay its debt. With default risk, welfare can be higher with
rules that do not completely stabilize inflation, as seen by the higher welfare in the model with
a higher  P coefficient, relative to the Default-Reference model without monetary frictions (or
equivalently strict inflation targeting). Nevertheless, our results resemble those in Galí and
Monacelli (2005) in that an interest rate rule that targets domestic inflation is useful for welfare.
In that paper, such an interest rate rule achieves welfare levels close to the optimal policy because
they work well to stabilize domestic inflation. In our framework with default risk, the same
interest rate rule is useful to alleviate both frictions because it stabilizes inflation and disciplines
default risk.


7    Conclusion
We have developed a framework that combines two important aspects of current policy in
emerging markets: sovereign risk in government debt and inflation-targeting as monetary policy.
Our work embeds sovereign risk in a New Keynesian model, which is the workhorse framework
used for central bank policy. We find that the monetary transmission is altered when economies
face sovereign default risk. Monetary policy that targets inflation requires larger fluctuations in
nominal domestic rates when the risk of default is a concern. Monetary frictions also discipline
sovereign risk and slow down debt accumulation. These results are robust to salient extensions
of the benchmark environment, including debt denominated in local currency and rich interest
rate rules. Quantitatively, the model replicates key moments in emerging market data, including
the comovements of spreads with nominal domestic rates and inflation, and it provides insights
into the conduct of monetary policy during Brazil's 2015 recession. These results show that
the current standard paradigm in central banks is incomplete and points toward incorporating
sovereign risk.
    In the last decade, many emerging markets have been successful in bringing down inflation


                                                  42
and giving central banks the independence to maintain stable prices. New Keynesian monetary
theory has been an important pillar in guiding such processes, but such theory was developed
for countries with deep and well-functioning financial markets. The growing literature on the
interaction between monetary theory and financial frictions has identified that some of the
lessons are modified, yet many open questions remain. An important question relates to the
optimality of interest rate rules and on whether these rules should depend not only on inflation
but also on financial conditions. Aoki et al. (2018) show that a combination of capital controls
and monetary policy works best for economies with pricing frictions and financial frictions
arising in banks with balance sheet concerns. Arellano et al. (2019) show that in economies with
sovereign risk, an interest rate rule that also responds to sovereign spreads goes a long way
toward preventing overborrowing while maintaining the benefits of low inflation. Low inflation,
unfortunately, has not been uniformly achieved in emerging markets, especially those with
chronic financial crises, such as Argentina and Turkey. An important open question involves the
links between financial imperfections and the inability of governments to achieve a successful
monetary policy.


References
Aguiar, M., M. Amador, E. Farhi, and G. Gopinath (2013, October). Crisis and commitment:
 Inflation credibility and the vulnerability to sovereign debt crises. Working Paper 19516,
 National Bureau of Economic Research.

Aguiar, M., M. Amador, and S. Fourakis (2019). On the welfare losses from external sovereign
 borrowing.

Aguiar, M. and G. Gopinath (2006). Defaultable debt, interest rates and the current account.
 Journal of International Economics 69(1), 64­83.

Aoki, K., G. Benigno, and N. Kiyotaki (2018). Monetary and financial policies in emerging
 markets. Princeton university working paper.

Arellano, C. (2008). Default risk and income fluctuations in emerging economies. American
 Economic Review 98(3), 690­712.

Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and G. Mihalache (2018). Default risk, sectoral reallocation, and persistent
  recessions. Journal of International Economics 112, 182 ­ 199.

Arellano, C., Y. Bai, and G. Mihalache (2019). Optimal simple monetary rules with sovereign
 risk. University of rochester mimeo.

Arellano, C. and A. Ramanarayanan (2012). Default and the maturity structure in sovereign
 bonds. Journal of Political Economy 120(2), 187­232.

Bacchetta, P., E. Perazzi, and E. van Wincoop (2018). Self-fulfilling debt crises: What can monetary
  policy do? Journal of International Economics 110, 119 ­ 134.

                                                43
Bianchi, J. and J. Mondragon (2018, December). Monetary Independence and Rollover Crises.
  Working paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Bianchi, J., P. Ottonello, and I. Presno (2018, March). Fiscal policy, sovereign risk and unemploy-
  ment.

Blanchard, O., J. D. Ostry, A. R. Ghosh, and M. Chamon (2017, August). Are Capital Inflows
  Expansionary or Contractionary? Theory, Policy Implications, and Some Evidence. IMF
  Economic Review 65(3), 563­585.

Calvo, G. A. (1988). Servicing the public debt: The role of expectations. The American Economic
 Review 78(4), 647­661.

Chatterjee, S. and B. Eyigungor (2012). Maturity, indebtedness, and default risk. American
 Economic Review 102(6), 2674­2699.

Corsetti, G. and L. Dedola (2016). The mystery of the printing press: Monetary policy and
 self-fulfilling debt crises. Journal of the European Economic Association 14(6), 1329­1371.

Corsetti, G., L. Dedola, and S. Leduc (2010). Chapter 16 - optimal monetary policy in open
 economies. Volume 3 of Handbook of Monetary Economics, pp. 861 ­ 933. Elsevier.

Corsetti, G. and P. Pesenti (2001, 05). Welfare and Macroeconomic Interdependence*. The
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 116(2), 421­445.

Cruces, J. J. and C. Trebesch (2013, July). Sovereign defaults: The price of haircuts. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 5(3), 85­117.

Cuadra, G. and H. Sapriza (2008). Sovereign default, interest rates and political uncertainty in
 emerging markets. Journal of International Economics 76(1), 78 ­ 88.

Devereux, M. B., E. R. Young, and C. Yu (2019). Capital controls and monetary policy in
 sudden-stop economies. Journal of Monetary Economics 103, 52 ­ 74.

Du, W. and J. Schreger (2016). Local currency sovereign risk. Journal of Finance 71(3), 1027­1069.

Dvorkin, M., J. M. Sanchez, H. Sapriza, and E. Yurdagul (2018, June). Sovereign Debt Restructur-
 ings. Working Papers 2018-13, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis.

Eaton, J. and M. Gersovitz (1981). Debt with Potential Repudiation: Theoretical and Empirical
  Analysis. Review of Economic Studies 48(2), 289­309.

Engel, C. and J. Park (2019, May). Debauchery and original sin: The currency composition of
  sovereign debt. University of wisconsin working paper.

Fanelli, S. (2017). Monetary policy, capital controls, and international portfolios.

Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2012, June). Dealing with the trilemma: Optimal capital controls with
  fixed exchange rates. Working Paper 18199, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                                44
Galí, J. and T. Monacelli (2005). Monetary policy and exchange rate volatility in a small open
 economy. Review of Economic Studies 72(3), 707­734.

Gordon, G. (2019, September). Efficient Computation with Taste Shocks. Working Paper 19-15,
 Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.

Ha, J., M. A. Kose, and F. Ohnsorge (2019). Inflation in Emerging and Developing Economies.

Hatchondo, J. C. and L. Martinez (2009). Long-duration bonds and sovereign defaults. Journal of
 International Economics 79(1), 117 ­ 125.

Hatchondo, J. C., L. Martinez, and H. Sapriza (2009, November). Heterogeneous Borrowers In
 Quantitative Models Of Sovereign Default. International Economic Review 50(4), 1129­1151.

Hatchondo, J. C., L. Martinez, and C. Sosa-Padilla (2016). Debt dilution and sovereign default
 risk. Journal of Political Economy 124(5), 1383­1422.

Hur, S., I. O. Kondo, and F. Perri (2018, December). Real Interest Rates, Inflation, and Default.
 Staff Report 574, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

Koop, G., M. H. Pesaran, and S. M. Potter (1996). Impulse response analysis in nonlinear
 multivariate models. Journal of Econometrics 74(1), 119­147.

Lorenzoni, G. and I. Werning (2019). Slow moving debt crises. American Economic Review.

Mendoza, E. G. and V. Z. Yue (2012, 04). A General Equilibrium Model of Sovereign Default and
 Business Cycles*. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 127(2), 889­946.

Miao, J. and P. Ngo (2018). Does calvo meet rotemberg at the zero lower bound? Boston
 university working paper.

Na, S., S. Schmitt-Grohé, M. Uribe, and V. Yue (2018, July). The twin ds: Optimal default and
 devaluation. American Economic Review 108(7), 1773­1819.

Nuno, G. and C. Thomas (2019, February). Monetary policy and sovereign debt vulnerability.
 Technical report, Bank of Spain.

Ottonello, P. and D. Perez (2019). The currency composition of sovereign debt. American Economic
  Journal: Macroeconomics.

Roger, S. (2009). Inflation targeting at 20 - achievements and challenges.

Rotemberg, J. J. (1982). Sticky prices in the united states. Journal of Political Economy 90(6),
 1187­1211.

Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe (2003). Closing small open economy models. Journal of Interna-
  tional Economics 61(1), 163­185.

Schmitt-Grohé, S. and M. Uribe (2007). Optimal simple and implementable monetary and fiscal
  rules. Journal of Monetary Economics 54(6), 1702 ­ 1725.

                                               45
Sunder-Plassmann, L. (2018). Inflation, default and sovereign debt: The role of denomination
  and ownership.

Taylor, J. B. (1993). Discretion versus policy rules in practice. Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
  on Public Policy 39, 195 ­ 214.




                                                 46
  O NLINE A PPENDIX TO "M ONETARY P OLICY AND S OVEREIGN
        R ISK IN E MERGING E CONOMIES (NK-D EFAULT )"
                BY   C RISTINA A RELLANO , YAN B AI , AND G ABRIEL M IHALACHE



A     Deriving the Government Borrowing
In this appendix, we derive the government's optimal borrowing equation (33) in Section 3.2.
To illustrate the government's borrowing incentives, we assume that all the policy functions
are differentiable with respect to state B and that the first-order conditions are sufficient for the
government's optimization problem. Conditional on not defaulting, the government chooses
{C, C f , N ,  , B } to solve the following problem:
                                                                         (s , B )
W (s, B) = max u(C, C f , N ) +  g E                 W (s , B )d( ) +               [W d ( s ) -  ] d  (  )
                                         (s   ,B )
                                                                                                         (47)
subject to the constraints arising from the Private and Monetary Equilibrium
                                                                              
         [] C + [C f + ( + r  ) B - q(s, B ) B - (1 - ) B ] -1 = 1 - ( -  )2 zN ,                        (48)
                                                                              2
             uC f           f          
                                                                          1
        [e ]      =      [ C + (  + r ) B - q ( s, B ) B - (1 -  ) B ] ,  - 1                            (49)
               uC   -1
                  P
         [ ] i       m  M ( s, B , 0) = u C ,                                                            (50)
                 
             -1        u                1
         []          - N -1 +                 F ( s, B , 0) = (  -  )  ,                                 (51)
                      zuC             uC zN

where the default cutoff  (s , B ) equals W d (s ) - W (s , B ) and the functions F (s, B , 0) and
M (s, B , 0) are defined in (27) and (28) with  = 0. Here we have substituted the terms of trade
e and the nominal domestic rate i using the balance of payments condition (22) and the interest
rate rule (26). Let , e ,  , and  be the Lagrange multipliers on the resource constraint (48), the
relative demand condition (49), the domestic Euler condition (50), and the NKPC condition (51),
respectively. Note that a positive  is associated with a smaller left-hand side of (50) than its
right-hand side. Similarly, a positive  is associated with a smaller left-hand side of (51) than its
right-hand side.




                                                     47
    The first-order conditions over C, C f , N ,  , and B are
                        uCC f uC - uCC uC f                              uCC    - 1 uN   F ( s, B , 0)
         uC -  - e                        2
                                                        +  uCC +             -         +               = 0,            (52)
                                  (uC )                                  uC      zuC        zNuC
                               e 2-    uC f C f uC - uCC f uC f
         uC f -       e + e          -
                   -1       (  - 1)2             ( u C )2
                             u f      - 1 uN             F ( s, B , 0)
                 +  uCC f +  CC -                  +                      = 0,                                         (53)
                              uC        zuC                 zNuC
                                        - 1 u NN              F ( s, B , 0)
         u N +  1 - (  -  )2 z -                        +                    = 0,                                      (54)
                   2                      zuC                   N 2 zuC
                              u
         - ( -  )zN -  P C + (2 -  ) = 0,                                                                              (55)
                               

           dq                                 1   2-         M         1 F
      q+        B - (1 -  ) B          e - e         e   - i   -                                                       (56)
           dB                     -1         -1-1            B       uC zN  B
                                                         1   
      =  g E(1 - D )(r  +  + (1 - )q(s , B ))      e - e       ( e )2-  .
                                                -1       -1-1

We can replace the multipliers  and e with (C, C f , N ,  ) using the first-order conditions of (52)
                                               1      2- 
and (53). We can replace the term  -1 e - e -    1  -1 e     on the Euler equation (56) with the
                X:
borrowing wedge m
                                 X
                                 m = G X [uC  + (( - 1)/  + ( -  ) ) ] ,
                            u f f uC -u     u                u
                             C C        CC f C f      uCC
                                                          - u CC
                                                                  f
                                  uC u f               u2     C uC f                 u f
where G X =                           C
                                  u f f uC -u
                                                        C
                                                      u f   u      u -uCC u f   -     CC
                                                                                    uC u f   . Also we define the borrowing
                e 1 -  / (  -1) -  C  C        CC f    C + CC f C          C            C
                                         uC u f                      u2
                                             C                        C
      C as
wedge m
                                              C             M     1   F
                                              m = i           +          .
                                                            B   uC zN  B
                                  X and  C into the equation (56), we obtain the Euler
Plugging the two borrowing wedges m     m
equation (33) in Section 3.2.


B      Proofs
B.1     Proof of Proposition 1
The proof consists of two parts. In the first part, we prove that higher borrowing B increases
future default risk. In the second part we show that, under Assumption 1, current inflation, the
nominal domestic rate, and the monetary wedge increase with B .




                                                                    48
    We first present the Private and Monetary Equilibrium under the quasi-linear preferences in
(36). In state S = (s, B, , B ), the equilibrium satisfies the following conditions
                                                                  
                                        ~,  ) N 1 -
           C + (C ( - 1)(1 -  )/ )) = z(z                           (  -  )2 ,                      (57)
                                                                  2
                -1        CN 1/                       C
  ( -  ) =                         -1        +              F ( s, B ,  ),                          (58)
                             ~,  )
                           z(z                      ~,  ) N
                                                  z(z
           
              = i  M ( s, B ,  ),                                                     (59)
           C
                    P
            i=i            m,                                                         (60)
                   
          C f = (C ( - 1)(1 -  )/ ))-1 + (1 - ) q(s, B )( B - (1 - ) B) - (r  + ) B , (61)

where we used the definition of exports, X = e  with  = 1, and the relations uC f /uC =
e/( - 1), uC f = 1 -  , uC =  /C, and -u N = N 1/ . The F and M function are given by (27)
and (28), respectively. In the following, we consider how B affects default risk and the Private
and Monetary Equilibrium.

Higher B increases default risk Es [( (s , B ))] We first show that the government's value
under repayment W (s, B) is decreasing in B. Take two values B0 and B1 with 0 < B0 < B1 . We
want to show W (s, B0 ) > W (s, B1 ) for any given s. First, for a given B , the current debt B is
absorbed by C f and does not affect {C, N ,  , i }. We can therefore write {C, N ,  , i } as functions
of (s, B ) and C f as a function of (s, B, B ), conditional on repayment. Hence, every B that is
feasible under B1 is also feasible under B0 since (C, N ,  , i ) remains the same under the same B ,
while C f can take any real value. Moreover,

                  (1 - )q(s, B ) B0 + (r  + ) B0 < (1 - )q(s, B ) B1 + (r  + ) B1
since q(s, B )  0 and r  +  > 0. This implies C f (s, B0 , B ) > C f (s, B1 , B ) for any given (s, B ).
Let B1 and B0 be the optimal borrowing levels associated with B1 and B0 , respectively. The
following inequalities hold

                  W (s, B1 ) = u C (s, B1 ), C f (s, B1 , B1 ), N ( B1 ) +  g EV (s , B1 )

                             < u C (s, B1 ), C f (s, B0 , B1 ), N (s, B1 ) +  g EV (s , B1 )

                              u C (s, B0 ), C f (s, B0 , B0 ), N (s, B0 ) +  g EV (s , B0 )
                             = W (s, B0 ).
Note that the first inequality holds because C f (s, B0 , B ) > C f (s, B1 , B ), and the second inequal-
ity holds because under B0 , B1 is feasible yet B0 is the optimal choice. Hence for B0 < B1 ,
W (s, B0 ) > W (s, B1 ) for any given s.
    The default cutoff given by  (s, B) = W d (s) - W (s, B) increases with B since the repaying
value W (s, B) decreases with B for any given s and the defaulting value W d (s) is independent of
B. This makes the default probability ( (s, B)) increase with B for any given s. As a result,
the default risk given by Es [( (s , B ))] increases with B .

                                                      49
Higher B increases inflation, the nominal rate, and the monetary wedge We consider the
case when the the economy is in good credit standing, with  = 0. B impacts {C, N ,  , i }
exclusively through its effect on the F and M functions. We approximate the system of equations
(57­61) and the monetary wedge given by

                                                              ~,  )
                                                            z(z
                                             weg =                  -1
                                                           CN 1/

with a first-order Taylor expansion around the equilibrium and the monetary wedge (C, N ,  , i,
weg) associated with B . We focus on a level of borrowing B where inflation is close to target
and the monetary wedge is close to zero. We solve for deviations of the equilibrium variables.
In the solution, holding shocks constant dz~ = dm = 0, the deviation of inflation d , nominal
domestic rates di, and the monetary wedge dweg are

                                                              1
                                            d  = a1 -            dM + dF                                    (62)
                                                              a0
                                                   i
                                           di =  P d                                                        (63)
                                                   
                                                     i
                                         dweg = a2     dM +  P dF                                           (64)
                                                     

where the positive constants a1 and a2 are a convolution of parameters,
                  C                                   (1+ 1
                                                           ( C +  (1- C ))) C
a1 =          -1                       > 0, a2 =            -1                       > 0, and C = C / N > 0. The
         +  p  (1+ 1
        2
                    ( C +  (1- C )))               1+  p         1
                                                             (1+  ( C +  (1- C )))
deviations of inflation, nominal rates, and the monetary wedge derived in (62­64) together with
Assumption 1 prove the result.


B.2      Proofs for Two-Period Example
Here we collect all the proofs for Section 4.2.

B.2.1    Proof of Lemma 1

Proof. Simplifying the system of equations of the private equilibrium (37) under no default, we
can show the second period's consumption C2 solves the following condition

                              C2 + [C2 ( - 1)(1 -  )/( )] = z ( z/C2 ) .                                    (65)

Let the optimal solution be C2 (z), which increases with z. The consumption in default C2d (zd )
satisfies equation (65) with the productivity given by zd . Assuming zd  z and given that C2 (z)
is strictly increasing, we infer that C2d (zd )  C2 (z). Define a function U (C, z
                                                                                 ~ ) as

                                                                                       ~ / C )1+ 
                                                                                     ( z
                           ~ )  log(C ) + [C ( - 1)(1 -  )/( )]-1 -
                     U (C, z                                                                      .
                                                                                      1 + 1/



                                                            50
It is easy to show that the repayment value in period 2 is linear in B and given by W2 ( B) =
U (C2 (z), z) - B. The defaulting value is given by W2 d -  = U (C ( z ), z ) -  for any utility
                                                                    2d d   d
cost .
    The default cutoff  ( B; z) equalizes the defaulting value and the repayment value, that is,
                              U (C2 (z), z) - B = U (C2d (zd ), zd ) - 
so that it is linear in B and the difference in payoffs between default and repayment
                            ( B; z) = U (C2d (zd ), zd ) - U (C2 (z), z) + B.
Default is preferred if and only if the default cost is small enough, i.e.,    ( B; z). The default
probability is therefore given by ( ( B; z)) with the following derivatives
             ( ( B; z))               ( B; z)
                        = ( ( B; z))            = ( ( B; z))  0
              B                       B
             ( ( B; z))                ( B; z )               U (C2 (z), z)
                        = ( ( B; z))            = -( ( B; z))                0,
              z                       z                           z
                               ( B;z)        U ( C ( z ),z )
                                             2
where we used the relation z = -            z      0 since the function U (Cz (z), z) increases
with z. In summary, default risk increases with debt B and decreases with productivity z.



B.2.2   Proof of Proposition 2

Proof. Here we want to prove that higher default risk increases the monetary wedge in period 1.
The private allocations (C1 , N1 ) and the terms of trade of e1 satisfy the following three equations
                                    
                            C1 + e1 = N1 ,                                                      (66)
                                          
                                   C1 =           e ,                                           (67)
                                     ( - 1)(1 -  ) 1
                               1   i 1 - ( ( B)) ( ( B))
                                 =                 +      .                                     (68)
                               C1  ~       C2         C2d
Differentiating the above system of equations, we have
                                               C1  i            1   1
                               d log C1 = -                       -       d ,
                                                 ~             C2d C2
                                                                
                                                 C1  e
                                 d log N1 =         + 1             d log C1 .
                                                 N1  N1
                                                                   1/
The monetary wedge in period 1 is weg1 =  / C1 N1             - 1. Using this expression and the
above two equations for d log C1 and d log N1 , we can solve for the derivative of monetary wedge
with respect to default risk
                                              
                   dweg1       1    C1  e                          i      1   1
                         =             + 1           +1                     -      0.
                    d               N1  N1                     ~ N1
                                                                  1/     C2d C2

A higher default risk raises the monetary wedge, since C2d  C2 .

                                                      51
B.2.3   Proof of Lemma 2

Proof. To prove Lemma 2, we first characterize the equilibrium C and N under our model and
under the flexible-price economy. Using the system of equations (66­68), we can show that C1 ( B)
and N1 ( B) satisfy
                                            1                  1
                           C1 ( B) =                1-( ( B))       ( ( B))
                                                                              ,                    (69)
                                          (i / ~)               +
                                                      C2             C2d
                                                                         
                                                      ( - 1)(1 -  )
                           N1 ( B) = C1 ( B) +                                C1 ( B) .            (70)
                                                           

Similarly, the equilibrium allocations in the flexible-price economy satisfy the following two
equations under the optimal choice of Bflex :

                                flex      1                    1
                               C1    =                   ))
                                                 1-( ( Bflex          ))
                                                              ( ( Bflex
                                                                                  ,                (71)
                                         rflex                  +
                                                    C2            C2d

                             flex    flex           ( - 1)(1 -  )  flex 
                            N1    = C1    +                          (C1 ) .                       (72)
                                                            

   When B  Bflex , C ( B )  Cflex for two reasons. First, according to Proposition 2, when
                      1         1
B  Bflex , the default risk is higher, i.e. ( ( B))  ( ( Bflex
                                                                  )). This together with the

condition C2d  C2 implies that the future marginal utility is higher in our model, i.e.

                   1 - ( ( B)) ( ( B))  1 - ( ( Bflex
                                                  ))    ( ( Bflex
                                                              ))
                              +                       +           .
                       C2       C2d          C2          C2d

Note that C2 is independent of B due to quasi-linear preferences in C f . Second, according to
Assumption 2, the real interest rate is higher in our model, i /~  rflex . Comparing equation (69)
with (71), we see that C1 ( B)  C1flex when B  B due to both the higher default risk and the
                                                   flex
higher interest rate in our model. Comparing (70) with (72), we can show that N1 ( B)  N1      flex

because C1 ( B)  C1 flex .

   The monetary wedge defined in (19) is

                                                                    
                                   monetary wedge =                1/
                                                                        - 1.
                                                               N1 C1

Given that N1 ( B)1/ C1 ( B)/  ( N1
                                  flex )1/ Cflex /  = 1, the monetary wedge in our model is
                                            1
non-negative. Define the borrowing wedge m    C ( B ) as


    C               u N ( B)     [1 + ( - 1)e1 ( B)-1 ] i ( ( B))(uC2d - uC2 )
    m ( B)   =    1+ 1
                    uC1 ( B)                       uC1 ( B)~
                   monetary wedge [1 + ( - 1)e1 ( B)-1 ]C1 ( B) i ( ( B))                  1   1
             =                                                                               -     (73)
                 1 + monetary wedge                  ~                                    C2d C2
                                                                                     , the
which is non-negative as long as the monetary wedge is non-negative. Hence, for B  Bflex
monetary wedge is non-negative and m   C ( B )  0.


                                                       52
B.2.4   Proof of Proposition 3

Proof. We first derive the government's Euler equation in the flexible-price economy. The
                              f                            f                           d-
government chooses B, C1 , C1 , and N1 to maximize u(C1 , C1 , N1 ) +  g max W2 ( B), W2
                                                                                    
                                                 f                                  -1
                                                         1+r  [1 -  (  ( B ))] B
subject to the resource constraint C1 +         C1   -    1                                  = N1 . The first-order
condition on B gives rise to

                                    1 - h( ( Bflex
                                                       
                                                   )) Bflex =  g (1 + r  ).
                                                                         f
   In our baseline model, the government chooses B, C1 , C1 , and N1 to solve the following
problem
                                                                                 ( B)
                       f                                                                  d
    max u    C1 ( B), C1 ( B), N1 ( B)    +  g [1 - ( ( B))]W2 ( B) +                   (W2 -  )d( ) ,
                                                                               -

subject to
                                                                         
                                      f      1                           -1
                            C1 +     C1   -     
                                                 [1 - ( ( B))] B              = N1 ,
                                            1+r
                                                                                         1
                                          f    1                                         -1
                      C1 =               C1 -     
                                                   [1 - ( ( B))] B                            ,
                           ( - 1)(1 -  )      1+r
                                               1
                                                  = i  M ( B ),
                                               C1
where the expected future marginal utility function M( B) is given by

                                     1                        1             1
                          M( B) =          [1 - ( ( B))]         + ( ( B))               .
                                     ~
                                                              C2           C2d
                                                                              C ( B ) given by
Taking first order conditions on B, we can show that equation (40) holds with m
equation (73).
   We now prove that default probability is lower in the baseline model,   flex          , by

contradiction. Suppose when  > flex     for B > B . According to Lemma 2,  C ( B )  0.
                                                     flex                          m
Given that we focus on hazard functions strictly increasing in , we can show the following
inequalities hold:
                            C ( B )
                            m
  1 - h( ( B )) B -                   1 - h( ( B )) B < 1 - h( ( Bflex
                                                                           
                                                                       )) Bflex =  g (1 + r  ).
                        1 - ( ( B ))
Hence we reach a contradiction on the optimality of B . In equilibrium, it has to be the case that
       and    .
B  Bflex              flex



C       Impulse Response Functions to Monetary Shock
In the event analysis we perform a counterfactual to Brazil by altering the path of nominal
domestic rates using monetary shocks m. In this appendix, we present detailed impulse response

                                                      53
functions for high monetary shocks m for aggregate output, domestic consumption, imports,
inflation, nominal rates, terms of trade, debt, and spreads for our benchmark model augmented
to have monetary shocks, with log m  N (0, 0.001). Figure 9 plots the responses to a 1% increase
in the m shock above its mean. The solid blue lines are for the benchmark NK-Default model,
and the dashed red lines are for the NK-Reference model. In our model, tight monetary policy
depresses output, domestic and foreign goods consumption, and inflation, and leads to a decline
in borrowing and sovereign spreads.


D     Extensions and Robustness
This appendix contains additional plots for the extensions and robustness exercises in Section 6.
We report impulse response functions to low-productivity realizations, mirroring Figure 5, for
the three extensions considered: local currency government debt in Figure 10, an interest rate
rule with a higher weight on inflation in Figure 11, and the interest rate rule with an output gap
term in Figure 12. In all three figures, the solid blue line is our baseline NK-Default model, and
the dashed red line is the extended model.
    Figure 13 plots the monetary wedge (left panels) and the nominal domestic rate (right panels)
against the level of debt for the benchmark model, in solid blue lines, and for extended models,
in dashed red lines. This figure shows that the analysis in Section 5.4 applies to the extended
models, as the behavior of the monetary wedge and nominal rates in the two high and low
default zones, respectively, is similar to that in the baseline model.


E    NK-Reference with Global Methods
In the main text, we use as the NK-Reference model a version of Galí and Monacelli (2005) solved
using local methods with very loose borrowing constraints. This appendix contains results from
a version of our baseline model reparameterized to have loose borrowing constraints, no default
risk in equilibrium, and a global methods solution. We show that despite seemingly different
international borrowing Euler equations (33) and (34), arising from households borrowing in the
NK-Reference model while the government is borrowing in our model, the results from these
models are very similar. The reason is that, with loose borrowing constraints, the borrowing
wedges  X and  C are close to zero.
    We reparameterize the NK-Default model to match key properties of the NK-Reference
environment: spreads with zero mean and zero volatility, and consumption volatility in line
with the data. To implement these alternative targets, we start with the baseline parameter
values but set 0 = -0.145, D  0, and  g = . These parameters result in ample borrowing
opportunities and spreads with mean and volatility less than 1 basis point. Table 7 compares the
second moments of NK-Reference and the reparameterized NK-Default model, which we label
Global NK-Reference. Their behavior is very similar: the volatilities of CPI inflation and the
nominal domestic rate are close and much lower than in the baseline model, whereas the ratio of
trade balance to output is strongly procyclical and four times more volatile than in baseline, a tell


                                                 54
0.2                                                         0.2

  0                                                           0
-0.2
                                                            -0.2
-0.4
                       NK-Default                           -0.4
-0.6                                                                                 NK-Default
                                                            -0.6
-0.8

 -1                    NK-Reference                         -0.8
                                                                                     NK-Reference
-1.2                                                          -1
   -10      -5     0       5        10      15   20            -10      -5       0       5         10   15   20


                 (a) Output (Y )                                   (b) Domestic Goods Consumption (C)

  2                                                           0

                       NK-Reference
  1
                                                            -0.5

  0                                                                                  NK-Default

                                                              -1
 -1

                       NK-Default                                                    NK-Reference
 -2                                                         -1.5
  -10       -5     0       5        10      15   20            -10      -5       0       5         10   15   20


       (c) Foreign Goods Consumption (C f )                                    (d) Inflation ( )

  3                                                         0.4
                                                                                     NK-Default
2.5                    NK-Default                           0.2

  2
                                                              0
                       NK-Reference
1.5
                                                            -0.2
  1

0.5                                                         -0.4
                                                                                     NK-Reference
  0
                                                            -0.6
   -10      -5     0       5        10      15   20            -10      -5       0       5         10   15   20


          (e) Nominal Domestic Rate (i)                                      (f) Terms of Trade (e)

  3                                                           0

  2
                               NK-Reference                -0.05

  1
                                                            -0.1
  0

                                                           -0.15
 -1                                                                                   NK-Default
                               NK-Default
 -2                                                         -0.2
  -10       -5     0       5        10      15   20            -10      -5       0       5         10   15   20


                   (g) Debt ( B)                                                  (h) Spread

                         Figure 9: Impulse Responses to Monetary Shock


                                                      55
0.2                                                                       0.2


   0                                                                        0

                                                                         -0.2
-0.2                                      Local Currency                                                    Local Currency
                                                                         -0.4
-0.4
                                                                         -0.6
-0.6
                                                                         -0.8
-0.8
                                                                           -1
                                    Foreign Currency                                                               Foreign Currency
  -1                                                                     -1.2

-1.2                                                                     -1.4
    -10        -5     0         5            10          15   20             -10          -5          0            5          10         15   20



                    (a) Output (Y )                                             (b) Domestic Goods Consumption (C)

0.2                                                                       1.4

   0                                                                      1.2

-0.2
                                                                            1
-0.4                                 Foreign Currency
                                                                          0.8
-0.6
                                                                          0.6
                                                                                                                           Foreign Currency
-0.8
                                                                          0.4
  -1
                                                                          0.2
-1.2                                                                                                      Local Currency
-1.4                                                                        0
                          Local Currency
-1.6                                                                     -0.2
    -10        -5     0         5            10          15   20             -10          -5          0            5          10         15   20




          (c) Foreign Goods Consumption (C f )                                                      (d) Inflation ( )

1.8                                                                     0.04

1.6                                                                     0.02
1.4                                                                         0
1.2
                                                                        -0.02
                                     Foreign Currency
   1
                                                                        -0.04
0.8
                                                                        -0.06
0.6                                                                                                            Foreign Currency
                                                                        -0.08
0.4

0.2                                                                      -0.1
                                        Local Currency
   0                                                                    -0.12           Local Currency
-0.2                                                                    -0.14
    -10        -5     0         5            10          15   20             -10          -5          0            5          10         15   20



             (e) Nominal Domestic Rate (i)                                                     (f) Terms of Trade (e)

0.5                                                                       0.9

                                                                          0.8
   0
                          Foreign Currency                                0.7

                                                                          0.6                                Foreign Currency
-0.5
                                                                          0.5

  -1                                  Local Currency                      0.4      Local Currency
                                                                          0.3
-1.5
                                                                          0.2

                                                                          0.1
  -2
                                                                            0

-2.5                                                                     -0.1
    -10        -5     0         5            10          15   20             -10          -5          0            5          10         15   20



                      (g) Debt ( B)                                                                       (h) Spread

              Figure 10: Local Currency: Impulse Responses to Productivity Shock


                                                                   56
0.2                                                                                     0.2

   0                                                                                      0

-0.2                                                                                   -0.2

-0.4                                       = 1.4                                       -0.4                                       = 1.4
                                         P                                                                                    P

-0.6                                                                                   -0.6

-0.8                                                                                   -0.8

  -1                                                                                     -1

-1.2                                                                                   -1.2                                        P
                                                                                                                                       = 2.0
                                         P
                                              = 2.0
-1.4                                                                                   -1.4
    -10        -5            0                  5                10    15   20             -10     -5              0              5              10   15   20



                            (a) Output (Y )                                                   (b) Domestic Goods Consumption (C)

0.2                                                                                     1.2

   0                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                       = 1.4
-0.2                                                           = 1.4                                                               P
                                                           P                            0.8
-0.4
                                                                                        0.6
-0.6
                                                                                        0.4
-0.8
                                                                                        0.2
  -1

                                                                                                                                   P
                                                                                                                                       = 2.0
-1.2                                                                                      0
                                         P
                                             = 2.0
-1.4                                                                                   -0.2
    -10        -5            0                  5                10    15   20             -10     -5              0              5              10   15   20



          (c) Foreign Goods Consumption (C f )                                                                (d) Inflation ( )

1.8                                                                                   0.02

1.6
                                                                                          0
1.4            P
                    = 1.4
                                                                                      -0.02
1.2
                                                                                      -0.04
   1

0.8                                                                                   -0.06

0.6                                                                                                                                           = 1.4
                                                                                      -0.08                                               P
0.4
                                                                                       -0.1
0.2
                                                       P
                                                           = 2.0
                                                                                      -0.12
   0                                                                                                              = 2.0
                                                                                                              P
-0.2                                                                                  -0.14
    -10        -5            0                  5                10    15   20             -10     -5              0              5              10   15   20



             (e) Nominal Domestic Rate (i)                                                               (f) Terms of Trade (e)

0.5                                                                                     0.9
                                                                                                                              = 2.0
                                                                                        0.8       P
                                                                                                      = 1.4               P
   0
                                                                                        0.7
-0.5                                                                                    0.6

                                                                                        0.5
  -1
                                                                                        0.4
-1.5                                            P
                                                     = 1.4
                                                                                        0.3

  -2                                                                                    0.2

                                                                                        0.1
-2.5
                                                                                          0
                            P
                                 = 2.0
  -3                                                                                   -0.1
   -10         -5            0                  5                10    15   20             -10     -5              0              5              10   15   20



                             (g) Debt ( B)                                                                             (h) Spread

           Figure 11: Rule with Higher  P : Impulse Responses to Productivity Shock


                                                                                 57
0.2                                                                                  0.2


   0                                                                                   0

                                                                                    -0.2
-0.2
                                                                                    -0.4
-0.4                                                                                                                                       =0
                                                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                    -0.6
-0.6
                                   Y
                                       =0
                                                                                    -0.8
-0.8
                                                                                      -1

  -1                                                                                -1.2                                               Y
                                                                                                                                           = 0.5
                                            Y
                                                = 0.5
-1.2                                                                                -1.4
    -10        -5     0                 5               10        15     20             -10     -5           0                     5               10           15   20



                    (a) Output (Y )                                                        (b) Domestic Goods Consumption (C)

0.2                                                                                  1.2

   0                                                                                   1                                                   =0
                                                                                                                                    Y
                                                             Y
                                                                 = 0.5
-0.2
                                                                                     0.8
-0.4
                                                                                     0.6
-0.6
                                                                                     0.4
-0.8
                                                                                     0.2                                   Y
                                                                                                                               = 0.5
  -1
                                   =0
                               Y
-1.2                                                                                   0


-1.4                                                                                -0.2
    -10        -5     0                 5               10        15     20             -10     -5           0                     5               10           15   20



          (c) Foreign Goods Consumption (C f )                                                            (d) Inflation ( )

1.8                                                                                0.02

1.6                                Y
                                       =0
                                                                                       0
1.4
                                                                                   -0.02
1.2
                                                                                   -0.04                                           =0
   1                                                                                                                           Y
0.8                                                                                -0.06

0.6
                                                                                   -0.08
0.4
                                   Y
                                       = 0.5                                        -0.1
0.2
                                                                                   -0.12                  = 0.5
   0                                                                                                  Y
-0.2                                                                               -0.14
    -10        -5     0                 5               10        15     20             -10     -5           0                     5               10           15   20



             (e) Nominal Domestic Rate (i)                                                           (f) Terms of Trade (e)

0.5                                                                                  0.9

                                                                                     0.8
   0
                                                                                     0.7
-0.5                                                                                 0.6

                                                                                     0.5
  -1
                                       Y
                                         = 0.5
                                                                                     0.4
-1.5
                                                                                     0.3

  -2                                                                                 0.2                                                                = 0.5
                                                                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                     0.1
-2.5
                              =0                                                       0                              =0
                          Y                                                                                       Y
  -3                                                                                -0.1
   -10         -5     0                 5               10        15     20             -10     -5           0                     5               10           15   20



                      (g) Debt ( B)                                                                              (h) Spread

          Figure 12: Rule with Output Gap: Impulse Responses to Productivity Shock


                                                                              58
2.5                                                                            0.14

                                                                              0.135
   2
                                                                               0.13
                                                                                               Local Currency
1.5                                                                           0.125

                                                                               0.12
   1
                                         NK-Default                           0.115
                                                                                                                                 NK-Default
0.5
                                                                               0.11

   0                                                                          0.105

                                                                                0.1
-0.5
                    Local Currency                                            0.095

  -1                                                                           0.09
   0.2         0.25             0.3            0.35         0.4   0.45             0.2        0.25               0.3              0.35        0.4   0.45
                                        Debt                                                                             Debt


          (a) Monetary Wedge: Local Currency                                   (b) Nominal Domestic Rate: Local Currency

2.5                                                                            0.13

                                                                              0.125
   2
                                                                               0.12                      NK-Default
1.5
                                                                              0.115

   1                                                                           0.11

                                                                                                                             Y
                                                                                                                                 = 0.5
                                                    = 0.5                     0.105
0.5                                             Y
                                                                                0.1
   0
                                                                              0.095
                           NK-Default
-0.5                                                                           0.09
    0.2        0.25             0.3            0.35         0.4   0.45             0.2        0.25               0.3              0.35        0.4   0.45
                                        Debt                                                                             Debt


             (c) Monetary Wedge: Y = 0.5                                                 (d) Nominal Domestic Rate: Y = 0.5

2.5                                                                            0.13

                                                                              0.125
   2
                                                                               0.12                      = 2.0
                                                                                                     P
1.5
                                                                              0.115

   1                                                                           0.11
                                  NK-Default
                                                                              0.105                                    NK-Default
0.5
                                                                                0.1
   0           P
                   = 2.0
                                                                              0.095

-0.5                                                                           0.09
    0.2        0.25             0.3            0.35         0.4   0.45             0.2        0.25               0.3              0.35        0.4   0.45
                                        Debt                                                                             Debt


             (e) Monetary Wedge:  P = 2.0                                                (f) Nominal Domestic Rate:  P = 2.0

             Figure 13: Robustness: Monetary Wedges and Nominal Domestic Rates




                                                                         59
        2.5                                                                               12.5


                                                                                            12
        2.0                                                                                        NK-Reference
                                                                                          11.5
        1.5
                                                        NK-Default
                                                                                            11                                            Global NK-Reference
        1.0
                                                                                          10.5

        0.5
              Global NK-Reference                                                           10
                                                                                                                  NK-Default
        0.0
                                                                                           9.5
                NK-Reference
       -0.5                                                                                  9
                0.3      0.35       0.4          0.45    0.5         0.55                        0.3     0.35         0.4          0.45         0.5      0.55
                                          Debt                                                                              Debt


                      (a) The Monetary Wedge                                                      (b) Nominal Domestic Rate (i)


                 Figure 14: Debt and the Monetary Wedge, Reparameterized NK-Default

tale sign of the greatly relaxed financial frictions. In Figure 14, we also show that the monetary
wedge and the nominal interest rate function from the Global NK-Reference model are very
similar to the NK-Reference model, in contrast to the resulting functions with default risk.


F      Numerical Implementation30
F.1     Computation with Taste Shocks
We compute the model using discrete choice methods, following Dvorkin et al. (2018) and
Gordon (2019), who adapt tools frequently used in structural applied work for the study of
sovereign default with long-term debt. Chatterjee and Eyigungor (2012) follow a related strategy,
also perturbing the borrowing choice ( B ), in order to address the convergence problems inherent
in models with long-term debt.
    We restrict the choice of B to be in a discrete set and associate each option with an i.i.d. taste
shock distributed Gumbel (Extreme Value Type I). The government's problem becomes

                                             W ( s, B,           B          ) = max J (s, B, B ) +          B     B                                             (74)
                                                                                 B

with
                      J ( s , B , B )  u C ( s , B , B ), C f ( s , B , B ), N ( s , B , B ) +  g Es | s V ( s , B )                                            (75)
and where B is a constant governing the relative importance of the taste shocks for the choice of
B and B is a vector of taste shocks, one for each possible value of B on the grid. As B  0 we
recover the unperturbed initial problem, with poor numerical convergence properties, whereas
as B  + the taste shocks dominate and the choice of B becomes uniform i.i.d.. Ex ante,
    30 The
        authors would like to thank Stony Brook Research Computing and Cyberinfrastructure, and the Institute
for Advanced Computational Science at Stony Brook University for access to the high-performance LIred and
SeaWulf computing systems, the latter of which was made possible by a $1.4M National Science Foundation grant
(#1531492).




                                                                                     60
                                                    Global
Mean                           NK-Reference   NK-Reference

  CPI inflation                         6.1               6.1
  Nominal domestic rate                11.5              11.5
  Spread                                 --               0.0

Standard Deviation

  CPI inflation                         1.0               1.1
  Nominal domestic rate                 1.3               1.2
  Spread                                 --               0.0
  Output                                2.4               2.4
  Consumption aggregate                 2.0               1.6
  Trade balance                         1.8               1.3
  Nominal depreciation rate             2.0               2.2

Correlation with Output

  CPI inflation                        -81            -36
  Nominal domestic rate                -98            -78
  Trade balance                          62               78
  Nominal depreciation rate            -28               -1

    Table 7: NK-Reference Results Using Global Methods




                              61
before taste shocks are realized, the choice probabilities are given by

                                exp [J (s, B, x )/ B ]       exp J (s, B, x ) - J (s, B) / B
     Pr B = x |s, B =                                      =                                                                (76)
                                x
                                ~ exp [ J ( s, B, x
                                                  ~ )/ B ]   x
                                                             ~ exp J ( s, B, x
                                                                             ~ ) - J ( s, B ) / B

with J (s, B) = maxB J (s, B, B ) and the government's value is

                                                                                        J ( s, B, B ) - J ( s, B )
    W ( s, B ) = E
                       B
                            {W (s, B,        B     ) } = J ( s, B ) +   B log                          B
                                                                                                                        .   (77)
                                                                                B

The value J (s, B) is what the government would achieve if all the taste shocks were zero (or if
the problem were unperturbed), whereas W (s, B) is the expected value before the realization of
the taste shocks. Panel (a) of Figure 15 plots an example of choice probabilities, associated with
state z = 1, B = 0.25 . The probability mass is tightly centered around the B that maximizes
J (s, B, B ), with about 70% of the mass is concentrated in 2­3 neighboring grid points.
    Additionally, we perturb the default decision in a similar fashion. At the start of each period,
the government observes default decision taste shocks and decides accordingly:

             V ( s, B ) = E     Repay , Default
                                                  max W (s, B) +        D Repay ,   W d (s) +         D Default     .       (78)

As a consequence, if state s, B is realized, the government chooses default with probability

                                                               exp W d (s)/ D
                           Pr( D = 1|s, B) =                                                               .                (79)
                                                     exp W d (s)/ D + exp [W (s, B)/                  D]

For values of D greater than zero, the default probability is everywhere nondegenerate, although
often numerically indistinguishable from zero or one. This induces bond price schedules that are
smooth in the borrowing choice B , further aiding numerical convergence. Panel (b) of Figure 15
plots "borrowing Laffer curves" (q(s, B ) B ) for various levels of the productivity shock.
    In the model augmented with taste shocks, the expression for the bond price schedule
becomes
                      1
     q ( s, B ) =         E Pr( D = 0|s , B )               r  +  + (1 - )  Pr( B |s , B )q(s , B )                     .   (80)
                    1 + r  s |s                                                 B

The expectation functions M(s, B ) and F (s, B ) are updated analogously.
    Note that the enforcement shocks  in the model map into the default-repayment taste shocks
as follows:

              V ( s, B ) = E    Repay , Default
                                                  max W (s, B) +        D Repay ,   W d (s) +         D Default

                           =E   Repay , Default
                                                  max{W (s, B), W d (s) +       D   (   Default   -    Repay ) }.
                                                                                                  

The terms are i.i.d. Gumbel (Extreme Value Type I) with the location parameter given by minus
the Euler-Mascheroni constant and scale parameter 1 and, as a result, their difference  follows
the logistic distribution with location parameter 0 and scale 1. The parameter D controls the
relative importance of the enforcement shock for the default decision.

                                                               62
                                     Choice Probabilities (B'|s, B)                                                                           Bond Sale Proceeds (q B')
       0.3                                                                                                          0.5

                                                                                                                   0.45
      0.25
                                                                                                                    0.4
                             Current Debt (B)
                                                                                                                   0.35
       0.2
                                                                                                                    0.3

      0.15                                                                    Expected Borrowing (B')              0.25

                                                                                                                    0.2
       0.1
                                                                                                                   0.15
                  Choice Probabilities (over B')
                                                                                                                    0.1
      0.05
                                                                                                                   0.05

         0                                                                                                            0
             0    0.05     0.1      0.15        0.2     0.25        0.3       0.35     0.4     0.45     0.5               0     0.1   0.2   0.3    0.4     0.5        0.6   0.7    0.8   0.9   1
                                                   Borrowing (B')                                                                                    Borrowing (B')


                 (a) Choice Probabilities (                               B    = 1.0e-5 )                                     (b) Bond Price Schedules (                    D   = 1.0e-4 )


                                                               Figure 15: Computation with Taste Shocks

F.2      Algorithm
The model is subject to an AR(1) productivity shock z, which we discretize over a grid with
#z = 21 points spanning ±3 standard deviations of its unconditional distribution. We also
allow for a zero-probability shock to the interest rate rule m, which we discretize over #m = 7
points spanning ±1.5%. The m shock is i.i.d., with Pr(m = 1) = 1 and Pr(m = 1) = 0. We use
these zero probability shocks to study the consequences of unexpected monetary tightening
in the quantitative analysis. We confirm that the results are identical if instead we consider a
Normally-distributed m shock with low variance. The B grid consists of # B = 250 points equally
spaced over [0, 0.45].
    The algorithm proceeds as follows:
                                                                 d and the bond price schedule q ,
  1. We start with initial guesses for the value functions V0 , W0                              0
     together with guesses for the F0 and M0 functions and the default and borrowing policies.
     We assume the probability of default is 1 and B = B with probability one, everywhere in
     the state space.

  2. We solve for for the private and monetary equilibrium (PME) everywhere in the state
     space, for arbitrary B . We restrict attention to B values that do not induce capital inflows
     or outflows that are "too large," for which a private and monetary equilibrium might not
     exist and confirm that this restriction does not bind in equilibrium:

                                 | - (r  + ) B + q(s, B ) B - (1 - ) B |  0.1                                                                            (Capital Inflow Bounds)

        We solve the private and monetary equilibrium via root-finding using Powell's hybrid
        method, on a system of two equations in two unknowns, C f and N :

             (a) Using the current guess of C f , N and the capital inflow, we compute the terms of
                 trade e from the balance of payments condition.
             (b) We compute the implied level of exports X associated with the terms of trade e.


                                                                                                              63
       (c) Given C f and e, we can recover domestic consumption C from the relative consump-
           tion condition.
      (d) Given C and the government's borrowing choice B , we compute the domestic nominal
          rate i from the domestic Euler equation.
       (e) Given i, we use the interest rate rule to compute the level of PPI inflation  .
       (f) We use these quantities to compute equation residuals for the New Keynesian Phillips
           curve and the domestic resource constraint.

     The solution to the PME yields policy functions C (s, B, B ), C f (s, B, B ), N (s, B, B ),  (s, B, B ),
     i ( s, B, B ), e ( s, B, B ).

  3. We solve the PME in default similarly. In particular, in default trade is balanced and the
     capital inflow term is zero, and productivity is penalized. The solution constitutes policy
                                    f
     functions in default: Cd (s), Cd (s), Nd (s), d (s), id (s), ed (s).

  4. Using PME results, we compute the value of the government in each state (V ) and in
     default (W d ) and derive choice probabilities for the B policy and default probabilities.

  5. Given borrowing and default policies (probabilities), we update the bond price schedule q
     and the expectation functions M and F.

  6. We check for the convergence of the bond price schedule, value functions, and expectation
     functions. We stop if values are closer than 1e-7 and prices are closer than 1e-5 in the sup
     norm, otherwise we fully update and iterate.

Simulation. Model statistics are computed over a simulation of 50,000 periods in length,
excluding periods in default and the 20 periods (5 years) following the return to market. Without
recovery, the sovereign returns to market without obligations and accumulates debt fast over
the following few periods. If we include these transitional debt dynamics in the sample used
to compute model moments, we find the results are largely unaltered, with the exception of
the cyclical patterns of the trade balance. By including all periods outside of default, the trade
balance becomes acyclical, while with our selection criterion the trade balance is countercyclical,
as in the data.

Reference and Extended Models The computation of the Default-Reference model--which
we can think of as either the real version of our model or the model under strict inflation
targeting--is almost identical, with one exception: in computing the PME, we use an undistorted
labor market condition, -u N /uC = z, instead of the NKPC in the system of two equations in two
unknowns. The computation of the extended models is similar to the benchmark: For the version
with local currency debt we solve a system of three equations in three unknowns (C f , e,  ) since
now  appears in the balance of payments condition, breaking the block-recursivity exploited in
the solution to the benchmark. The algorithm is otherwise unaltered. The model with an output
gap term in the interest rate rule requires that we first compute the Default-Reference model,


                                                   64
simulate it, and save average output levels by productivity shock realization, then load in these
statistics for the model with the extended rule. The interest rate rule then responds to deviations
of output from these average output levels in the Default-Reference environment.




                                                65
