                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                FINANCE AND CHILDREN'S ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE

                                           Qing Hu
                                          Ross Levine
                                           Chen Lin
                                          Mingzhu Tai

                                       Working Paper 26678
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26678


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Qing Hu, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Mingzhu Tai. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Finance and Children's Academic Performance
Qing Hu, Ross Levine, Chen Lin, and Mingzhu Tai
NBER Working Paper No. 26678
January 2020
JEL No. G28,I2,J2

                                         ABSTRACT

What is the impact of regulatory reforms that enhance credit market efficiency on children's
human capital? Using a parent-child panel dataset, we find that such reforms reduced children's
academic performance in low-income families. Consistent with the view that financial
development entices low-income parents to substitute out of childrearing and into employment
with adverse effects on children's education, we find that among low-income families, regulatory
reforms: increased mother's employment hours, reduced parental supervision and parent-child
discussions about school and college, and had bigger adverse effects when mothers were not
already working full-time and grandparents were not living with the child.


Qing Hu                                              Chen Lin
Faculty of Business and Economics                    Faculty of Business and Economics
The Hong Kong University                             The University of Hong Kong
Hong Kong                                            Hong Kong
Hong Kong                                            chenlin1@hku.hk
hqhuqing@connect.hku.hk
                                                     Mingzhu Tai
Ross Levine                                          Faculty of Business and Economics
Haas School of Business                              The University of Hong Kong
University of California at Berkeley                 Hong Kong
545 Student Services Building, #1900 (F685)          taimzh@hku.hk
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
Ross_levine@haas.berkeley.edu
                                                                                                       1



1. Introduction

       What is the impact of credit conditions on children's human capital accumulation? An

influential line of research explains that relaxing credit constraints can facilitate investments in

human capital, where those investments can include spending directly on education, purchasing

homes in communities conducive to academic success, addressing health conditions, and

mitigating the impact of adverse family income shocks on children's education (e.g., Schultz

1960, 1961; Becker 1962, 1964, 1981; Leibowitz 1974; Jacoby and Skoufias 1997; Card 1999;

Carneiro and Heckman 2002; Heckman 2006; Cunha and Heckman 2007; Agarwal and Qian

2014; Chetty et al. 2014, 2016; Popov 2014; Favara and Imbs 2015; Sun and Yannelis 2016).

Research also indicates how financial policies that boost family income can increase

expenditures on children's human capital development (e.g., Blau 1999; Currie 2009; Dahl and

Lochner 2012; Bharadwaj et al. 2013; Aizer and Currie 2014; Aizer et al. 2016a; Popov 2018).

       Research, however, also suggests that there might be a dark side to the finance-education

nexus: improvements in credit conditions might exert an adverse effect on children's academic

performance by harming the quantity and quality of parenting. In particular, the relaxation of

credit constraints tends to increase firms' demand for workers, boosting employment hours (e.g.,
Beck et al. 2010; Popov and Rocholl 2018). If the boost in labor demand entices parents to

substitute out of childrearing and into paid employment, this could harm children's human

capital development (e.g., Becker 1964, 1965; Aizer 2004; Carneiro et al. 2015; Juhn et al. 2015,

2018). Furthermore, if additional employment hours deplete parental energy and patience,

financial system improvements that increase parental employment could harm the quality of

parent-child interactions, with adverse ramifications on children's educational performance.

There are, however, several countervailing influences. Even if financial development decreases

the amount of time that parents allocate to children, there (a) might be sound alternatives, such as

grandparents and childcare (e.g., Havnes and Mogstad 2011a,b, 2015) and (b) the quality of

parent-child interactions might increase, perhaps due to diminishing returns to parenting time or
                                                                                                   2



reduced parental anxiety about family income (e.g., Becker 1964, 1965, 1981; Aizer et al. 2016b).

Thus, the impact of credit conditions on human capital accumulation is an empirical question.

       In this paper, we (1) evaluate the impact of bank regulatory reforms that enhanced credit

conditions on children's academic performance and (2) explore whether these reforms influenced

children's academic performance by altering the amount and quality of time that parents spend

on childrearing. We do not evaluate whether this "parent time allocation channel" is the only

mechanism linking finance and school performance. Rather, we assess whether the parent time

allocation channel can help explain the connection between finance and children's academic

performance. As we will explain, our work is novel in that we have (1) a panel-child dataset with

information on the allocation of parent's and children's time and (2) an exogenous source of

variation in credit conditions.

       To explore the connections between credit conditions and children's human capital

development, we construct a parent-child panel dataset running from 1986 through 2005. We

begin with the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY79), which is a representative

survey of 12,686 individuals who were between the ages of 14 and 22 when the survey started in

1979. We combine the NLSY79 with the NLSY79 Child dataset, which contains information on

the descendants of female respondents in the NLSY79 survey. This yields time-series

information on (1) children's test scores, (2) the total employment hours of parents and when

they work those hours, (3) the number of hours that children spend watching television, playing

video games, and doing homework--both on school days and over weekends, (4) parental

monitoring of children's activities, (5) parent-child communications about school, and (6) other

family details.

       As an exogenous shock to credit conditions, we exploit interstate bank branch

deregulation. Although the Riegle-Neal Act eliminated regulatory prohibitions on interstate

banking through the establishment of subsidiaries in other states in 1995, U.S. states were

permitted to regulate out-of-state branch expansion. Starting in 1995 and continuing through

2005, individual states implemented and eased--to differing degrees and in different years--
                                                                                                    3



regulatory restrictions on out-of-state banks establishing branches within their borders (Johnson

and Rice 2008). Since the costs of branching are lower than the costs of establishing subsidiaries,

regulatory restrictions on branching limited competition between banks in different states and

made banking markets less efficient. Rice and Strahan (2010) construct an interstate bank branch

deregulation index for each state in each year that measures the ease with which banks

headquartered in other states can establish branches within the state and show that deregulation

improved local credit conditions. We use cross-state, cross-time variation in the deregulation of

impediments to interstate bank branching as an exogenous source of variation in local credit

conditions and examine the impact on children's academic performance, parental employment,

parental monitoring of children, and the amount of time that children spend watching television,

playing video games, and doing homework.

       In particular, we use a generalized difference-in-differences estimation strategy. In our

examination of academic achievement, the dependent variable is an indicator of how child i from

state s in year t performed on Peabody Individual Achievement Tests relative to others in the

same birth cohort. The main explanatory variables are based on the Rice and Strahan (2010)

interstate bank branch deregulation index, which varies at the state-year level. We differentiate

children by whether they are from families with incomes above (high-income) or below (low-

income) the sample median. We differentiate by family income because past research shows that

bank deregulation had a big, positive impact on employment among low-income households but

not among high-income families (e.g., Beck, et al. 2010). Therefore, to the extent that bank

deregulation influences the academic achievement of children through its effects on parental

employment, we expect that bank branch deregulation will have a larger effect on children from

low-income households. Based on this argument, our two main explanatory variables are the

deregulation index interacted with (a) the high-income dummy variable and (b) the low-income

dummy variable. We separately report the coefficient on the deregulation index for children from

high- and low-income families and test whether those estimated coefficients differ significantly.
                                                                                                      4



The regressions control for individual and year fixed effects, birth cohort linear time trends, and

time-varying indicators of state economic activity and population.

        We discover that academic achievement falls among children from low-income families

but not among children from high-income families following interstate bank branch deregulation.

This finding is robust to controlling for many factors, including the child's time-invariant

characteristics, trends in the tests scores of the child's birth cohort, year fixed effects, time-

varying features of the state in which the child lives, and whether the parents are divorced.

Furthermore, and consistent with the generalized difference-in-differences methodology, we find

no evidence of pre-trends. The estimated impact of interstate branch deregulation on the test

scores of children from low-income families is material. The estimates suggest that if a state

changes its regulations from prohibiting out-of-state banks from establishing branches within its

borders to allowing unrestricted interstate branching, children's age-adjusted test scores fall by 8%

of the low-income sample mean.

        To explore one potential channel--the parent time allocation channel--through which

financial development may harm children's academic performance, we examine a series of four

questions. First, following interstate bank branch deregulations, do parents work more hours?

We examine both the total number of hours that parents work and the amount of hours that they

work during non-school times, which are the hours when children are available to interact with

parents. Second, among families in which bank branch deregulation induces parents to work

more hours, does deregulation reduce parental supervision of their children and the amount of

time that children spend on academically productive endeavors, such as homework, and

academically less productive activities, such as television and video games (e.g., Gentzkow and

Shapiro 2008)? Third, among families most impacted by branch deregulation, is there a

reduction in parent-child communications about school (e.g., classes, grades, standardized tests,

college)? Fourth, does the impact of an improvement in the financial system on children's

academic achievement vary across families in ways that are consistent with the parent time

allocation channel? For example, if parents are already working full time, then the impact of
                                                                                                   5



branch deregulation on children's education through the parent time allocation channel should be

minimal. Similarly, if grandparents live with a family and can readily substitute for working

parents, then deregulation should have a smaller effect on children's education via the parent

time allocation channel.

       We find evidence consistent with the parent time allocation view of how improving the

financial system can hurt children's academic performance. First, interstate bank branch

deregulation induced mothers from low-income families to work more hours and work more

hours during non-school times, while there was no effect on either mothers in high-income

families or fathers in either low- or high-income families. This suggests that the parent time

allocation channel operates primarily on low-income families. Indeed, as noted above, we find

that bank branch deregulation only lowers children's test scores among low-income families.

Furthermore, the finding that bank branch deregulation only increases the number of hours that

mothers work in paid employment suggests that the parent time allocation channel operates

through mothers.

       Second, we find that among families in which bank branch deregulation increases the

employment hours of mothers, i.e., in low-income families, there is a reduction in parental

monitoring of children, a reduction in hours spent on homework during non-school hours (but no

effect on homework during school), and an increase in hours spent on television and video games

on school days (but not over weekends). These findings are consistent with the view that

financial development increases the demand for labor and induces mother's from low-income

families to work more in paid employment, and this reallocation of parental time allows children

to substitute out of homework and into less academically productive endeavors.

       Third, we find that interstate bank branching reforms reduced parent-child discussions

about school and going to college among families most impacted by the reforms, i.e., low-

income families. Bank deregulation was not associated with a significant change in such parent-

child discussions among high-income families. This is consistent with the parent time allocation
                                                                                                    6



channel since bank branch deregulation increased the employment of mothers from low-income

families but had no effect on parental employment in high-income families.

       Finally, we discover that the impact of interstate bank branch deregulation on mothers'

employment and children's test scores differs across families in a manner that is consistent with

the parent time allocation view. We consider two pre-treatment differences in families that might

influence the impact of interstate bank branch deregulation on mother's employment and

children's test score: whether the mother was already employed full time before bank branch

deregulation and whether grandparents live with the mother-child. Consistent with the parent

time allocation view, we find that when mothers were not already working full time, the earlier

results hold: bank branch deregulation induces mothers to work more hours and children's test

scores fall; however, when mothers were already working full-time, bank branch deregulation

has none of these effects. Also consistent with the parent time allocation channel, we find that

when grandparents live with the mother-child pair, bank branch deregulation does not reduce

children's academic achievement. This is also consistent with the findings in Havnes and

Mogstad (2011a,b, 2015): when there is a reasonable substitute for mothers' supervision of

children, an increase in the amount of time that mothers spend in paid employment does not

harm children's academic performance.

       It is worth stressing that we do not examine the welfare effects of parents self-selecting

into working more. Parents choosing to work more hours make that decision while considering

many factors. We examine the impact of a regulatory reform that improved credit conditions on

children's academic achievement and explore whether the parent time allocation channel helps

explain the connections between credit conditions and children's human capital accumulation.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the interstate

bank branch deregulation index, and Section 3 discusses the parent-child panel database. Section

4 provides the analyses of the relationship between interstate bank branch deregulation on

children's academic performance, while Section 5 explores whether credit conditions influence

children's academic performance through the parent time allocation channel. Section 6 concludes.
                                                                                                     7




2. Bank Branch Deregulation

       In 1994, the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Act (IBBEA) effectively

removed state-specific restrictions on banks expanding across state lines through the

establishment of separately capitalized bank subsidiaries. The Act, however, permitted states to

restrict bank expansion across state lines through the establishment of bank branches. Interstate

branching can occur by an out-of-state bank (a) acquiring an in-state bank and converting that

bank into its branch(es), (b) establishing new branches within a state ("de novo" branching), or

(c) purchasing the branches of an in-state bank.

       States used four types of restrictions on interstate branching. First, some states imposed

minimum age restrictions with respect to how long a target bank has been in existence before it

can be acquired and consolidated into branches. These minimum age restrictions, with a

federally set maximum of five years, make interstate banking more costly because they required

banks to either purchase an entire older bank, which is more costly than opening a branch, or

open a new subsidiary and then wait until the minimum age to convert it into a branch. Second,

some states prohibited de novo interstate branching. Third, some states prohibited the acquisition

of a single branch or portions of an institution, which represents an additional barrier to cross-

state branching. Fourth, some states imposed limits on the percentage of insured deposits

(deposit-cap) in a state that a single bank could hold, which could limit large interstate bank

mergers.

       We use the Rice and Strahan (2010) index of regulatory restrictions on interstate

branching. Specifically, IBBEA Index takes a value between zero and four, where we add one

point to the index if the state (1) does not impose a minimum age restriction for acquisition, (2)

allows de novo interstate branching, (3) permits interstate branching by acquiring a single branch;

(4) sets the deposit-cap at 30% or greater. Thus, larger values of IBBEA Index indicate a more

deregulated interstate branching environment. We set the IBBEA Index to zero for the years
                                                                                                      8



before the Riegle-Neal Act. There is considerable cross-state, cross-time variation in the IBBEA

Index.



3. Data and Variables

3.1 Data

         To construct a panel dataset on parenting behavior, child activities, child attitudes, and

child performance in school, we begin with and the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth 1979

(NLSY79), which is administered by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The NLSY79 is

a national representative household survey consisting of 12,686 American youth born between

1957 and 1964 and aged 14 to 22 in the initial survey round 1979. It was an annual survey until

1994 and then became a biennial survey. With the 1986 survey, when female interviewees were

between the ages of 21 and 29, the NLSY79 Child started collecting additional information on

their children. NLSY79 Child survey is also conducted every two years and collects information

on children under 15 years old.

         We restrict the sample as follows. We start with all respondents in the 50 states plus the

District of Columbia; however, we limit the sample to the years from the first survey year in

1986 through 2005 to match these parent-child data with data on interstate bank branch

deregulation. We drop respondents in the military and economically disadvantaged white

subsamples since these subsamples were discontinued in 1985 and 1990 respectively.

Furthermore, we exclude children who enter the survey ("entry year") after the effective year of

interstate branching regulation, as defined by Rice & Strahan (2010), so that we have pre-

treatment observations. Finally, we drop children from the sample when we cannot identify

where they live from the mother's location or they change their state of residence during the

sample period.

         Using sampling weights provided by the BLS, our data offer a representative longitudinal

sample of mothers from the 1957-1964 cohorts and their offspring. As we will explain in detail,

these mother-child panel data offer unique information on parenting behavior, the attitudes of
                                                                                                   9



both mother and child about their relationship, school performance, as well as information on

family background, structure, and employment. Table 1 presents summary statistics on the

variables described in the remainder of this section.



3.2 Variables

       3.2.1 Children's Education

       To measure academic performance in each year, the NLSY79 Child survey provides

longitudinal data on each child's Peabody Individual Achievement Tests (PIAT) test scores and

rank in the areas of math, reading recognition, and reading comprehension. The math part of the

PIAT assesses the child's basic knowledge and application of math concepts (i.e., geometry and

trigonometry) and skills (i.e., numerals and sequence recognition). The reading recognition part

measures the child's effective recognition of letters and pronunciation/communication ability.

The reading comprehension part evaluates a child's ability to extract the meaning of sentences.

       We construct and analyze two age-normalized measures of academic performance for

each child in each year. Average Score is the normalized age-adjusted value of the average math,

reading recognition, and reading comprehension test scores. Average Rank is the rank of the

average score on the math, reading recognition, and reading comprehension parts of the PIAT

test. For the normalizations, we compute each child's age-adjusted score (or rank) in each year,

so that the normalized value has a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.



       3.2.2 Parental Employment

       We employ five measures of the amount of time that each parent works and the degree to

which employment hours occur when the child is not in school. Mom (Dad)-FT is a dummy

variable that equals one if mother (father) works full-time or not, as defined as (1) working at

least 50 weeks, and (2) working at least 2000 hours in a given year, and zero otherwise. Mom

(Dad)-Work Hours equals the total number of hours that the mother/father works in a given year.

Mom (Dad)-Works Non-School Times is a dummy variable that equals one if mother's (father's)
                                                                                                  10



working time begins before 7am or after 5pm, and zero otherwise. Mom (Dad)-Work Hours Non-

School Times equals the total number of hours that the mother (father) works during non-school

hours--between 5p.m. and 7a.m.--during a typical workday. Mom (Dad)-Work Hours HW

Times equals the total number of hours that the mother (father) works typical homework hours--

between 6p.m. and 10p.m.--during a typical workday.



       3.2.3 Parental Monitoring

       We use seven indicators of parental oversight of each child's allocation of time, e.g.,

parental limitations on television and games, the amount of time spent watching television during

the week and over weekends, time spent on homework--both home and at school, and general

monitoring of the child's whereabouts and wellbeing. Limit TV & Games is the child's rating of

the statement "How often parents limit the amount of time watching TV/video games" and the

answer ranges from 0 (never) to 3 (often). TV Hours in Weekdays and TV Hours on Weekends

are the number of hours a child watches TV on typical weekday or weekend day, respectively,

where the answers range from 1 (almost none) to 6 (highly frequently). HW Hours in School and

HW Hours after School equal the number of hours per week that child spends on homework

during and after school, respectively, where the answers range from 1 (almost none) to 5 (highly

frequently). Mom Knows is the mother's rating of the statement "How often mom knows who

child is with when not home" and the answer ranges from 1 (only rarely) to 4 (all the time). Tell

Parents is the child's rating of the statement "How much child tells parents about where child is

when not home" and the answer ranges from 1 (not at all) to 3 (a lot).



       3.2.4 Parental Involvement with Child's Education

       We also assess the frequency with which the child discusses school related issues with

parents and parental participation in parent-teacher conferences. From the school survey part of

the NLSY79 Child, we use five measures based on the child choosing from 0 (never) to 3 (often)

in response to the following statements: (1) How often discuss things studied in class (Discuss
                                                                                                    11



Class); (2) How often discuss grades or report card (Discuss Grades); (3) How often discuss

standardized test scores, i.e., district/state/national exams/tests, (Discuss Standardized Tests); (4)

How often discuss selecting courses or programs (Discuss Courses); and (5) How often discuss

going to college (Discuss College). We also use two measures based on questions posed to the

mother. Mom Lectures is the answer to the mother's rating of the statement "Mom would lecture

child if (s)he got low grades," ranging from 1 (not at all likely) to 5 (very likely). Parent-Teacher

Conference is a dummy variable that equals one if mother attends parent-teacher conference, and

zero otherwise.



4. Empirical Results: Bank Deregulation and Academic Performance

       In this section, we examine the relationship between bank regulatory reforms that spurred

economic activity and employment on children's academic performance. To do this, we exploit

(a) the cross-state, cross-time lowering of regulatory barriers to interstate bank branching that

boosted local economic activity and employment and (2) longitudinal data from the NSLY79

Child on math and reading test scores to evaluate the impact of bank deregulation on children's

academic achievement. We differentiate by high- and low- income households since past

research shows that bank deregulation had a big, positive impact on employment and income

among low-income households but not on high-income families (e.g., Beck et al. 2010). Thus, to

the extent that bank deregulation influences the academic achievement of children through its

effects on economic activity and parental employment, we expect that bank branch deregulation

will have a larger effect on children from low-income households.

       We employ a generalized difference-in-difference estimation strategy using the following

empirical model:


             !,!,! =  +    !,! +   !,! + !   + ! +  ! + !,!,! ,(1)


where !,!,! is one of the two age-normalized measures of academic performance for child i, in

state s, in year t (i.e., Average Score or Average Rank).  !,! is the interstate bank
                                                                                                      12



branching deregulation index for state s at time t, which ranges from 0 to 4, where higher values

indicate fewer regulatory impediments to interstate branch banking.  is our key coefficient of

interest, gauging the impact of interstate bank branching deregulation on academic performance.

!,! include basic state-level, time-varying variables, the log of state-level GSP per

capital in 2010 dollars (Log (GSP per Capita) and log of total population in the state (Log

(Population)). We condition on individual and year fixed effects (! and  ! ), as well as birth

cohort linear time trends (!  ) to control for time-invariant individual characteristics, common

shocks to all individuals in each period, and the possibility that test scores trend over time

differentially by birth cohort. We cluster standard errors at the state level.

       Furthermore, we differentiate children by family income. Specifically, for each child, we

first calculate the family's total income (in 2010 dollars) in the "entry year," which is the first

year that the mother-child pair enters the NLSY79 Child dataset. We then define a family as

"high-income" if family income is above state median family income in the entry year and

otherwise classify the family as low-income. We separately report the coefficient on IBBEA

Index for children from high- and low-income families and report the p-value for the test of

whether those estimated coefficients are equal. Formally, we estimate the following regression:


!,!,! =  +  !   !,!   +  !   !,!   +
                                                    +   !,! + !   + ! +  ! + !,!,! ,(1')


where  !,!   is the IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable

that equals one for high-income families and zero otherwise, and  !,!  

is defined analogously.

       As shown in Table 2, academic achievement falls among children from low-income

families following interstate bank branch deregulation, but not among children from high-income

families. The coefficient estimate on the IBBEA Index for children from low-income families is

significantly lower than that for children from high-income families for both the Average Rank

and Average Score measures of academic achievement. As emphasized above, most states
                                                                                                   13



lowered barriers to interstate branching in several years and these reforms happened in different

years across the different states. As also emphasized, the results in Table 2 hold when

conditioning on individual, year, and cohort linear trends, as well as state economic activity and

the population of states. These controls help in isolating the relationship between bank

deregulation and educational achievement.

       The estimated relationship is large. For example, consider Average Rank (column 3).

The estimated coefficient suggests that if the state liberalizes restrictions on interstate bank

branching from fully closed to fully open (i.e., IBBEA Index jumps from 0 to 4), Average Rank

among children in the low-income families falls by 3.4 (-0.848*4). Considering that the average

value of Average Rank among children from low-income families is 42, the estimated

coefficients suggest that full interstate bank branch deregulation is associated with an 8%

(=3.4/42) drop in Average Rank, when evaluated for the average child from a low-income family.

Put differently, since the standard deviation of Average Rank for children from low-income

families is 13, the estimates indicate that full branch deregulation is associated with a 26%

reduction in Average Rank relative to the sample standard deviation.

       In Table 3, we provide robustness tests and check for pre-trends. Column (1) and (2)

show that the estimates are seldom affected by the sample weights. Column (3) and (4) show that

the findings are robust to controlling for whether the parents are divorced or separated.

Furthermore, to alleviate the pre-trends concern, we employ the same method as Krishnan,

Nandy and Puri (2015) and explicitly examine this possibility in column (5) and (6). Results

show that our findings are not driven by potential trends.

       These results establish that following interstate branch deregulation, academic test scores

fell among children from lower income families. Past research shows that bank deregulation

exerts a disproportionately large, positive effect on employment and income among low-income

individuals. These two findings combine to motivate an exploration of whether the channel

connecting bank deregulation and children's academic performance runs through the changing

labor market conditions facing low-income families.
                                                                                                   14




5. Empirical Results: The Parent Time Allocation Channel

       This section examines one potential channel--the parent time allocation channel--

through which interstate bank branch deregulation might shape the academic performance of

children. To the extent that bank deregulation induces parents to work more for pay and therefore

have less time to monitor, supervise and participate in children's homework and other activities,

this could adversely affect children's academic performance. Our goal is to shed empirical light

on whether the parent time allocation channel helps account for some of the impact of regulatory

reforms that enhance financial system efficiency on children's academic performance.

       We examine a series of four questions. First, following interstate bank branch

deregulations, do parents--and if so which parents--work more hours in paid employment? We

examine both the total number of hours that parents work and the amount of hours that they work

during non-school times, i.e., when those employment hours are mostly likely to conflict with

times that children are available to interact with parents. We continue to differentiate between

children from low- and high-income families to assess whether deregulation had an especially

pronounced effect on the employment hours of low-income parents as suggested by Beck,

Levine, and Levkov (2010). Moreover, we differentiate between mothers and fathers. We assess

whether regulatory reforms that spur economic activity have disproportionately large effects on

employment by mothers or fathers. If bank branch deregulation only boosts the employment

hours of, for example, mothers, then the parent time allocation channel is most likely to operate

through mothers.

       Second, among families in which bank branch deregulation induces parents to work more

hours, does this reduce parental supervision of children and the amount of time children spend on

academically productive endeavors? We examine changes in the degree to which parents know

about their children's whereabouts and activities, the amount of time that children spend on

homework both in school and at home, and the amount of time they spend on television and

video games during times when parents are working and not directly supervising their kids. In
                                                                                                      15



this way, we examine whether financial development changes key inputs associated with

academic success in ways that are consistent with the parental time allocation channel.

       Third, is there a reduction in parent-child communications about school among families

most impacted by branch deregulation? We evaluate changes in the extent to which parents and

children talk about classes, grades, standardized tests, college, etc. One possibility is that when

parents increase employment hours, they maintain--or even increase--discussion of academics.

Another possibility is that the time, pressures, and energy associated with additional employment

hours crowd out parent-child interactions about children's educational experiences and ambitions.

       Fourth, does the impact of an improvement in the financial system on children's

academic achievement vary across families in ways suggested by the parent time allocation

channel? For example, if parents are already working full time before interstate bank branch

deregulation triggers an increase in labor demand, then the impact of this deregulation on

children's education through the parent time allocation channel should be minimal. Similarly, if

grandparents live with a family, then this increases the likelihood that when parents devote a few

more hours to a job, there are readily available substitute caregivers. Such a family situation

would reduce the adverse impact of branch deregulation on children's academic performance via

the parent time allocation channel. We test both of these predictions.



5.1 Channel Exploration: Parents' Employment Participation and Hours

       The starting point of the patent time allocation view is that banking reforms that eased

credit conditions disproportionately boosted the demand for lower-income workers (e.g., Beck,

Levine, and Levkov 2010) and disproportionately pulled women into the workforce, reducing the

gender gap in labor force participation (e.g., Popov and Zaharia 2019). We begin by assessing

the impact bank deregulation on labor market participation by the mothers and fathers of the

children in our sample while also differentiating between high- and low-income families. Thus,

we begin by merging the analyses of Beck, Levine, and Levkov (2010) and Popov and Zaharia
                                                                                                    16



(2019) and testing whether banking reforms that improved credit conditions disproportionately

increased the employment hours of women from lower-income households.

       We use the same regression specification as above, except that the dependent variable is

now one of five measures of the employment status of either the mother or father. In particular,

we examine Mom (Dad)-FT, Mom (Dad)-Work Hours, Mom (Dad)-Works Non-School Times,

Mom (Dad)-Work Hours Non-School Times, and Mom (Dad)-Work Hours HW Times. We

conduct these analyses for mothers and report the results in Panel A of Table 4 and provide the

results for fathers in Panel B of Table 4.

       We find that interstate bank branch deregulation induced mothers from low-income

families to work more hours, work more hours during non-school and homework times, while

there was no effect on either mothers in high-income families or fathers in either low- or high-

income families. Consider the results on mothers in Panel A. Following bank deregulation, there

is a significant increase in Mom-FT, Mom-Work Hours, Mom-Works Non-School Times, Mom-

Work Hours Non-School Times, and Mom-Work Hours HW Times among mothers from low-

income households but not for mothers from high-income households, where the estimated

results on low- and high-income mothers are significantly different from each other. As shown in

Panel B, we do not find any effect of bank deregulation on employment by fathers.

       The estimated effects are economically large. For example, consider the extent to which

mothers work during non-school time (Mom-Work Hours Non-School Times). This might be an

especially relevant metric since it means that the mother is less available to monitor, supervise

and participate in their children's activities. Also, consider a large bank regulatory reform,

moving from the most severe barriers to interstate branching to no regulatory prohibitions on

branching, so that the change in the IBBEA Index equals four. The estimated coefficients in

column (4) of Panel A of Table 4 suggest that this reform would induce the average low-income

mother to work 0.43 (= 0.108*4) additional hours (26 minutes) during non-school times on a

typical workday.
                                                                                                   17



       These findings are consistent with the first step of the parent time allocation explanation

of why test scores fall among children from low-income families after interstate bank branch

deregulation: bank deregulation triggers an especially pronounced increase in the demand for

low-income workers and this disproportionately induces mothers from low-income families to

work more in paid employment. To the extent that mothers devote more time to employment,

they may have less time for direct childcare, with potentially large ramifications on academic

achievement.



5.2 Channel Exploration: Parents' Monitoring, Television, and Homework

       The next step in the parent time allocation explanation stresses that when bank

deregulation increases the employment hours of mothers, this reduces their monitoring of

children. To evaluate this view, we examine the extent to which parents limit television and

video games (Limit TV & Games), the number of hours children watch television during the

week (TV Hours in Weekdays) and weekends (TV Hours on Weekends), and the number of hours

spent on homework, both in school (HW Hours in School) and outside of school (HW Hours out

of School). We use TV Hours on Weekends and HW Hours in School as placebo-like tests, since

the parent time allocation view focuses on periods when newly employed mothers face greater

constraints on monitoring, supervising, and participating in children's activities, e.g., during the

work week and non-school hours. Furthermore, to assess mother's supervision, we examine the

degree to which mothers have information on their children's whereabouts (Mom Knows) and the

degree to which children tell parents about their whereabouts (Tell Parents).

       As shown in Table 5, we discover that following interstate bank branch deregulation: (1)

parents reduced limitations on television watching and video games playing by their children, (2)

children watched more television during the typical weekday, (3) children did not watch more

television on weekends, (4) children did not alter the amount of time spent on homework during

school hours, and (5) children devoted less time to homework outside of school hours. Consistent

with the findings reported in Tables 2 to 4, these results on television and homework hold among
                                                                                                    18



low-income families but not among high-income families. Thus, among families in which

mothers were more likely to be induced to work more hours in paid employment following bank

deregulation--low-income families, we find that children watch more television and do less

homework when the increase in mothers' employment is likely to interfere most with overseeing

their kids--during non-school hours and weekdays. Furthermore, the Table 5 results on Mom

Knows and Tells Parents show that mothers and parents more generally from low-income

families tend to have less information about their children after bank deregulation. The findings

are consistent with the view that bank deregulation attracts mothers into the workforce and this

reallocation of parental time leads to a reallocation of children's time toward less academically

productive activities, with adverse implications on children's performance on academic

achievement tests.



5.3 Channel Exploration: Communication about School

       Besides influencing the number of hours that children allocate to homework and

watching television, the parent time allocation channel also stresses that pulling mothers into the

workforce could hinder parent-child discussions about a range of school topics that shape their

children's academic performance. To assess this view, we examine seven measures of the extent

to which parents communicate with their children about classes, grades, standardized tests,

courses, and college, and whether the mother attends parent-teacher conferences.

       As shown in Table 6, bank deregulation triggered a significant reduction in parent-child

communications about academics among children from low-income families. In no case,

however, was bank deregulation associated with a significant change in these parent-child

communication indicators among high-income families, though the estimated coefficient on

IBBEA Index (High Income) is not always significantly different from IBBEA Index (Low

Income). These findings are broadly consistent with the parent time allocation channel view of

how interstate bank branch deregulation lowered test scores: By inducing mothers from low-
                                                                                                  19



income families to work more, deregulation reduces the amount of time that mothers have for

discussing school with their children or attending parent-teacher conferences.



5.4 Time Allocation Channel: Heterogeneous Effects

       We next evaluate whether the impact of interstate bank branch deregulation on mothers'

employment and children's test scores differs by family conditions We examine two pre-

treatment conditions. First, we differentiate families by whether the mother was already

employed full time before the deregulation. If the mother was already fully employed, then the

impact of deregulation on mother's employment is likely to be minimal and hence the impact of

deregulation through the time allocation channel on children's test scores is also likely to be

minimal. Second, we differentiate families by whether grandparents can easily boost the

supervision of their grandchildren when mothers increase employment hours. If, for example,

grandparents live in the same house, then bank deregulations that induce mothers to work more

hours in paid employment may have less of an adverse impact on the quality of the supervision

of children and hence have less of an adverse impact on children's academic performance.

       To conduct these tests, we differentiate families as follows. First, we differentiate

families by whether the mother was working full time or not when the mother-child pair enters

the sample, i.e., whether the mother was working full time in the entry year (Mom-FT-Entry

Year). Second, we differentiate families by whether grandparents live in the same house as the

mother and child in the entry year (Grandparents-Entry Year). Using the same regression

specification as above, we then evaluate the impact of bank branch deregulation on children's

academic achievement when (1) differentiating the sample by whether Mom-FT-Entry Year

equals one or zero and (2) differentiating by whether Grandparents-Entry Year equals one or

zero. The parent time allocation channel view predicts that the impact of bank branch

deregulation on academic achievement will be greater when Mom-FT-Entry Year and/or

Grandparents-Entry Year equal zero. Furthermore, we also test whether mothers who were

working FT increase the number of hours that they work after deregulation, especially
                                                                                                      20



employment hours during non-school times. In this way, we can focus attention on the

reallocation of parental time and not on some other feature of bank deregulation.

       As shown in Tables 7 and 8, the results of these heterogeneous tests are consistent with

the parent time allocation view. In the sample where the mother is not working full-time prior to

bank deregulation (Mom-FT-Entry Year = 0), the earlier results hold: bank branch deregulation

induces (1) mothers to work more hours in paid employment (Table 8, column 1), (2) mothers to

work more hours during non-school hours (Table 8 column 2), and (3) reduces children's

academic achievement. Critically, however, when the mother was already working full-time,

bank branch deregulation has none of these effects. The results from the analyses that

differentiate by whether grandparents live with the mother-child pair also support the time

allocation view. When grandparents live in the same house as the mother and child in the entry

year (Grandparents-Entry Year = 1), we find that bank branch deregulation does not reduce

children's academic achievement. This is consistent with the view that when there is a

reasonable substitute for mothers' supervision of children, factors that entice mothers to work

more hours in paid employment do not harm children's academic performance as measured by

standardized test score.



6. Conclusion

       In this paper, we first evaluated the effect of bank regulatory reforms that improved the

efficient functioning of local credit markets on children's academic performance. We exploit

cross-state, cross-time variation in the deregulation of barriers to interstate bank branching as a

source of exogenous variation in local credit conditions. Using a panel data on parent-child pairs

from 1986 through 2005, we assess the impact these regulatory reforms on children's academic

performance. We differentiate children by whether they are from high-income or low-income

families because research shows that bank deregulation spurred employment among low-income

families but not among high-income families. Thus, if bank branch deregulation shapes
                                                                                                   21



children's human capital accumulation by altering parental employment, then deregulation

should have a larger effect on children from low-income families.

       We find that following regulatory reforms that improved local banking system efficiency,

academic performance falls among children from low-income families but not those from high-

income families. This finding is robust to controlling for child and year fixed effects, cohort

linear time trends, and time-varying characteristics of the state where the child resides. While

influential research how financial development can enhance human capital accumulation, we

discover that U.S. bank regulatory reforms that improved the functioning of local credit markets

were followed by declines in academic performance, which may have long-run effects on

children's well-being as adults (e.g., Agarwal and Mazumder 2013).

       The second part of our analyses explored one channel through which financial

development might harm children's academic performance: The parent time allocation channel.

When applied to finance and children's education, the parent time allocation channel posits that

if more competitive, efficient financial systems increase firms' demand for workers, this could

induce parents to devote less time to childrearing and more time to paid employment with

adverse effects on children's human capital development. We examine four implications of this

channel. First, we examine whether bank branch deregulations spurs parents--and if so which

parents--to work more hours in paid jobs? Second, among families in which bank branch

deregulation induces parents to work more hours, we examine whether this reduces parental

supervision and the extent to which children spend time on academically productive endeavors.

Third, we examine whether parent-child discussions about school and college fall among

families most affected by bank regulatory reforms? Fourth, we test whether the impact of

regulatory reforms on children's performance varies across families in ways that are consistent

with the parent time allocation channel.

       Across each of these four dimensions, the evidence is consistent with the parent time

allocation view of how improving the financial system impedes children's academic

performance. First, branch deregulation pulled mothers from low-income families into the
                                                                                                   22



workforce, but had no effect on either mothers in high-income families or fathers. This suggests

that the parent time allocation channel operates through mothers. Second, among low-income

families, there is a reduction in parental monitoring of children, a reduction in hours spent on

homework during non-school hours, and an increase in hours spent on television and video

games on school days following regulatory reforms that improved credit markets. Third, these

regulatory reforms that enticed mothers from low-income families to spend more hours in the

labor force reduced parent-child discussions about school and college. Fourth, consistent with the

parent time allocation view, branch deregulation has less of deleterious impact on children's test

scores when (a) mothers were already working full-time before deregulation or (b) grandparents

were living with the mother-child pair. This suggests that when there is a reasonable substitute

for mothers' supervision of children, an increase in maternal employment does not harm

children's academic performance.
                                                                                                23



References

Agarwal, S. and Mazumder, B., 2013. Cognitive abilities and household financial decision

       making. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 5(1), pp.193-207.

Agarwal, S. and Qian, W., 2014. Consumption and debt response to unanticipated income shocks:

       Evidence from a natural experiment in Singapore. American Economic Review, 104(12),

       pp.4205-30.

Aizer, A., 2004. Home alone: Supervision after school and child behavior. Journal of Public

       Economics, 88(9-10), pp.1835-1848.

Aizer, A. and Currie, J., 2014. The intergenerational transmission of inequality: maternal

       disadvantage and health at birth. Science, 344(6186), pp.856-861.

Aizer, A., Eli, S., Ferrie, J. and Lleras-Muney, A., 2016a. The long-run impact of cash transfers

       to poor families. American Economic Review, 106(4), pp.935-71.

Aizer, A., Stroud, L. and Buka, S., 2016b. Maternal stress and child outcomes: Evidence from

       siblings. Journal of Human Resources, 51(3), pp.523-555.

Beck, T., Levine, R. and Levkov, A., 2010. Big bad banks? The winners and losers from bank

       deregulation in the United States. The Journal of Finance, 65(5), pp.1637-1667.

Becker, G.S., 1962. Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Political

       Economy, 70(5, Part 2), pp.9-49.

Becker, G.S., 1964. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special

       Reference to Education. Columbia University Press, New York.

Becker, G.S., 1965. A Theory of the Allocation of Time. The Economic Journal, pp.493-517.

Becker, G.S., 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Harvard University Press.

Bharadwaj, P., Løken, K.V. and Neilson, C., 2013. Early life health interventions and academic

       achievement. American Economic Review, 103(5), pp.1862-91.

Blau, D.M., 1999. The effect of income on child development. Review of Economics and

       Statistics, 81(2), pp.261-276.
                                                                                                 24



Card, D., 1999. The causal effect of education on earnings. In Handbook of Labor

       Economics (Vol. 3, pp. 1801-1863). Elsevier.
Carneiro, P. and Heckman, J.J., 2002. The evidence on credit constraints in postsecondary

       schooling. The Economic Journal, 112(482), pp.705-734.

Carneiro, P., Løken, K.V. and Salvanes, K.G., 2015. A flying start? Maternity leave benefits and

       long-run outcomes of children. Journal of Political Economy, 123(2), pp.365-412.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N. and Katz, L.F., 2016. The effects of exposure to better neighborhoods on

       children: New evidence from the Moving to Opportunity experiment. American

       Economic Review, 106(4), pp.855-902.

Chetty, R., Hendren, N., Kline, P. and Saez, E., 2014. Where is the land of opportunity? The

       geography of intergenerational mobility in the United States. The Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, 129(4), pp.1553-1623.

Chyn, E., 2018. Moved to opportunity: The long-run effects of public housing demolition on

       children, American Economic Review 108, 3028­3056.

Cunha, F. and Heckman, J., 2007. The technology of skill formation. American Economic

       Review, 97(2), pp.31-47.

Currie, J., 2009. Healthy, wealthy, and wise: Socioeconomic status, poor health in childhood,

       and human capital development, Journal of Economic Literature 47, 87-112.

Currie, J. and Moretti, E., 2003. Mother's education and the intergenerational transmission of

       human capital: Evidence from college openings. The Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, 118(4), pp.1495-1532.

Dahl, G.B. and Lochner, L., 2012. The impact of family income on child achievement: Evidence

       from the earned income tax credit. American Economic Review, 102(5), pp.1927-56.

Favara, G. and Imbs, J., 2015. Credit supply and the price of housing. American Economic

       Review, 105(3), pp.958-92.
                                                                                               25



Gentzkow, M. and Shapiro, J.M., 2008. Preschool television viewing and adolescent test scores:

       Historical evidence from the Coleman study. The Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, 123(1), pp.279-323.

Havnes, T. and Mogstad, M., 2011. No child left behind: Subsidized child care and children's

       long-run outcomes. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3(2), pp.97-129.

Havnes, T. and Mogstad, M., 2011. Money for nothing? Universal child care and maternal

       employment. Journal of Public Economics, 95(11-12), pp.1455-1465.

Havnes, T. and Mogstad, M., 2015. Is universal child care leveling the playing field?. Journal of

       Public Economics, 127, pp.100-114.

Heckman, J.J., 2006. Skill formation and the economics of investing in disadvantaged

       children. Science, 312(5782), pp.1900-1902.

Jacoby, H.G. and Skoufias, E., 1997. Risk, financial markets, and human capital in a developing

       country. The Review of Economic Studies, 64(3), pp.311-335.

Johnson, C.A. and Rice, T., 2008. Assessing a decade of interstate bank branching. Wash. & Lee

       L. Rev., 65, p.73.

Juhn, C., Rubinstein, Y., and Zuppman, C.A., 2015. The Quantity-Quality Trade-off and the

       Formation of Cognitive and Non-cognitive Skills. NBER Working Paper 21824.

Juhn, C., Rubinstein, Y., and Zuppman, C.A., 2018. Spacing and the Quantity-Quality Trade-off.

       University of Houston mimeo.

Krishnan, Debarshi K. Nandy, Karthik, and Manju Puri, 2014, Does financing spur small

       business productivity? evidence from a natural experiment, The Review of Financial

       Studies, 28, 1768­1809.

Leibowitz, A., 1974. Home investments in children. Journal of Political Economy, 82, S111­

       S131.

Popov, A., 2014. Credit constraints and investment in human capital: Training evidence from

       transition economies. Journal of Financial Intermediation, 23(1), pp.76-100.
                                                                                               26



Popov, A., 2018. Evidence on finance and economic growth. In Handbook of Finance and

       Development. Edward Elgar Publishing.

Popov, A. and Rocholl, J., 2018. Do credit shocks affect labor demand? Evidence for

       employment and wages during the financial crisis. Journal of Financial

       Intermediation, 36, pp.16-27.

Popov, A. and Zaharia, S., 2019. Credit market competition and the gender gap in labor force

       participation: Evidence from local markets. European Economic Review, 115, pp.25-59.
Rice, T. and Strahan, P.E., 2010. Does credit competition affect smallfirm finance? The Journal

       of Finance, 65(3), pp.861-889.

Schultz, T.W., 1960. Capital formation by education. Journal of Political Economy, 68(6),

       pp.571-583.

Schultz, T.W., 1961. Investment in human capital. The American Economic Review, pp.1-17.

Sun, S.T. and Yannelis, C., 2016. Credit constraints and demand for higher education: Evidence

       from financial deregulation. Review of Economics and Statistics, 98(1), pp.12-24.
                                                                                                             27


Table 1. Summary Statistics

This table provides summary statistics. The sample period covers the first year of the NLSY79 Child survey
(1986) to the last year of the bank branching deregulation index (2005). Variables are defined in Appendix 1.

   Variable                                  N         Mean        S.D.       Min       Median       Max
   State-Level Bank Branching Deregulation
   IBBEA Index                             1,020       0.915      1.375         0          0           4

   Children's Academic Achievement
   Average Rank                            22,574     49.605      28.870     0.266      49.401       100
   Average Score                           22,574       0          0.997     -4.763      0.013      6.230

   Parents' Employment Status
   Mom-FT                                  27,956      0.367      0.482         0          0          1
   Mom-Work Hours                          27,956      1,317       970          0        1,560      3,380
   Mom-Works Non-School Times              28,731      0.128      0.334         0          0          1
   Mom-Work Hours Non-School Times         28,710      0.828      1.938         0          0         8.5
   Mom-Work Hours HW Times                 28,709      3.239      2.315         0          5          5
   Dad-FT                                  18,531      0.738      0.440         0          1          1
   Dad-Work Hours                          18,531      2,074       781          0        2,080      4,160
   Dad-Works Non-School Times              19,352      0.219      0.414         0          0          1
   Dad-Work Hours Non-School Times         19,318      1.197      2.200         0          0          9
   Dad-Work Hours HW Times                 19,318      3.513      2.175         0          5          5

   Parents' Effective Monitoring
   Limit TV & Games                         9,442      1.609      1.038         0          2           3
   TV Hours in Weekdays                    27,080      2.325      1.024         1          2           6
   TV Hours on Weekends                    27,149      2.356      0.907         1          2           6
   HW Hours in School                       9,431      0.876      0.880         0          1           5
   HW Hours out of School                   9,436      1.201      0.869         0          1           5
   Mom Knows                               14,070      3.776      0.490         1          4           4
   Tell Parents                             4,630      2.528      0.804         0          3           3

   Parents' Involvement in Children's Education
   Discuss Class                            9,377      2.119      0.855         0          2           3
   Discuss Grades                           9,370      2.368      0.848         0          3           3
   Mom Lectures                            11,253      3.793      1.399         1          4           5
   Discuss Standardized Tests               9,202      1.135      1.132         0          1           3
   Discuss Courses                          5,390      1.522      1.104         0          2           3
   Discuss College                          5,427      1.551      1.089         0          2           3
   Parent-Teacher Conference               10,608      0.903      0.296         0          1           1

   State-Level Controls
   Log (GSP per Capita)                    1,020      10.595      0.256      10.076     10.567      12.041
   Log (Population)                        1,020      14.974      1.029      13.025     15.077      17.403
                                                                                                                28


Table 2. Bank Branching Deregulation and Children's Academic Achievement

This table reports OLS regression results of children's academic achievement on interstate branching
deregulation and other controls. For the dependent variables, Average Rank denotes the child's age-adjusted
rank of the average of PIAT Mathematics and Reading score, and Average Score denotes the child's age-
adjusted standardized average score of PIAT Mathematics and Reading score with a mean of zero and a
standard deviation. The key independent variables are based on the interstate branching measure, IBBEA Index,
which ranges from 0 (most restrictive) to 4 (most deregulated). State controls include log of GSP per capita
and log of total population. We include IBBEA Index (High Income), which equals the IBBEA Index interacted
with a dummy variable that equals one if the child is in a household with above the median income and IBBEA
Index (Low Income), which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that equals one if the
child is in a household with below the median income. We include individual and year fixed effects in column
(1) and (2), and further control for birth cohort linear time trends in column (3) and (4). All regressions use the
sample weights provided by NLSY79 Child. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the state
level are in parentheses. We test whether the estimated coefficient IBBEA Index (High Income) is significantly
different from the estimated coefficient on IBBEA Index (Low Income) and report the p-value of this test in the
last row. For coefficient estimates, *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                      Average Rank       Average Score      Average Rank       Average Score
                                           (1)                 (2)               (3)                 (4)
   IBBEA Index (High Income)              0.053              0.003              0.031              0.002
                                         (0.307)            (0.010)            (0.300)            (0.010)
   IBBEA Index (Low Income)             -0.838**           -0.020*            -0.848**           -0.021*
                                         (0.301)            (0.011)            (0.302)            (0.011)
   Log (GSP per Capita)                 21.090**           0.720**            20.827**           0.716**
                                         (9.798)            (0.274)            (9.903)            (0.274)
   Log (Population)                      -18.648             -0.702            -19.192             -0.725
                                        (17.443)            (0.546)           (17.552)            (0.546)
   Individual FE                           Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
   Year FE                                 Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
   Cohort Linear Trends                    No                  No                Yes                Yes
   Observation                            22574              22574              22574              22574
   R-Squared                              0.721              0.727              0.722              0.727
   P-Value                                0.002              0.002              0.002              0.003
                                                                                                                  29


    Table 3. Bank Branching Deregulation and Children's Academic Achievement: Pre-Trends and Other
    Robustness Checks

    This table reports robustness checks on OLS regression results of children's academic achievement on
    interstate branching deregulation and other controls. Column (1) and (2) present baseline results without
    sample weights. Column (3) and (4) further control for the dynamics of family composition. Column (5) and (6)
    explicitly examine the potential pre-trends. Pre(4,1) is a dummy variable that equals one if the year falls within
    four years before the interstate branching deregulation year, and zero otherwise. For the dependent variables,
    Average Rank denotes the child's age-adjusted rank of the average of PIAT Mathematics and Reading score,
    and Average Score denotes the child's age-adjusted standardized average score of PIAT Mathematics and
    Reading score with a mean of zero and a standard deviation. The key independent variables are based on the
    interstate branching measure, IBBEA Index, which ranges from 0 (most restrictive) to 4 (most deregulated). D-
    Separate/Divorce is a dummy variable that equals one if mother's marital status is separated or divorced, and
    zero otherwise. State controls include log of GSP per capita and log of total population. We include IBBEA
    Index (High Income), which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that equals one if the
    child is in a household with above the median income and IBBEA Index (Low Income), which equals the
    IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that equals one if the child is in a household with below the
    median income. We include individual and year fixed effects, as well as birth cohort linear time trends, in all
    columns. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses. We test
    whether the estimated coefficient IBBEA Index (High Income) is significantly different from the estimated
    coefficient on IBBEA Index (Low Income) and report the p-value of this test in the last row. For coefficient
    estimates, *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                    Unweighted Regression        Control for Family Composition           Pre-Trends
                                   Average       Average           Average           Average         Average Average
                                     Rank          Score             Rank             Score            Rank       Score
                                      (1)           (2)               (3)               (4)             (5)        (6)
IBBEA Index (High Income)            0.135         0.004             0.029            0.002            0.203      0.006
                                    -0.303        -0.011            -0.301             -0.01          (0.322)    (0.011)
IBBEA Index (Low Income)           -0.784**      -0.022**          -0.848**          -0.021*         -1.071** -0.025*
                                    -0.287         -0.01            -0.302            -0.011          (0.396)    (0.014)
D-Separate/Divorce                                                   0.307            0.016
                                                                    -0.811            -0.025
Pre(4,1) (High Income)                                                                                0.697       0.015
                                                                                                     (0.768)     (0.025)
Pre(4,1) (Low Income)                                                                                 -0.878      -0.017
                                                                                                     (1.074)     (0.035)
Log (GSP per Capita)               15.947          0.628**         20.809**           0.715**       20.819**     0.716**
                                    -9.709          -0.295           -9.907            -0.275        (9.966)     (0.277)
Log (Population)                    -6.381          -0.283          -19.222            -0.726        -19.104      -0.722
                                   -20.686          -0.665          -17.568            -0.546       (17.513)     (0.546)
Individual FE                        Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
Year FE                              Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
Cohort Linear Trends                 Yes             Yes              Yes               Yes            Yes         Yes
Observation                         22574           22574            22574             22574          22574       22574
R-Squared                           0.718           0.724            0.722             0.727          0.722       0.727
P-Value                             0.000           0.001            0.002             0.003          0.000       0.007
                                                                                                                  30


     Table 4. Bank Branching Deregulation and Parents' Employment Status

     This table reports OLS regression results parents' employment status on interstate branching deregulation and
     other controls. Panel A presents the responses of mother's employment status, while Panel B presents the
     responses of father's employment status. For the dependent variables, Mom (Dad)-FT is a dummy variable that
     equals one if mother (father) (1) works at least 50 weeks, and (2) works at least 2000 hours in a given year, and
     zero otherwise. Mom (Dad)-Work Hours denotes the mother's (father's) total working hours in a given year.
     Mom (Dad)-Works Non-School Times is a dummy variable that equals one if the mother (father) works during
     the child's activity time based on mother's (father's) reported job beginning time (before 7am or after 5pm),
     and zero otherwise. Mom (Dad)-Work Hours Non-School Times denotes the mother's (father's) total working
     hours that are within the child's activity time. Mom (Dad)-Work Hours HW Times denotes the mother's
     (father's) total working hours that are within the child's typical homework time (6pm to 10pm). The key
     independent variables are based on the interstate branching measure, IBBEA Index, which ranges from 0 (most
     restrictive) to 4 (most deregulated). State controls include log of GSP per capita and log of total population.
     We include IBBEA Index (High Income), which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that
     equals one if the mother (father) is in a household with above the median income and IBBEA Index (Low
     Income,) which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that equals one if the mother (father)
     is in a household with below the median income. We include individual and year fixed effects, as well as birth
     cohort linear time trends, in all columns. All regressions use the sample weights provided by NLSY79.
     Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses. We test whether the
     estimated coefficient IBBEA Index (High Income) is significantly different from the estimated coefficient on
     IBBEA Index (Low Income) and report the p-value of this test in the last row. For coefficient estimates, *, **,
     and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

Panel A. Mother's Labor Participation
                                             Mom-Work       Mom-Works Non-        Mom-Work Hours          Mom-Work
                                 Mom-FT
                                               Hours         School Times         Non-School Times      Hours HW Times
                                    (1)           (2)               (3)                   (4)                   (5)
IBBEA Index (High Income)         -0.005        -19.985           0.002                 0.007                  0.012
                                 (0.006)       (14.240)          (0.004)               (0.020)                (0.028)
IBBEA Index (Low Income)        0.021***      48.351**          0.019***               0.108**                0.083*
                                 (0.006)       (18.520)          (0.005)               (0.033)                (0.046)
Log (GSP per Capita)              0.172       457.417*            0.133                 0.560                  0.418
                                 (0.132)      (245.881)          (0.089)               (0.441)                (0.569)
Log (Population)                  -0.101     -717.587**           -0.144                -0.250               -1.949**
                                 (0.149)      (306.228)          (0.107)               (0.462)                (0.693)
Individual FE                      Yes            Yes              Yes                   Yes                    Yes
Year FE                            Yes            Yes              Yes                   Yes                    Yes
Cohort Linear Trends               Yes            Yes              Yes                   Yes                    Yes
Observation                       27956          27956            28731                 28710                  28709
R-Squared                         0.416          0.531            0.272                 0.279                  0.371
P-Value                           0.001          0.000            0.001                 0.003                  0.052
                                                                                                    31


Panel B. Father's Labor Participation
                                           Dad-Work    Dad-Works Non-   Dad-Work Hours     Dad-Work Hours
                                 Dad-FT
                                            Hours       School Times    Non-School Times     HW Times
                                    (1)        (2)            (3)               (4)               (5)
IBBEA Index (High Income)         -0.001   -17.274**        -0.007            -0.019            -0.034
                                 (0.007)     (8.344)       (0.005)           (0.024)           (0.026)
IBBEA Index (Low Income)          0.003      -20.703        0.000             -0.044            -0.006
                                 (0.007)    (12.521)       (0.006)           (0.036)           (0.032)
Log (GSP per Capita)              0.050      -92.993        -0.195            0.199             -0.262
                                 (0.206)   (248.520)       (0.142)           (0.679)           (0.586)
Log (Population)                  -0.174    -111.228      -0.330**          -2.065**            -0.704
                                 (0.125)   (217.143)       (0.129)           (0.638)           (0.613)
Individual FE                      Yes         Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes
Year FE                            Yes         Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes
Cohort Linear Trends               Yes         Yes           Yes               Yes               Yes
Observation                       18531       18531         19352             19318             19318
R-Squared                         0.297       0.407         0.337             0.308             0.297
P-Value                           0.618       0.817         0.182             0.465             0.440
                                                                                                                           32


         Table 5. Bank Branching Deregulation and Parents' Effective Monitoring

         This table reports OLS regression results of parents' effective monitoring activities on interstate branching
         deregulation and other controls. For the dependent variables, Limit TV & Games is the answer to child's rating
         of the statement "How often parents limit the amount of time watching TV/video games", ranging from 0
         (never) to 3 (often). TV Hours in Weekdays is the answer to number of hours child watches TV on typical
         weekday, ranging from 1 (almost none) to 6 (highly frequently). TV Hours on Weekends is the answer to
         number of hours child watches TV on typical weekend day, ranging from 1 (almost none) to 6 (highly
         frequently). HW Hours in School is the answer to hours per week spent on homework during school, ranging
         from 1 (almost none) to 5 (highly frequently). HW Hours after School is the answer to hours per week spent on
         homework after school, ranging from 1 (almost none) to 5 (highly frequently). Mom Knows is the answer to
         mother's rating of the statement "How often mom knows who child is with when not home", ranging from 1
         (only rarely) to 4 (all the time). Tell Parents is the answer to child's rating of the statement "How much child
         tells parents about where child is when not home", ranging from 1 (not at all) to 3 (a lot). The key independent
         variables are based on the interstate branching measure, IBBEA Index, which ranges from 0 (most restrictive)
         to 4 (most deregulated). State controls include log of GSP per capita and log of total population. We include
         IBBEA Index (High Income), which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that equals one
         if the child is in a household with above the median income and IBBEA Index (Low Income), which equals the
         IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that equals one if the child is in a household with below the
         median income. We include individual and year fixed effects, as well as birth cohort linear time trends, in all
         columns. All regressions use the sample weights provided by NLSY79 Child. Heteroskedasticity-robust
         standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses. We test whether the estimated coefficient IBBEA
         Index (High Income) is significantly different from the estimated coefficient on IBBEA Index (Low Income)
         and report the p-value of this test in the last row. For coefficient estimates, *, **, and *** indicate significance
         at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                 Limit TV &      TV Hours in     TV Hours on      HW Hours       HW Hours          Mom          Tell
                                   Games          Weekdays        Weekends        in School     out of School    Knows       Parents
                                      (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)           (6)          (7)
IBBEA Index (High Income)           -0.016          -0.010          0.004           0.020           -0.015        0.003        -0.025
                                   (0.029)         (0.010)         (0.005)         (0.022)         (0.046)       (0.006)      (0.024)
IBBEA Index (Low Income)          -0.107**        0.029**           0.008           -0.025        -0.082**       -0.025*    -0.116***
                                   (0.032)         (0.009)         (0.007)         (0.024)         (0.030)       (0.012)      (0.029)
Log (GSP per Capita)                0.728           0.108           -0.269          -0.444          0.390         -0.125       -1.150
                                   (0.677)         (0.273)         (0.253)         (0.546)         (0.763)       (0.228)      (0.806)
Log (Population)                    -0.492        0.536**           0.251           0.529           -0.882       0.501**       1.015
                                   (0.672)         (0.248)         (0.151)         (1.002)         (0.794)       (0.202)      (1.782)
Individual FE                        Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes
Year FE                              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes
Cohort Linear Trends                 Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes           Yes          Yes
Observation                          9442           27080           27149            9431            9436         14070         4630
R-Squared                           0.212           0.297           0.389           0.195           0.191         0.341        0.155
P-Value                             0.002           0.000           0.536           0.097           0.007         0.062        0.002
                                                                                                                      33


      Table 6. Bank Branching Deregulation and Parents' Involvement in Children's Education

      This table reports OLS regression results of parents' involvement in children's education on interstate
      branching deregulation and other controls. Appendix 1 details information on the survey waves and minimum
      age requirement for each question. For the dependent variables, Discuss Class is the child's rating of the
      statement "How often discuss things studied in class". Discuss Grades is the child's rating of the statement
      "How often discuss grades or report card". Mom Lectures is the answer to mother's rating of the statement
      "Mom would lecture child if (s)he got low grades", ranging from 1 (not at all likely) to 5 (very likely). Discuss
      Standardized Tests is the child's rating of the statement "How often discuss district/state/national exams/tests".
      Discuss Courses is the child's rating of the statement "How often discuss selecting courses or programs".
      Discuss College is the child's rating of the statement "How often discuss going to college". Answers for above
      questions range from 0 (never) to 3 (often). Parent-Teacher Conference is a dummy variable that equals one if
      mother attends parent-teacher conference, and zero otherwise. The key independent variables are based on the
      interstate branching measure, IBBEA Index, which ranges from 0 (most restrictive) to 4 (most deregulated).
      State controls include log of GSP per capita and log of total population. We include IBBEA Index (High
      Income) which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that equals one if the child is in a
      household with above the median income and IBBEA Index (Low Income) which equals the IBBEA Index
      interacted with a dummy variable that equals one if the child is in a household with below the median income.
      We include individual and year fixed effects, as well as birth cohort linear time trends, in all columns. All
      regressions use the sample weights provided by NLSY79 Child. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors
      clustered at the state level are in parentheses. We test whether the estimated coefficient IBBEA Index (High
      Income) is significantly different from the estimated coefficient on IBBEA Index (Low Income) and report the
      p-value of this test in the last row. For coefficient estimates, *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%, 5%,
      and 1%.

                                                                         Discuss
                                 Discuss      Discuss      Mom                         Discuss      Discuss     Parent-Teacher
                                                                      Standardized
                                  Class       Grades      Lectures                     Courses      College      Conference
                                                                           Tests
                                    (1)          (2)          (3)           (4)            (5)         (6)             (7)
IBBEA Index (High Income)         -0.027       -0.036       0.005         -0.045         0.035       0.005           -0.000
                                 (0.024)      (0.029)      (0.020)       (0.028)        (0.034)     (0.034)         (0.007)
IBBEA Index (Low Income)         -0.049*     -0.059**     -0.049**        -0.050       -0.097**    -0.079**        -0.014**
                                 (0.029)      (0.018)      (0.020)       (0.035)        (0.029)     (0.026)         (0.007)
Log (GSP per Capita)              -0.106       0.292       0.803*       -1.242**         -1.335      -0.348        -0.406**
                                 (0.586)      (0.489)      (0.452)       (0.563)        (1.160)     (0.688)         (0.146)
Log (Population)                  0.381        0.133       -0.996*       1.629*          -0.466      2.178           -0.028
                                 (0.651)      (0.936)      (0.585)       (0.813)        (1.214)     (1.382)         (0.209)
Individual FE                      Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
Year FE                            Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
Cohort Linear Trends               Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes             Yes
Observation                        9377         9370        11253          9202           5390        5427           10608
R-Squared                         0.136        0.156        0.518         0.214          0.217       0.304           0.165
P-Value                           0.174        0.506        0.050         0.868          0.004       0.013           0.071
                                                                                                                   34


Table 7. Bank Branching Deregulation and Children's Academic Achievement: Heterogeneous
Responses by Initial Family Conditions

This table reports heterogeneous OLS regression results of children's academic achievement on interstate
branching deregulation and other controls. For the dependent variables, Average Rank denotes the child's age-
adjusted rank of the average of PIAT Mathematics and Reading score. For the partitioning variables, Mom-FT
is a dummy variable that equals one if mother (1) works at least 50 weeks, and (2) works at least 2000 hours at
the entry year, and zero otherwise. Grandparents-Entry Year is a dummy variable that equals one if
grandparents live in the household at the entry year. The key independent variables are based on the interstate
branching measure, IBBEA Index, which ranges from 0 (most restrictive) to 4 (most deregulated). State
controls include log of GSP per capita and log of total population. We include IBBEA Index (High Income),
which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that equals one if the child is in a household
with above the median income and IBBEA Index (Low Income), which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with
a dummy variable that equals one if the child is in a household with below the median income. We include
individual and year fixed effects, as well as birth cohort linear time trends, in all columns. All regressions use
the sample weights provided by NLSY79 Child. Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the state
level are in parentheses. We test whether the estimated coefficient IBBEA Index (High Income) is significantly
different from the estimated coefficient on IBBEA Index (Low Income) and report the p-value of this test in the
last second row. We test whether the estimated coefficients IBBEA Index (Low Income) between subsamples
are significantly different and report the p-value of this test in the last row. For coefficient estimates, *, **, and
*** indicate significance at 10%, 5%, and 1%.

                                                  Mom-FT-Entry Year              Grandparents-Entry Year
                                                   No           Yes                 No            Yes
                                                Average      Average             Average       Average
                                                  Rank          Rank               Rank           Rank
                                                   (1)           (2)                (3)            (4)
        IBBEA Index (High Income)                 0.080        0.018               0.028         -0.271
                                                 (0.353)      (0.419)             (0.294)       (0.952)
        IBBEA Index (Low Income)                -0.897**       -0.340            -0.782**        -0.404
                                                 (0.314)      (0.625)             (0.339)       (0.831)
        Log (GSP per Capita)                    19.449*      27.530*             19.121*        37.949
                                                (11.043)     (16.160)             (9.767)      (23.026)
        Log (Population)                         -23.845       4.032              -21.713       39.008
                                                (17.561)     (29.390)            (16.663)      (28.127)
        Individual FE                              Yes          Yes                 Yes           Yes
        Year FE                                    Yes          Yes                 Yes           Yes
        Cohort Linear Trends                       Yes          Yes                 Yes           Yes
        Observation                               17475         4811               19855          2715
        R-Squared                                 0.726        0.703               0.719         0.728
        P-Value (High-Low Income)                 0.000        0.614               0.026         0.876
        P-Value (Low Income between
                                                          0.352                            0.680
                 Subsamples)
                                                                                                              35


Table 8. Bank Branching Deregulation and Mothers' Labor Market Outcomes: Heterogeneous
Responses by Initial Employment Status

This table reports heterogeneous OLS regression results of mothers' labor market outcomes on interstate
branching deregulation and other controls. For the dependent variables, Mom-Work Hours denotes the mother's
total working hours in a given year. Mom-Work Hours Non-School Times denotes the mother's total working
hours that are within the child's activity time. For the partitioning variables, Mom-FT is a dummy variable that
equals one if mother (1) works at least 50 weeks, and (2) works at least 2000 hours at the entry year, and zero
otherwise. The key independent variables are based on the interstate branching measure, IBBEA Index, which
ranges from 0 (most restrictive) to 4 (most deregulated). State controls include log of GSP per capita and log of
total population. We include IBBEA Index (High Income), which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with a
dummy variable that equals one if the mother is in a household with above the median income and IBBEA
Index (Low Income), which equals the IBBEA Index interacted with a dummy variable that equals one if the
mother is in a household with below the median income. We include individual and year fixed effects, as well
as birth cohort linear time trends, in all columns. All regressions use the sample weights provided by NLSY79.
Heteroskedasticity-robust standard errors clustered at the state level are in parentheses. We test whether the
estimated coefficient IBBEA Index (High Income) is significantly different from the estimated coefficient on
IBBEA Index (Low Income) and report the p-value of this test in the last second row. We test whether the
estimated coefficients IBBEA Index (Low Income) between subsamples are significantly different and report
the p-value of this test in the last row. For coefficient estimates, *, **, and *** indicate significance at 10%,
5%, and 1%.

                                         Mom-FT-Entry Year                    Mom-FT-Entry Year
                                          No           Yes                  No                Yes
                                      Mom-Work Mom-Work              Mom-Work Hours    Mom-Work Hours
                                         Hours       Hours           Non-School Times Non-School Times
                                          (1)          (2)                  (3)                (4)
   IBBEA Index (High Income)            -18.402       9.893               -0.010             0.028
                                       (16.892)     (15.726)             (0.032)            (0.057)
   IBBEA Index (Low Income)            41.303**      11.282              0.126**             0.023
                                       (19.294)     (23.491)             (0.038)            (0.041)
   Log (GSP per Capita)               750.620**     -450.374              0.777              -0.016
                                      (342.273)    (362.344)             (0.515)            (0.876)
   Log (Population)                    -364.367   -663.745**              -0.168             -0.551
                                      (369.094)    (322.993)             (0.550)            (0.723)
   Individual FE                          Yes          Yes                 Yes                Yes
   Year FE                                Yes          Yes                 Yes                Yes
   Cohort Linear Trends                   Yes          Yes                 Yes                Yes
   Observation                           20573        7165                21069               7367
   R-Squared                             0.510        0.379               0.266              0.322
   P-Value (High-Low Income)             0.001        0.956               0.003              0.955
   P-Value (Low Income between
                                                0.326                                  0.054
            Subsamples)
                                                                                                                                                         36
        Appendix 1. Variable Definition

Variable                                  Definition                                                                                          Source
State-Level Bank Branching Deregulation
                                          We follow RS (2010) and contrast the index ranging from 0 (most restrictive) to 4 (most
                                          deregulated). We add one point to the index if the state (1) does not impose a minimum age          Rice and Strahan
IBBEA Index
                                          restriction for acquisition, (2) allows de novo interstate branching, (3) permits interstate        (2010)
                                          branching by acquiring a single branch; (4) sets the deposit-cap no less than 30%.

Children's Academic Achievement
                                                                                                                                              NLSY79 Child-CS
Average Rank                              Child's age-adjusted rank of the average of PIAT Mathematics and Reading score.
                                                                                                                                              (1986-2004)
                                          Child's age-adjusted standardized average score of PIAT Mathematics and Reading score with a        NLSY79 Child-CS
Average Score
                                          mean of zero and a standard deviation.                                                              (1986-2004)

Parents' Employment Status
                                          A dummy variable that equals one if mother (father) (1) works at least 50 weeks, and (2) works at
Mom (Dad)-FT                                                                                                                                  NLSY79 (1986-2005)
                                          least 2000 hours in a given year, and zero otherwise.

Mom (Dad)-Work Hours                      Mother's (father's) total working hours in a given year.                                            NLSY79 (1986-2005)

                                          A dummy variable that equals one if mother (father) works during the child's activity time based
Mom (Dad)-Works Non-School Times                                                                                                              NLSY79 (1986-2004)
                                          on mother's (father's) reported job beginning time (before 7am or after 5pm), and zero otherwise.

Mom (Dad)-Work Hours Non-School Times     Mother's (father's) total working hours that are within the child's activity time.                  NLSY79 (1986-2004)

                                          Mother's (father's) total working hours that are within the child's typical homework time (6pm to
Mom (Dad)-Work Hours During HW Times                                                                                                          NLSY79 (1986-2004)
                                          10pm).

Parents' Effective Monitoring
                                          Child's rating of the statement "How often parents limit the amount of time watching TV/video       NLSY79 Child-SS
Limit TV & Games
                                          games". The answer ranges from 0 (never) to 3 (often).                                              (1996-2004)
                                          Number of hours child watches TV on typical weekday. The answer ranges from 1 (almost none)         NLSY79 Child-MS
TV Hours in Weekdays
                                          to 6 (highly frequently).                                                                           (1990-2004)
                                          Number of hours child watches TV on typical weekend day. The answer ranges from 1 (almost           NLSY79 Child-MS
TV Hours on Weekends
                                          none) to 6 (highly frequently).                                                                     (1990-2004)
                                                                                                                                                               37

                                               Mother's rating of the statement "How often mom knows who child is with when not home". The           NLSY79 Child-MS
Mom Knows
                                               answer ranges from 1 (only rarely) to 4 (all the time).                                               (1992-2004)

                                               Child's rating of the statement "How much child tells parents about where child is when not           NLSY79 Child-CSAS
Tell Parents
                                               home". The answer ranges from 1 (not at all) to 3 (a lot).                                            (1996-2004)


Parents' Involvement in Children's Education

                                               Child's rating of the statement "How often discuss things studied in class". The answer ranges        NLSY79 Child-SS
Discuss Class
                                               from 0 (never) to 3 (often).                                                                          (1996-2004) & Age>=6

                                               Child's rating of the statement "How often discuss grades or report card". The answer ranges          NLSY79 Child-SS
Discuss Grades
                                               from 0 (never) to 3 (often).                                                                          (1996-2004) & Age>=6

                                               Mother's rating of the statement "Mom would lecture child if (s)he got low grades", ranging from      NLSY79 Child-MS
Mom Lectures
                                               1 (not at all likely) to 5 (very likely).                                                             (1988-2004)

                                               Child's rating of the statement "How often discuss district/state/national exams/tests". The answer   NLSY79 Child-SS
Discuss Standardized Tests
                                               ranges from 0 (never) to 3 (often).                                                                   (1996-2004) & Age>=6

                                                                                                                                                     NLSY79 Child-SS
                                               Child's rating of the statement "How often discuss selecting courses or programs". The answer
Discuss Courses                                                                                                                                      (1996-2004) &
                                               ranges from 0 (never) to 3 (often).
                                                                                                                                                     Age>=10
                                                                                                                                                     NLSY79 Child-SS
                                               Child's rating of the statement "How often discuss going to college". The answer ranges from 0
Discuss College                                                                                                                                      (1996-2004) &
                                               (never) to 3 (often).
                                                                                                                                                     Age>=10
                                               A dummy variable that equals one if mother attends parent-teacher conference, and zero                NLSY79 Child-SS
Parent-Teacher Conference
                                               otherwise.                                                                                            (1996-2004)



State-Level Controls
Log (GSP per Capita)                           Natural logarithm of state-level GSP per capita.                                                      BEA
Log (Population)                               Natural logarithm of state-level total population.                                                    BEA

 Partitioning Variables
Individual-Level Partitioning Variable
                                               We use family's total income at the entry year to divide the full sample into high- and low-
Income Group                                                                                                                                         NLSY79
                                               income groups based on the state median family income.
