                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    STATES TAKING THE REINS? EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATION REQUIREMENTS
                  AND LOCAL LABOR MARKET OUTCOMES

                                       Shalise Ayromloo
                                      Benjamin Feigenberg
                                        Darren Lubotsky

                                      Working Paper 26676
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26676


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank seminar participants at Texas Christian University, the University of Arkansas at Little
Rock, the University of Illinois at Chicago, APPAM, and SOLE for helpful feedback. We also
thank Michael Disher, Ruveyda Gozen, Katherine McElroy, and Shogher Ohannessian for
outstanding research assistance. Financial support was generously provided by the University of
Illinois at Chicago Office of Social Science Research. Any errors are ours. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Shalise Ayromloo, Benjamin Feigenberg, and Darren Lubotsky. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
States Taking the Reins? Employment Verification Requirements and Local Labor Market
Outcomes
Shalise Ayromloo, Benjamin Feigenberg, and Darren Lubotsky
NBER Working Paper No. 26676
January 2020
JEL No. J18,J21,J3,J61,J63

                                         ABSTRACT

We estimate the impact of state-level "E-Verify" legislation that mandates employment eligibility
verification for private-sector workers. We document declines in formal sector employment and
employment turnover after mandate passage, with effects concentrated among those likeliest to be
work-ineligible. Using newly available data, we show that larger firms are far more likely to
comply with mandates. Heterogeneity in adherence leads to substantial within-state employment
spillovers from larger to smaller firms, as well as a reduction in the number of large firms. We
find no evidence that work-ineligible populations relocate or that native-born workers' labor
market outcomes improve in response to mandates.

Shalise Ayromloo                                Darren Lubotsky
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Chicago               University of Illinois at Chicago
601 South Morgan Street                         University Hall Room 728
Chicago, IL 60607                               601 South Morgan Street
United States                                   Chicago, IL 60607
sayrom2@uic.edu                                 and NBER
                                                lubotsky@uic.edu
Benjamin Feigenberg
Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Chicago
University Hall room 706
601 South Morgan Street
Chicago, IL 60607
bfeigenb@uic.edu
1     Introduction

As global migration flows rose over recent decades, United States federal immigration
policy focused resources on strengthening border security and raising the costs of entering
into the U.S. illegally. U.S. Border Patrol spending correspondingly rose almost ten-fold
over the past two decades, to $4.3 billion in Fiscal Year 2017. In spite of this unidimen-
sional focus of federal immigration policy, states have selectively adopted policies designed
to make undocumented immigration less attractive to potential migrants by reducing ac-
cess to public benefits, by increasing cooperation between local/state law enforcement and
federal immigration authorities, and by strengthening employment eligibility verification
systems. The adoption of employment eligibility verification systems, in particular, has
the potential to dramatically reshape the immigration landscape by eliminating undoc-
umented immigrants' access to formal sector labor markets and the associated earnings
gains that have motivated past waves of migration to the U.S. At the same time, the
welfare implications of these state-level policies are ambiguous. The substitutability of
natives and work-eligible immigrants for undocumented workers will determine whether
these subgroups benefit from falling undocumented labor supply in formal sector markets,
while constraints placed on the hiring of undocumented workers will raise the costs that
firms face.
    The primary system used to verify immigrants' work eligibility is E-Verify, a largely
voluntary electronic verification system developed by the U.S. Immigration and Natural-
ization Service (INS) in 1997.1 Partial or comprehensive mandates have been adopted by
twenty-two states that require the E-Verify system be used to verify employment eligibil-
ity of new hires. In this paper we study how the passage and enforcement of state-level
E-Verify mandates have affected local labor market outcomes for subpopulations with
1
    The INS was abolished in 2003 and replaced by the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services
    (USCIS), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), and Customs and Border Patrol (CBP)
    offices in the Department of Homeland Security.



                                              2
varying rates of predicted employment ineligibility and for native-born workers, the in-
tended beneficiaries of these policies.
    Understanding the complex impacts of expanded E-Verify usage is particularly relevant
at present. Recent comprehensive immigration reform proposals, such as legislation passed
by the U.S. Senate in 2013, and the White House's FY 2019 Budget Message (OMB,
2018) have called for a federal private-sector E-Verify mandate. More broadly, this work
contributes to a greater understanding of the role of state and local policies, including
cooperation agreements with federal authorities, in influencing labor market outcomes
and immigrants' location choice.2 Finally, immigration policy is currently among the most
hotly debated political issues. A vast academic literature has sought to understand how
immigration, both legal and undocumented, impacts American firms and the economic
fortunes of the native-born.3 While evaluating the efficacy of E-Verify is important for
understanding the limits of policy, an improved understanding of the impact of E-Verify
helps deepen our understanding of the ultimate gains or losses from immigration.4
    Our investigation begins with a new analysis of administrative data from the Depart-
ment of Homeland Security on usage of the E-Verify system. We use this data to estimate
the effect of E-Verify mandates on usage and document a high degree of non-compliance.
Specifically, we show that E-Verify usage is quite low among firms with fewer than 20
employees and their usage is largely unaffected by passage of a mandate. The high degree
of non-compliance that we document suggests that the mandates may impose substantial
costs on firms.
2
    For example, other recent work studies the impacts of the Secure Communities Act (East et al.,
    2019; East and Velasquez, 2019) and the 287(g) program (Bohn and Santillano, 2017).
3
    This literature is recently reviewed and discussed in Lewis and Peri (2015) and Dustmann et al.
    (2016a). Other recent examples are Chassamboulli and Peri (2015), Dustmann and Glitz (2015),
    Dustmann et al. (2016b), and Clemens et al. (2018).
4
    Our work also contributes to understanding of the role of legal status in immigrant outcomes because
    the increased use of E-Verify may have the effect of creating much sharper distinctions in the labor
    market outcomes of immigrants with different legal statuses. See, for instance, Borjas and Cassidy
    (2019).




                                                  3
   We use three data sources to identify labor market impacts: the Quarterly Workforce
Indicators (QWI), American Community Survey (ACS), and County Business Patterns
(CBP). Our benchmark county-level approach identifies significant declines in Hispanic
worker employment in response to both passage and enforcement of E-Verify mandates.
We provide evidence that employment declines are driven by those subpopulations most
likely to be classified as work-ineligible. We identify employment declines among Hispanic
and likely work-ineligible subpopulations that are notably larger than those found in prior
work (Orrenius and Zavodny, 2015, 2016; Orrenius et al., 2018; Amuedo-Dorantes and
Bansak, 2014). These divergent findings are explained by differences in the benchmark
specifications employed. Specifically, we test for parallel pre-trends with respect to key
outcomes and, in contrast to past work, focus on specifications without linear time trends
when the data provide support for doing so. Given treatment effects that grow over time,
the inclusion of time trends will tend to attenuate estimates. We also build on past work
by showing that usage of the E-Verify system and the associated labor market effects are
apparent when mandates are passed, prior to enforcement. Treatment effects associated
with the date of enforcement, which have been the focus of much prior research, may
therefore fail to accurately capture the overall effect of the mandates.
   Consistent with the prior evidence, we document declines in Hispanic worker turnover
(hires and separations) that parallel employment losses. This type of "job lock" is driven
by the fact that E-Verify mandates apply only to newly-hired workers and represents a
notable labor market distortion induced by E-Verify mandates. We use ACS data to
demonstrate that Hispanic employment declines in response to E-Verify mandate passage
are driven by probabilistically undocumented workers, the intended targets of the policy.
Our work finds no evidence that native-born workers benefit from E-Verify mandates and
some evidence they are harmed by them. In particular, we identify small but statisti-
cally significant declines in employment among non-Hispanics using the QWI. ACS data



                                             4
provide no evidence of corresponding employment gains among U.S. citizens. We esti-
mate employment declines among native-born workers who are the most substitutable for
undocumented immigrants, such as young, male workers without college degrees. These
employment declines are mirrored by declines in labor market earnings and family income.
   We next identify substantial heterogeneity in employment effects by firm size. Larger
firms are more likely to comply with E-Verify mandates and we correspondingly demon-
strate that virtually all of the decline in Hispanic employment is driven by workers in
larger firms. The number of large firms also declines significantly in response to the pas-
sage of E-Verify mandates, suggesting that aggregate employment effects result from a
combination of extensive and intensive margin changes. The disproportionate decline in
large firm employment represents an unintended consequence of E-Verify mandates and
suggests that the costs imposed on firms that do comply with these mandates may be
substantial.
   The heterogeneous employment impacts between large and small firms motivate our
analysis of within-state and within-county spillovers. Since some E-Verify mandates ex-
clude smaller firms, and even when covered smaller firms have a lower compliance rate
with mandates, counties that have a larger share of employment in small firms will be
impacted less by statewide mandates. We use this variation to estimate models that
compare counties in the same state that vary in their effective E-Verify coverage. These
estimates indicate that there are important spillover effects that reflect the movement of
workers from jobs in high-compliance to low-compliance counties and from jobs in larger
to smaller firms. These models are also important because they rely on a distinct source
of variation in E-Verify coverage than the traditional variation across states and time
exploited in our and others' earlier analyses.
   Finally, we use ACS data to show that the size of the potentially undocumented pop-
ulation does not change in response to passage of E-Verify mandates. The divergence



                                             5
between this finding and the evidence from past work that E-Verify mandates lead to un-
documented population declines (see, for instance, Orrenius and Zavodny, 2016) appears
to be explained by our focus on the timing of mandate passage rather than enforcement.
We provide suggestive evidence that increases in supplementary family income sources
may explain the lack of any significant estimated impact on the mobility of the work-
ineligible subpopulation.



2     E-Verify Background, Mandates, and Usage

The 1952 Immigration and Nationality Act officially made employers responsible for ensur-
ing that their employees are legally eligible to work in the United States, but enforcement
of this requirement remained limited over subsequent decades. Beginning in 1986 the eli-
gibility verification process was streamlined and strengthened through a requirement that
all newly hired employees fill out Employment Eligibility Verification Form I-9. This form
requires new employees to submit documentation of their identify and their authorization
to work in the United States, for example through a combination of a passport, Perma-
nent Resident Card, or other approved documents. Federal law requires that employers
maintain I-9 forms, but does not mandate that the employer verify the authenticity of the
information or documents provided. Concerns arose in subsequent years regarding the ac-
curacy and timeliness of verification of employee eligibility based on I-9 Form submissions
(Orrenius and Zavodny, 2015, Meissner and Rosenblum, 2009).
    In 1997 an electronic verification system was developed by the U.S. Immigration and
Nationalization Service (INS) to improve the efficiency of the employee verification pro-
cess. The E-Verify program provides employers with access to an electronic database that
allows for rapid verification of work eligibility. There is no federal mandate to use the
E-Verify system to verify the accuracy of information on the I-9 form. Rather, federal



                                            6
legislation requires only that E-Verify be used for all employees in a given firm or else
not be used at all by the firm.5 While there are no monetary costs to firms to use the
E-Verify system, the are non-trivial set-up, training, and compliance costs to using the
system. These costs are particularly cumbersome for small firms, which a 2011 analysis
suggested would spend $2.6 billion on compliance-related costs if forced to utilize E-Verify
(Arvelo, 2011). Firms that use E-Verify turn over employment data to the Department
of Homeland Security for statistical analysis, which employers may worry could trigger
audits or immigration enforcement raids.6
    In 2006, Colorado, Georgia, and North Carolina became the first states to enact man-
dates that require E-Verify usage for particular types of new hires.7 Currently 22 states
have enacted some type of E-Verify mandate. E-Verify requirements vary significantly
across states, ranging from requirements imposed in nine states that E-Verify be used
by all or nearly all employers, to less comprehensive E-Verify requirements covering only
state agencies and state contractors/subcontractors. Table 1 lists all state-level E-Verify
laws. Note that many mandates were phased-in over several years, with larger firms cov-
ered initially and smaller firms covered in later years.8 In our benchmark analyses, we
exclude those states that passed E-Verify mandates covering state agencies and/or state
contractors/subcontractors but not covering other private sector firms since the effective
coverage in these states is low and since our data do not allow us to identify firms' state
contractor/subcontractor status. In the Appendix, we show the robustness of findings to
the inclusion of data from these states. Penalties for non-compliance vary across states
5
    Beginning in 2009, the Federal Acquisitions Regulation requires federal contractors, with some ex-
    ceptions, to use E-Verify for all new employees.
6
    For example, see https://www.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/hr-topics/talent-acquisition/pages/pros-
    and-cons-registering-for-everify.aspx.
7
    Data on state E-Verify laws comes from the National Conference of State Legislatures (2015) and
    individual state statutes.
8
    Several counties in California enacted E-Verify mandates. These were overturned by subsequent
    state law that prohibited lower levels of government from enacting such mandates. Illinois also
    prohibits lower levels of governments from enacting E-Verify mandates. We are not aware of any
    other sub-state E-Verify mandates.



                                                 7
from modest fines to suspension of a business license.
    A unique contribution of our work is in providing the first assessment of the effect of
state E-Verify mandates on usage of the system. We obtained administrative records from
the USCIS via a Freedom of Information Act request that include counts of enrollment by
firms in the E-Verify system, counts of total E-Verify queries, and counts of queries deemed
work ineligible, separately by county, detailed industry, firm size, and year-quarter from
2004 to 2016. These data are an important part of our research design because they allow
us to assess how common E-Verify usage was prior to a mandate's passage and to evaluate
the change in usage associated with mandate passage as well as enforcement. In addition,
these data are used to evaluate heterogeneity in adherence to state-level mandates as a
function of firm size.
    New hires (the population subject to E-Verify mandates) are measured in the Quar-
terly Workforce Indicators (QWI) data. The QWI contain aggregate data on employment,
hires, separations, and other labor market measures by geographic area, industry, firm
size, and a limited number of worker demographic characteristics from 2004 through the
second quarter of 2015. The QWI is created by the United States Census Bureau from
matched employer-employee data that is itself created from state and federal administra-
tive records and surveys. Much of the information on employment and hires comes from
state Unemployment Insurance (UI) records, which cover 96 percent of civilian wage and
salary jobs.9 The measure of hires that we use includes all people who had earnings from
an employer in a particular quarter but did not have earnings from that employer in the
previous quarter.
    Figure 1 shows the ratio of E-Verify queries to new hires from 2004 to 2015. E-Verify
usage was quite low prior to 2006 and began to rise after the relaunch of the web interface
with enhanced features (including photo matching for individuals who have a Permanent
9
    Detailed information about the QWI data is available at https://lehd.ces.census.gov/data.




                                                 8
Resident Card or Employment Authorization Document), and public outreach in 2007.10
In 2006, three percent of hires were queried. The ratio rose to 20 percent in 2010 and 31
percent in 2015.11 2008 was the first year that any private sector hires were subject to
an E-Verify mandate. Figure 1 also shows the fraction of private-sector hires that were
subject to an E-Verify mandate. We estimated this coverage rate by applying applicable
state laws based on firm size.12 The coverage rate rises from zero in 2007 to 12.3 percent
in 2015.
     Figure 2 shows the ratio of E-Verify queries to hires separately by firm size. E-Verify
usage is quite uncommon among firms with fewer than 20 employees, where under ten
percent of hires were queried in 2015. By contrast, over 40 percent of hires in firms with 20
or more employees were queried in 2015. This disparity is not because of state mandates
that exclude small firms since most states with private sector mandates eventually covered
all firms (the exceptions are Tennessee, Georgia, and Utah, which exclude firms with fewer
than six, fewer than 11, and fewer than 15 employees, respectively). Rather, the disparity
is likely caused, in part, by the fact that some portion of the set-up and compliance costs
are fixed and therefore higher on a per-hire basis for small firms. Some of the disparity
is also likely due to larger firms being more likely to be federal or state contractors and
therefore subject to a mandate. In Section 4, we demonstrate that mandate passage
sharply increases E-Verify usage by larger firms while smaller firms experience a more
marginal increase in usage.
     A small existing literature has directly investigated labor market impacts of E-Verify
10
     A summary of the history of the E-Verify program is given at https://www.uscis.gov/e-verify/about-
     program/history-and-milestones.
11
     The E-Verify queries data in Figure 1 includes queries by both public and private-sector entities,
     while our extract of the QWI data covers only the private sector. Thus the ratio of queries to hires
     overstates the fraction of private sector hires that are queried.
12
     The data on hires in the QWI is grouped into firm size bins that do not always coincide with the
     E-Verify mandate thresholds, which induces some measurement error in our coverage rate. Our
     measure of coverage does not take into account any others exclusions to a law.




                                                   9
mandates.13 This past work has consistently identified state-level employment declines
among likely work-ineligible subpopulations in response to E-Verify enforcement but is
otherwise inconclusive regarding the net labor market impacts of (and costs associated
with) E-Verify mandates. The best-known, state-level E-Verify case studies examine
the migration and labor market impacts of Arizona's 2007 Legal Arizona Workers Act
(LAWA), which mandated statewide E-Verify usage. These studies identify a signifi-
cant decline in the state population characterized as non-citizen Hispanic in response
to LAWA's passage, but find no evidence of improvement in employment outcomes for
non-Hispanic low-skilled workers (Bohn et al., 2014, 2015). Moreover, LAWA was passed
during a period in which Arizona enacted multiple laws which were widely perceived as
"anti-immigrant" (Newman, 2017), suggesting that the undocumented population might
have been particularly responsive to the passage of LAWA given the overall state climate.
The most comprehensive empirical research on the aggregate labor market impacts of
the scale-up of E-Verify usage includes Amuedo-Dorantes and Bansak (2014), Orrenius
and Zavodny (2015), and Orrenius et al. (2018). These studies examine the employment
and wage effects of E-Verify mandates passed in multiple states and find mixed evidence
of whether any benefits accrue to likely work-eligible sub-populations, likely due to dif-
ferences in the data sources used, among other factors. Orrenius and Zavodny (2016)
employs a similar approach to examine changes in state-level likely undocumented popu-
lations and finds evidence that E-Verify mandates lead to reductions in this population,
driven by declines in the number of recent migrants living in a given state.14
13
     Other recent work has turned to investigating downstream outcomes, including foreign direct in-
     vestment responses, educational enrollment, and health insurance (Amuedo-Dorantes et al., 2015;
     Gunadi, 2018; Churchill, 2019).
14
     Although we replicate this finding when examining undocumented population responses to E-Verify
     mandate enforcement, we find no such impact in benchmark specifications that study responses
     to mandate passage. These divergent results are explained by an increase in the undocumented
     population immediately after passage, which leads to an inflated estimate of the decline in population
     following mandate enforcement. See Figure A6.




                                                    10
3      Data sources

We use three complementary data sources on labor market outcomes. Our benchmark
specifications employ outcomes constructed using QWI data from 2004 to 2015, which we
described in Section 2. These data give accurate measures of aggregate employment, hires,
and separations by quarter, county, firm size, industry, and Hispanic ethnicity.15 These
data cover formal sector, wage and salary workers. The data do not cover self-employed
workers, independent contractors, or those who work in informal or uncovered jobs. QWI
data does not include any information about a worker's eligibility to work in the United
States. We analyze these data for Hispanics and non-Hispanics separately. While the
population of Hispanic workers includes both natives and immigrants, and the subpopu-
lation of Hispanic immigrants includes both work-eligible and work-ineligible immigrants,
we anticipate that changes in employment patterns driven by E-Verify legislation will
be most likely to manifest themselves as changes in Hispanic employment patterns given
that the share of Hispanic workers who are undocumented is substantially higher than
the share of non-Hispanic workers without work eligibility, a fact we document below.
     We also analyze data from the ACS from 2005 to 2015 that allows us to focus more
directly on workers most likely to be undocumented and ineligible to work in the United
States, and workers who are potentially affected by changes in labor market outcomes
among undocumented workers. ACS data have a number of advantages. First, they
contain variables that allow us to study geographic movement, household-level earnings,
self-reported employment status (which may include informal employment), and self-
employment, which are not available in the QWI. Rich demographic data allow us to
focus on treatment effects among more narrow classifications of individuals, including
native-born Hispanics and low-skilled, native-born individuals. However, the ACS does
15
     QWI data is available for both public and private sector employment. We only analyze data on
     private sector employment.




                                               11
not contain information on the legal status of foreign-born persons and so we follow
an existing literature and define a respondent as probabilistically undocumented if that
person is a foreign-born, non-veteran with no post-secondary education.16 Averaged over
our sample period, 47.1 percent of Hispanics are foreign-born and 55.4 percent of these
are probabilistically undocumented. More generally, 26.9 percent of the foreign-born are
probabilistically undocumented.
     Two important drawbacks of the ACS are, first, that it is a sample and thus provides
a noisier measure of employment; second, geographic coverage is more limited than in the
QWI. Individuals in the ACS are classified by their Public Use Microdata Area (PUMA),
which are areas created by the Census Bureau that contain at least 100,000 people. We
thus employ a cross-walk that maps PUMAs into each of the 3,142 counties (or county-
equivalents). Finally, ACS data is annual, rather than quarterly.
     We also study changes in the number of establishments in operation using County
Business Patterns (CBP) data, which are derived from the Business Register data collected
by the U.S. Census Bureau. These data provide the number of establishments in operation
at the county-by-firm size bin-by year level and represent the most comprehensive existing
data source for establishment-level records (United States Census Bureau, 2019). Data
are available for the first quarter of each year between 2004 and 2015.



4      Research Design and Empirical Findings

We now describe our empirical framework to identify changes in E-Verify usage in response
to the enactment of legislation mandating its use and to examine resultant changes in
labor market outcomes for exposed workers as a function of their likely employment
eligibility. The ideal experiment to identify E-Verify program impacts would require the
16
     This definition is adopted in Feigenberg (2019) and a closely-related definition is employed in Orre-
     nius and Zavodny (2016).



                                                   12
random assignment of E-Verify legislation passage and enforcement across place and time.
Absent random variation in the passage and enforcement of E-Verify legislation, a key
identification challenge is that, even in the absence of an E-Verify mandate, counties
in states that pass and enforce E-Verify legislation may have subsequently experienced
changes in labor market and immigration outcomes that differed from those in counties
in states that did not pass such legislation. To identify the causal impacts of E-Verify
legislation in the presence of potentially endogenous passage, we begin with event-study
models that document that there are no pre-trends in E-Verify usage or in QWI-based
Hispanic labor market outcomes prior to passage of E-Verify legislation. (A comprehensive
set of event studies for all examined outcomes is included in the Appendix.) We then
employ two complementary identification strategies to measure the effect of legislation on
outcomes following passage and enforcement of employment verification mandates: The
first approach uses variation across states and time in E-Verify mandates to identify the
causal effect of mandates on average labor market outcomes. The second approach uses
data disaggregated to the firm size level to exploit within-state variation in the predicted
coverage of and adherence to E-Verify mandates and to investigate within-state spillovers.


4.1    Event study models

We begin by presenting event study graphs that characterize differences in E-Verify query
rates and in QWI-based employment outcomes among Hispanics in the years before and
after passage of any private sector E-Verify legislation in a given state. Our primary goal
here is to assess whether there are differential trends in outcomes prior to passage of an
E-Verify mandate. To do this, we estimate regression models with the following form:

                                    4
                      Ycst =  +           y Everif ycsty + t + c +   cst                (1)
                                  y =-4




                                               13
where Ycst is the outcome of interest for county c in state s in year-quarter t.17 t and
c represent year-quarter and county fixed effects. Finally, Everif ycsty is defined as
an indicator variable that identifies whether E-Verify legislation covering any private
sector workers (regardless of firm size) was passed in county c in state s in y years after
year-quarter t (or y years before for negative-valued y ). We focus here on the effects of
passage, rather than of enforcement, of any private sector E-Verify mandate since passage
and enforcement of legislation mandating coverage for smaller firms is typically preceded
by legislation mandating coverage of larger firms. As a result, even if the conditional
exogeneity assumption is satisfied with regards to the passage of E-Verify legislation,
labor market responses to initial passage have the potential to bias estimates derived
from models that focus on dates of enforcement or on the dates on which mandates
covering all private sector workers were passed. As noted, this emphasis on the timing
of legislative passage of any private sector mandate also distinguishes our research design
from the prior literature and is supported by the finding (presented below) that E-Verify
system usage increases in response to initial mandate passage.
     Figure 3 demonstrates that E-Verify mandate passage sharply increases E-Verify usage
by firms. Panel A shows the ratio of E-Verify queries to hires in states that passed any
private sector mandate, by year relative to the date a mandate was passed. This ratio
increases by 22 percentage points from four years prior to the mandate to four years after
it, with an 15 percentage point jump during the first full year after the law was passed.
Panels B through C show the ratio of queries to hires separately by firm size. The ratio
of queries to hires in firms with fewer than 20 employees rises by 10 percentage points,
with a three percentage point increase in the first full year after the law was passed. We
17
     We use the inverse hyperbolic sine (asinh) transformation of all dependent variables, unless otherwise
     noted, because some cells have zero values for employment, hires, or separations. Our results are
     similar when we use the natural log of labor market outcomes (dropping zero) or using ratios of
     outcomes to population. The asinh function closely parallels the natural logarithm function, but is
     well defined at zero (Card and Dellavigna, 2019).




                                                    14
find a similarly small responsiveness to mandates that explicitly cover all private sector
firms. By contrast, larger firms are far more likely to use E-Verify and their usage pattern
shows a noticeable increase after E-Verify mandates are passed. Firms with 20 or more
employees have a 23 percentage point increase in the first full year after the law was
passed.
   Figure 4 presents estimates from Equation 1 for outcomes characterizing Hispanic
employment, separations, and hires. We find no evidence of statistically significant pre-
trends in any of the outcomes. All three labor market outcomes decline in the year after
E-Verify passage and the effect sizes tend to grow over the subsequent years. Importantly,
these figures provide support for the identifying assumption that the declines in Hispanic
employment, hires and separations after E-Verify passage that we will document cannot
be attributed to differential pre-trends that would have predicted diverging outcomes even
in the absence of E-Verify legislation.
   In Appendix Figures A1-A10, we present estimates from parallel event study models
for all of the dependent variables that we consider below, in the QWI, ACS, and CBP
samples. In most specifications, we find no evidence of pre-trends in outcomes. Below
we note a few limited exceptions in which we assess the sensitivity of estimates to the
inclusion of county-specific linear time trends.


4.2       Employment outcomes in the QWI

We next estimate changes in E-Verify query rates and labor market outcomes associated
with the passage and implementation of E-Verify legislation. An initial goal of our analysis
is to assess whether effects of E-Verify mandates emerge after passage of legislation, before
it goes into effect. The event studies presented in Figure 4 preview the finding that
mandate passage impacts local labor market outcomes even prior to enforcement. Since
E-Verify mandates apply only to newly-hired workers, we expect that there could be "job


                                             15
lock" based on immigration status among those who would be forced to verify employment
eligibility if they switch employers. If true, this would lead to a decline in job separations
among work-ineligible individuals after E-verify mandates are passed, even before they are
enforced. A reduction in separations could contribute to a concurrent reduction in hires
among work-ineligible individuals. By contrast, whether we observe an immediate decline
in employment is theoretically uncertain; to the extent that work-ineligible workers forgo
job transitions and/or job search, we may see limited aggregate changes in employment
even in the presence of significant declines in hires and separations.
   We begin our analysis with labor market effects on Hispanic individuals measured in
the QWI files. Our first research design builds on the existing literature and exploits state
by year-quarter variation in E-Verify passage and enforcement in a multi-state difference-
in-differences estimation framework. We estimate models at the county level, rather than
state level, that more flexibly account for within-state differences across local labor mar-
kets and consequently generate more precise treatment effect estimates. The estimated
specifications are of the following form:


                Ycst =  + 1 Everif ycst,p + 2 Everif ycst,e + t + c +      cst            (2)

   The included regressors are as defined in Equation 1, with the exception of Everif ycst,p ,
an indicator variable equal to one if E-Verify legislation that covers any private sector
workers has been passed in county c state s by year-quarter t, and Everif ycst,e , which
characterizes whether a private sector mandate covering all workers is being enforced in
county c state s by year-quarter t. For comparison, we also present estimates that omit
the Everif ycst,e indicator in order to parallel the specifications used to generate event
study plots in Figures 3 and 4. Here, we estimate Equation 2 using inverse hyperbolic
sine transformations of the dependent variables because a number of our outcomes have




                                             16
a subset of zero-valued cells. Standard errors are clustered at the state level.18
     Before examining labor market outcomes, we estimate the effect of E-Verify legislation
on the fraction of new hires that are queried though the E-Verify system. Results are
presented in the first two columns of Table 2. Column 1 indicates that passage of any
private-sector E-Verify mandate is associated with a 16.4 percentage point increase in the
fraction of hires queried in the system. In the second column we separately control for
both passage of a mandate and enforcement of a mandate. Over half of the effect loads
onto passage of an E-Verify mandate, further supporting our hypothesis that legislative
passage (rather than subsequent enforcement) is the relevant determinant of the initial
onset of local labor market responses.
     The remaining columns of Table 2 present estimates of the impact of E-Verify mandates
on labor market outcomes among Hispanics. Odd-numbered columns estimate treatment
effects associated with E-Verify passage on employment, separations, and hires among
Hispanic workers, while even-numbered columns include both the passage and enforce-
ment regressors as indicated in Equation 2. In columns three, five, and seven we find a
statistically significant 8.7 percent decline in Hispanic employment, a 13.3 percent decline
in separations, and a 13.9 percent decline in hires. In columns four, six, and eight, in
which we include separate indicators for both the passage and the enforcement of man-
dates, the coefficient associated with passage is larger than the coefficient associated with
18
     In Appendix Tables A5 to A15, we present corresponding regression estimates that include linear
     time trends; these represent our preferred specifications in the subset of cases for which event stud-
     ies provide evidence of divergent pre-trends. In Appendix Tables A5 to A15, we also verify that
     our estimates are not sensitive to the inclusion of state-level covariates characterizing lagged labor
     market performance and the set of additional immigration enforcement measures already in place in
     county c in state s in year-quarter t. Specifically, following Orrenius and Zavodny (2015, 2016), we
     include the lagged unemployment rate, lagged log state GDP per capita, lagged log housing starts,
     and lagged log state government expenditures. We also include indicators for whether a state has
     any legislation in place to facilitate information-sharing with federal law enforcement, to restrict
     public benefits access for undocumented immigrants, or to strengthen protections for undocumented
     immigrants. Finally, we verify in Appendix Tables A5 to A15 that estimates are robust to includ-
     ing all states in the sample (states that passed E-Verify mandates covering state agencies and/or
     state contractors/subcontractors but not covering other private sector firms are excluded in our
     benchmark specifications).



                                                    17
the date of enforcement in the employment model, while the opposite is true for sepa-
rations and hires. In any case, passage and enforcement coefficients are not statistically
distinguishable within each of these models.
   As noted previously, the employment and turnover declines we estimate among His-
panic workers are notably larger than those found in prior work (Orrenius et al., 2018).
Though our focus on date of mandate passage rather than enforcement could be expected
to contribute to these divergent findings, in practice this is not the case. Effect sizes
that grow over time mean that average post-event outcome values are higher in passage-
based than enforcement-based models, while declining outcome values between passage
and enforcement imply that pre-event outcomes are also higher in passage-based than in
enforcement-based models. These pre- versus post-event differences across models appear
similar in magnitude and so effectively cancel out. In contrast, the exclusion of linear
time trends from our benchmark models appears to explain most of the difference; in the
presence of effects sizes that grow over time and in the absence of differential pre-trends,
the inclusion of these linear time trends will tend to attenuate estimated treatment effects.
   In Table 3, we present estimates analogous to those in Table 2 but for non-Hispanic
workers. Non-Hispanic workers could be affected in a number of ways. We estimate that
1.2 percent of Non-Hispanics are probabilistically undocumented and so their labor mar-
ket outcomes could be negatively affected by the enactment of E-Verify mandates. The
employment available to work-eligible individuals could increase or decrease, depending
on whether they are substitutes or complements to individuals who are not eligible to
work in the United States. Furthermore, if work-ineligible individuals experience "job
lock", mobility for those who are work-eligible may also be depressed as a result, leading
to declines in separations and hires above and beyond any measured employment effects.
On net, the estimates in Table 3 indicate negative effects on labor market outcomes,
though smaller than the effects on Hispanics. For example, passage of an E-Verify man-



                                             18
date is associated with declines of 2.9, 8.3, and 7.3 percent in employment, separations,
and hires. While these negative impacts may appear to be large, we note that labor mar-
ket outcomes among non-Hispanics display a slight downward trend prior to passage of
E-Verify legislation, which, if not controlled, would bias our post-period estimates down-
wards (see Appendix Figure A1). When we control for a county-specific linear time trend,
the pre-period trend goes away and our post-period effects are small in magnitude and
generally not statistically significant at conventional levels.19 Importantly, given the low
share of non-Hispanics likely to be work-ineligible, we can rule out employment gains
greater than two percent among work-eligible, non-Hispanics in response to the passage
of E-Verify mandates.
     We next turn to our analysis of labor market effects measured in the ACS, which allows
us to identify average treatment effects for individuals who are likely to be undocumented
based on additional observable characteristics, as well as effects on subgroups of native-
born individuals. We estimate models similar to Equation 2, though the ACS data are
annual and the only policy variable that we include is a dichotomous treatment variable
indicating whether any private-sector E-Verify mandate has been passed by the end of a
given year. Table 4 first presents employment effects of E-Verify mandates by Hispanic
ethnicity and undocumented status. Here employment excludes self-employment since
self-employed individuals are not subject to E-Verify mandates. We examine changes in
self-employment patterns separately in the subsequent analysis. Columns 1 and 2 show
mandates are associated with a large 16.5 percent decline in employment among Hispan-
ics and no effect among non-Hispanics, which mirror our results from the QWI. Columns
three through five show that the policy impacts are largest for those we impute to be
probabilistically undocumented. In particular, E-Verify mandates reduce employment by
17.5 percent among likely undocumented Hispanics, by 13.2 percent among likely docu-
19
     We find declines of 1.0, 1.8, and 0.6 percent in employment, separations, and hires in these models,
     presented in Appendix Table A6.



                                                   19
mented Hispanics, and by 19.0 percent among all likely undocumented workers (regardless
of ethnicity). Roughly one-quarter of Hispanic workers in the ACS sample are classified
as probabilistically undocumented while only about one percent of non-Hispanic workers
are classified accordingly, which buttresses our interpretation of the estimates from the
QWI that larger (negative) labor market impacts for Hispanic workers are driven by the
relatively higher share of work-ineligible individuals within this subpopulation.
   A purported motivation for restricting employment opportunities among undocu-
mented immigrants is to improve outcomes among the native-born. However, outcomes
among the native-born could be helped or harmed, depending on whether they are substi-
tutes or complements with undocumented migrant labor. Our estimates in the remaining
columns of Table 4 indicate that E-Verify mandates, in fact, reduce employment among
some lower-skilled groups of native-born workers. The estimate in column six shows a
fairly precisely estimated zero effect among the native-born population as a whole. How-
ever, the passage of any E-Verify mandate reduces employment among natives with a high
school degree or less education by 2.7 percent. The last two columns indicate that this
effect is entirely driven by reduced employment among low-skilled natives who are 16 to
40 years old, while there is no effect among older workers.


4.3    Firms and heterogeneity in E-Verify coverage and adherence

In this section we extend our analysis to better understand the role of firms. To do
so, we employ an alternative identification strategy that organizes the data by county,
firm size, and year-quarter. We first examine heterogeneity in labor market impacts as
a function of firm size. We leverage findings from these initial analyses to construct a
county-level measure of predicted E-Verify exposure. Using this measure, we can control
for unrestricted state-year-quarter fixed effects in our models to assuage any remaining
concerns regarding internal validity and to assess the extent of within-state employment


                                            20
spillovers across areas with differing levels of predicted E-Verify coverage. To conduct the
initial firm size-level analysis, we estimate models of the form


                        Yf cst =  + Everif yf cst + t + f c +      f cst                  (3)

Here, Yf cst reflects the outcome of interest for firm size bin f in county c in state s in
year-quarter t and Everif yf cst is a measure of whether E-Verify legislation that covers
any firms in firm size bin f has been passed by the end of year-quarter t. t is a year-
quarter fixed effect and f c is a firm-size bin-by-county fixed effect. Although the raw QWI
includes five firm size bins, data is frequently censored or missing for three intermediate
bins, corresponding to firms with 20-499 employees. Consequently, we divide the sample
into two bins: workers in firms with fewer than 20 employees and workers in firms with 20+
employees. Since data is least likely to be missing for the smallest (0-19 employee) bin,
this approach allows us to maximize sample coverage by calculating employment in the
20+ employee bin as the difference between total employment and small firm employment.
To maximize coverage, we impute missing employment levels within county-by-firm size
bin cells, though we verify in the Appendix that results are not sensitive to this approach.
   The estimates corresponding to Equation 3 are presented in the odd-numbered columns
of Table 5 and characterize average treatment effects for the Hispanic subpopulation. In
the even-numbered columns, we present split-sample equivalent estimates (including year-
quarter-by-firm size bin fixed effects) to produce treatment effects separately by firm size
bin. Column 2 indicates that aggregate employment declines are driven almost entirely
by job losses in larger firms. Interestingly, declines in hires and separations are similar in
smaller and larger firms, suggesting that even workers in low-adherence small firms may
experience "job lock" after the passage of E-Verify mandates, perhaps due to concerns
regarding the likelihood that they will find alternative employment within the set of firms
that exhibit similarly low adherence to existing E-Verify mandates. In Appendix Table


                                             21
A1, we present corresponding results for the non-Hispanic population. We do not find the
same evidence of heterogeneous employment responses in smaller versus larger firms. Since
the vast majority of non-Hispanic workers are work-eligible, this lack of heterogeneity is
consistent with the hypothesis that differences in adherence across smaller versus larger
firms explain the heterogeneous Hispanic employment responses that we identify.20
     We have documented stark differences in compliance with E-Verify mandates and in
Hispanic employment effects across firms of varying sizes. We next examine the extent
to which measured employment changes result from changes in the number of establish-
ments in operation as compared to within-firm intensive margin changes in the number
of employees. Increases in the cost of labor or in hiring costs could lead firms to close or
relocate to other areas, or may deter firms from entering the market. We explore these ef-
fects using County Business Patterns (CBP) data. Table 6 first presents coefficients from
specifications that parallel those presented in Table 5.21 In columns one and two, the
dependent variable is the total number of establishments in the given firm size bin. While
the column 1 estimate indicates that E-Verify enforcement is associated with a (insignifi-
cant) 1.6 percent decline in the number of establishments, column 2 identifies a larger (and
precisely-estimated) decline in the number of establishments with 20+ employees. These
contrasting results are explained by the finding from Table 5 that employment declines
are concentrated in larger firms. In column 3, we aggregate the data to the county-year-
quarter level and identify a small and statistically insignificant 0.4 percent decline in the
total number of establishments. This small aggregate effect is explained by the fact that
most establishments have fewer than 20 employees and so changes in the number of larger
establishments do not lead to significant changes in the total number of establishments.
20
     Interestingly, we also find no evidence of heterogeneity in employment effects across industries as a
     function of likely undocumented employment shares.
21
     CBP data are available for the first quarter of each year from 2004 to 2015 and so we estimate
     specifications at the annual level and employ an E-Verify passage measure that is an indicator for
     whether a mandate has been passed by the end of the first quarter in a given year.




                                                   22
However, in columns four through six, we replace the dependent variable with a measure
of the number of employment-weighted establishments.22 This specification is designed
to better capture the share of jobs lost due to the reduction in the number of establish-
ments in operation. We find a larger (and statistically significant) 2.4 percent decline in
the county-year-quarter specification. Though this estimate should be interpreted cau-
tiously given the actual underlying distribution of establishment sizes within each bin is
not available in the CBP, the point estimate would imply that roughly 60 percent of total
job losses are due to the reduced number of establishments in operation.23


4.4      E-Verify mandates and employment spillovers

In this subsection we assess the extent to which E-Verify mandates lead to shifts in employ-
ment from covered or compliant firms to others. In particular, some E-Verify mandates
explicitly exclude small firms. Others phase-in coverage for small firms over time. We
have also shown that usage of E-Verify at small firms is low and largely unresponsive to
mandates. Much of the employment effect of E-Verify mandates is concentrated in large
firms. To what extent, therefore, does a state mandate shift employment from larger to
smaller firms? This is important because spillovers arguably represent a clear welfare loss
and do not advance any of the purported goals of E-Verify proponents.
     We begin this analysis in Table 7, in which we leverage within-state variation in
effective E-Verify coverage. Our prior analyses focused on changes in outcomes associated
with passage of an E-Verify mandate. We now compare these to models that condition
on a state by year-quarter fixed effect, which removes the common effect of passage of the
22
      As an example, a county with two firms with 1-19 employees in a given year would have a weighted
      establishment value of 20 (two times the midpoint of the 1-19 employee bin). In contrast, a county
      with one firm with 1-19 employees and one firm with 20-49 employees would have a weighted estab-
      lishment value of 44.5 (the sum of midpoint of the 1-19 employee bin and the midpoint of the 20-49
      employee bin).
23
      This estimate is based on the finding that passage of E-Verify legislation leads to a 3.8 percent reduc-
      tion in total employment (combining the Hispanic and non-Hispanic samples) and a corresponding
      2.4 percent decline in the number of employment-weighted establishments.


                                                      23
mandate. The only remaining variation in E-Verify coverage in these models will be due to
differences in the firm size distribution across counties. To the extent E-Verify coverage
induces shifts in employment from high coverage to lower coverage areas, estimates in
these models will be larger in magnitude than those in corresponding specifications that
do not include state by year-quarter fixed effects.
     To conduct this analysis, we exploit cross-county variation in the baseline share of
employment in large firms in combination with variation in the timing of the passage of
mandates covering each firm size bin and in adherence to these mandates. Specifically,
we use data from 2004 to 2006 (before the passage of the first relevant E-Verify mandate)
to construct county-specific measures of the share of employment in firms with 20+ em-
ployees. We then construct a time-varying county-level coverage measure that captures
the share of private sector jobs that would be expected to adhere to E-Verify mandates in
each year-quarter based on this baseline firm size distribution. Effective coverage is zero
if a given firm size bin is not yet covered by an E-Verify mandate. To measure effective
coverage conditional on the passage of a mandate, we exploit variation in adherence, as
measured using DHS E-Verify query data. Based on estimates from a specification that
parallels those included in Table 5 but replaces the dependent variable with the firm size-
specific E-Verify query rate, we thus scale the effective coverage of small firms by a factor
of 0.23 to account for the relatively smaller "first stage" magnitude (characterizing the
relationship between mandate passage and E-Verify query rate) in small firms as com-
pared to large firms. As an example, a county with 50 percent of employment in small
firms at baseline has an effective coverage rate of 50 percent in each quarter in which only
large firm mandates have been passed and has an effective coverage rate of 61.5 percent
(50 percent+50 percent*0.23) in each quarter in which a mandate covers all firm sizes.24
24
     To confirm robustness, in Appendix Table A2 we present results based on a coverage measure that
     uses only variation across firm sizes in the timing of mandate enforcement and ignores variation
     in adherence. Across specifications, estimated patterns of labor market effects appear qualitatively
     similar.


                                                   24
   Odd-numbered columns of Table 7 present estimates that correspond to Equation
2, but replace the prior E-Verify passage and enforcement measures with this measure
of predicted county-level coverage. Variation in coverage in these models is driven by
passage of E-Verify mandates and the results closely mirror those presented in Table 2.
In the even-numbered columns of Table 7, we add state-by-year-quarter fixed effects to the
specifications from the corresponding odd-numbered columns. These fixed effects control
for the state-wide mandate in place and so variation in coverage is driven by differences
in the baseline firm size distribution. Column 2 validates this alternative approach by
demonstrating that higher predicted coverage significantly increases E-Verify usage.
   Turning to labor market outcomes, in column 4 we find a 38.2 percent decline in His-
panic employment in response to a 100 percentage point increase in predicted coverage.
This point estimate is significantly larger than the benchmark employment decline esti-
mated in column 3. Without state-by-year-quarter fixed effects, the estimate in column
3 captures both spillovers and the average pre-post difference in employment that results
from the E-Verify mandate. In contrast, column 4 exploits only variation that is condi-
tional on the set of mandates in place, and so the notably larger estimated treatment effect
in this specification is consistent with sizable employment spillovers from local labor mar-
kets with higher to lower levels of predicted coverage. This large estimated employment
decline also suggests that unobservable, time-varying state-level factors correlated with
E-Verify mandate passage cannot explain the measured Hispanic employment declines
presented previously. Turning to job turnover measures, the specifications in columns 6
and 8 provide little evidence of spillovers on the separations or hires margins, consistent
with the finding that declines in separations and hires appear fairly uniform across the
firm size distribution. For completeness, Appendix Table A3 presents parallel results
for the non-Hispanic population; here, we find little evidence of comparable within-state
employment spillovers for non-Hispanic workers.



                                            25
   To provide additional evidence on the extent of sub-state employment spillovers, Table
8 estimates employment changes in small firms for Hispanic and non-Hispanic workers as
a function of the same county-level predicted coverage measure included in Table 7 spec-
ifications. Columns 1 and 4 demonstrate modest employment declines in small firms in
response to higher county-level coverage rates (insignificant for Hispanics and significant
for non-Hispanics but not statistically distinguishable across the two subpopulations).
Columns 2 and 5 restrict the sample to county-year-quarter cells in which small firms
are not yet subject to E-Verify mandate enforcement and results appear nearly identical.
These findings are consistent with the possibility that E-Verify mandate passage has a
modest deterrent effect on employment levels in uncovered small firms, perhaps due to an-
ticipation of future coverage. Columns 3 and 6 add state-by-year-quarter fixed effects and
show that higher coverage is associated with a large and precisely-estimated 35.3 percent
increase in Hispanic employment in small firms (the corresponding 6.9 percent estimate for
non-Hispanics is notably smaller and is only marginally significant). This relative increase
in small firm employment in response to higher county-level coverage, in a specification
which differences out any common deterrent effect associated with state-level mandate
passage, is consistent with the presence of within-county spillovers as employment moves
from larger (high-adherence) to smaller (uncovered or low-adherence) firms.


4.5    Understanding the response to E-Verify mandates

In the preceding analyses, we have established that the passage of E-Verify mandates
led to reductions in employment among Hispanic workers in general and among undocu-
mented workers in particular. We next explore a range of alternative outcomes to better
understand how individuals and labor markets adjusted to changing E-Verify coverage.
In particular, we ask whether employment verification requirements lead to declines in
the likely work-ineligible population and changes in self-employment (which is not sub-


                                            26
ject to employment verification). We conclude this analysis by investigating impacts of
E-Verify mandates on individual wage and self-employment earnings, and overall changes
in household income.
   We begin in Table 9 with an assessment of the impact of E-Verify mandates on
the probabilistically undocumented population in a county. These are estimated using
(person-weighted) population counts in the American Community Survey and a regres-
sion model similar to Equation 2, though the only policy variable is an indicator that
any private-sector E-Verify mandate has been passed. The estimate in column 1 shows
no effect of passage of an E-Verify mandate on the probabilistically undocumented pop-
ulation. Next we assess whether passage of an E-Verify mandate affected the share of
undocumented workers who moved to their current state of residence in the past year.
Passage of a mandate would reduce this share if it leads to shifts in the undocumented
population from states with mandates to those without. In fact, the estimate in col-
umn 2 indicates that the in-migration rate among undocumented workers is unaffected
by passage of E-Verify legislation.
   The remaining two columns of Table 9 present estimates of the impact of E-Verify
mandates on self-employment, measured through self-reports in the ACS. Self-employment
is an important outcome because a potential effect of E-Verify is for undocumented workers
to move from regular, payroll employment (which is captured in the QWI data and may
be subject to an E-Verify mandate) to self-employment (which is not measured in the
QWI and would not be subject to an E-Verify mandate). In particular, to the extent that
firms, in response to E-Verify mandates, are able to reclassify some of their labor force from
employees to independent contractors, the QWI data would show declines in employment.
Column 3 measures the effect of passage of a mandate on self-employment among all
workers and shows a fairly precise null effect. By contrast, the estimate in column 4 shows
that passage of a mandate increases self-employment among undocumented workers by



                                             27
17.0 percent. Though the estimate is sizeable, the baseline self-employment rate is 8.1
percent and so the increase in self-employment is small relative to the overall decline in
wage and salary employment. Moreover, this estimate should be interpreted cautiously
given evidence that self-employment among undocumented workers is already rising prior
to E-Verify mandate passage (see Appendix Figure A6).
     To provide a summary impact of passage of E-Verify mandates, we conclude with an
analysis in Table 10 of effects on individual and household labor market earnings. Our
measures of annual earnings refer to income earned in the calendar year prior to the sur-
vey.25 As above, we estimate the parameters of these models using an inverse hyperbolic
sine transformation of the dependent variables. Panel A, which examines changes in wage
and salary income, presents estimates that parallel corresponding employment effects:
wage declines are significantly larger for Hispanics than non-Hispanics and for the likely
work-ineligible populations as compared to natives. In Panel B, however, we examine self-
employment income and find that Hispanics and likely work-ineligible individuals expe-
rience large (though generally imprecise) estimated increases in self-employment income,
while non-Hispanics and natives experience significant declines.26 Despite the increases
in self-employment income, our estimates in Panel C indicate that total personal earnings
(the sum of wage and self-employment income measures from the prior two panels) fall in
response to passage of E-Verify mandates. Finally, in Panel D we assess effects on total
household income from wages and self-employment. Though point estimates suggest that
E-Verify mandates lead to declines in household earnings for all groups, estimated effects
are smaller than the corresponding effects on individual earnings. This is especially true in
column 5, which presents effects for probabilistically undocumented workers, who experi-
25
     In Appendix Table A4, we estimate the relationship between the same annual earnings measures
     and lagged E-Verify mandate passage to ensure that results are not sensitive to the assumed timing
     of treatment effects. Estimates in Appendix Table A4 parallel those in Table 10.
26
     As above, self-employment earnings estimates for undocumented workers should be interpreted cau-
     tiously given the evidence of pre-trends found in Appendix Figure A8.




                                                  28
ence an estimated 27 percent decline in their own earnings, but only a four percent decline
in household earnings (which is not statistically different from zero). This indicates that
the household members of respondents with higher rates of work ineligibility seemingly
increase their earnings in response to the passage of E-Verify mandates, partly offsetting
the direct negative effects estimated for the work-ineligible population and helping to
explain the lack of a significant migration response (documented in Table 9).



5     Conclusions

This paper investigates the labor market impacts of employment eligibility authorization
(E-Verify) mandates. A key contribution of our work is to document the impact of
E-Verify mandates on usage of the system, relying on newly available administrative
records from the Department of Homeland Security. Importantly, usage of E-Verify to
verify employment eligibility of new hires is quite low in firms that employ fewer than
20 individuals. Mandates have a modest effect on usage, raising the ratio of queries to
hires by about ten percentage points in the four years after a mandate is passed (from a
baseline level of 4.5 percent). Usage in large firms is considerably higher, but still far from
complete. In total, we estimate that four years after a mandate is passed, usage increases
by 25 percentage points from a baseline level of 21 percent. Imperfect compliance in the
face of a legal mandate is noteworthy because it implies there are important monetary
and/or non-monetary barriers to using the system. Enactment of a nationwide mandate
would exacerbate these costs.
    We use two primary data sources ­ the Quarterly Workforce Indicators and the Amer-
ican Community Survey ­ and two complimentary research designs to estimate the labor
market impacts of E-Verify mandates. We document that passage of a mandate leads
to significant declines in Hispanic employment and in the employment of likely work-



                                              29
ineligible subpopulations. Our estimates are larger than those found in prior research.
We find no evidence that non-Hispanics or natives correspondingly benefit from man-
date passage. Rather, we find significant employment declines among young, male, and
less-educated native-born workers. Consistent with our findings regarding usage of the
E-Verify system, firm size-level analyses reveal that much of the employment decline is
concentrated in large firms. Our analysis of data from the County Business Patterns indi-
cates that a substantial fraction of the employment decline is associated with a reduction
in the number of large firms that locate in an area following passage of a mandate.
   We find clear evidence that E-Verify mandates lead to a number of labor market
distortions. First, mandates lead to reductions in both hires and job separations. These
effects are largest for Hispanics but are also negative (though in some cases imprecisely-
estimated) for non-Hispanic workers, consistent with market-wide declines in employment
mobility in response to E-Verify passage. Second, we find evidence of important within-
state and within-county spillovers in employment from large to small firms.
   In sum, while E-Verify mandates may significantly reduce formal sector employment
among work-ineligible individuals, these policies are not effective in deterring undocu-
mented migration. Moreover, the lack of gains experienced by native-born workers, the
labor market distortions, and the disproportionate costs imposed on large firms suggest
that the net aggregate costs associated with such mandates may be substantial.




                                           30
References

Amuedo-Dorantes, C. and C. Bansak (2014). Employment verification mandates and
  the labor market outcomes of likely unauthorized and native workers. Contemporary
  Economic Policy 32 (3), 671­680.

Amuedo-Dorantes, C., C. Bansak, and A. Zebedee (2015). The impact of mandated em-
  ployment verification systems on state-level employment by foreign affiliates. Southern
  Economic Journal 81 (4), 928­946.

Arvelo, J. (2011, January 28). `Free' e-verify may cost small businesses $2.6 billion:
  Insight. Bloomberg.

Bohn, S., M. Lofstrom, and S. Raphael (2014). Did the 2007 Legal Arizona Workers
  Act reduce the state's unauthorized immigrant population? Review of Economics and
  Statistics 96 (2), 258­269.

Bohn, S., M. Lofstrom, and S. Raphael (2015). Do e-verify mandates improve labor
  market outcomes of low-skilled native and legal immigrant workers? Southern Economic
  Journal 81 (4), 960­979.

Bohn, S. and R. Santillano (2017). Local immigration enforcement and local economies.
  Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society 56 (2), 236­262.

Borjas, G. J. and H. Cassidy (2019). The wage penalty to undocumented immigration.
  Labour Economics 61, 101757.

Card, D. and S. Dellavigna (2019). What do editors maximize? Evidence from four
  leading economics journals. Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Chassamboulli, A. and G. Peri (2015). The labor market effects of reducing the number
  of illegal immigrants. Review of Economic Dynamics 18 (4), 792 ­ 821.

                                           31
Churchill, B. F. (2019). E-verify mandates and immigrant health insurance. Vanderbilt
  University Working Paper.

Clemens, M. A., E. G. Lewis, and H. M. Postel (2018, June). Immigration restrictions as
  active labor market policy: Evidence from the Mexican bracero exclusion. American
  Economic Review 108 (6), 1468­87.

Dustmann, C. and A. Glitz (2015). How do industries and firms respond to changes in
  local labor supply? Journal of Labor Economics 33 (3), 711­750.

Dustmann, C., U. Sch¨
                    onberg, and J. Stuhler (2016a). The impact of immigration: Why
  do studies reach such different results? Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (4), 31­56.

Dustmann, C., U. Sch¨
                    onberg, and J. Stuhler (2016b). Labor supply shocks, native wages,
  and the adjustment of local employment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (1),
  435­483.

East, C. N., A. L. Hines, H. Mansour, and A. Velasquez (2019). The labor market effects
  of immigration enforcement. University of Colorado-Denver Working Paper.

East, C. N. and A. Velasquez (2019). Unintended consequences of immigration enforce-
  ment: Household services and high-skilled women's work. University of Colorado-
  Denver Working Paper.

Feigenberg, B. (2019). Fenced out: The impact of border construction on U.S.-Mexico
  migration. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, forthcoming.

Gunadi, C. (2018). Does stricter immigration policy affect college enrollment and public-
  private school choice of natives? IZA Journal of Development and Migration 8 (1).

Lewis, E. and G. Peri (2015). Immigration and the economy of cities and regions. Vol-
  ume 5, Chapter 10, pp. 625­685. Elsevier.

                                           32
Meissner, D. and M. Rosenblum (2009). The next generation of e-verify: Getting employ-
  ment verification right. Migration Policy Institute.

Newman, P. (2017). Arizona's anti-immigration law and the pervasiveness of racial pro-
  filing. Georgetown Immigration Law Journal 31 (3).

Office of Management and Budget (OMB) (2018).            Fiscal Year 2019; An American
  Budget. https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/BUDGET-2019-BUD/pdf/BUDGET-
  2019-BUD.pdf. U.S. Government Publishing Office.

Orrenius, P. and M. Zavodny (2015). The impact of e-verify mandates on labor market
  outcomes. Southern Economic Journal 81 (4), 947­959.

Orrenius, P. and M. Zavodny (2016). Do state work eligibility verification laws reduce
  unauthorized immigration? IZA Journal of Migration 5 (5).

Orrenius, P., M. Zavodny, and E. Gutierrez (2018). Do state employment eligibility
  verification laws affect job turnover? Contemporary Economic Policy 36 (2), 394­409.

United   States   Census   Bureau    (2019).      County    Business   Patterns   (CBP).
  https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cbp.html.




                                           33
graph1                                                                                                          10/27/17, 9:14 AM




                                           Figure 1: Annual Trends in E-Verify Usage
                       .3
                       .2
            Fraction
                       .1
                       0




                            2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009 2010    2011    2012    2013     2014    2015
                                                                  year

                                                  Coverage rate                Fraction queried



         Data
         Data source:
               source: United
                        United States
                                States Department
                                        Department of Homeland Security data series.
         Notes:
         Notes: This
                 This figure
                      figure plots
                             plots the
                                    the annual
                                         annual E-Verify rate, defined as the number of E-Verify queries divided by
         the
         the total
             total number
                   number ofof new
                               new hires,
                                     hires, and
                                            and the annual fraction of all private sector hires subject to E-Verify
         mandates.
         mandates. New
                     New hires
                          hires are
                                 are measured
                                     measured using the QWI.




                                                                  34
                                                                  35
                                                      Figure 2: Annual Trends in E-Verify Usage by Firm Size
                                           .4
   Annual E-Verify Rate (Queries Per Hire)
         .1         .2   0     .3




                                                2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                                                            Year

                                                                 0 to 19 employees              20+ employees


Data source: United States Department of Homeland Security data series.
Notes: This figure plots the annual E-Verify rate, defined as the number of E-Verify queries divided by
the total number of new hires, separately by firm size bin. New hires are measured using the QWI.




                                                                               35
                                                  Figure 3: Event Studies for E-Verify Usage by Firm Size


                                                  Panel A: All Firms                                                                   Panel B: 0-19 Employees
                      .3




                                                                                                                        .3
                                                                                          E-Verify Rate (Queries Per Hire)
                                                                                                        .1      .2
                                    .2
     E-Verify Rate (Queries Per Hire)




                                                                                                0          -.1


                                                                                                                             -4   -3    -2    -1      0       1     2    3   4
                                                                                                                                       Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                    .1




                                                                                                                                       Panel C: 20+ Employees
                                                                                                                        .3
                                                                                          E-Verify Rate (Queries Per Hire)
                                                                                                                .2
    0




                                                                                                0       .1
                      -.1




                                                                                                           -.1




                                         -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4                                           -4   -3    -2    -1      0       1     2    3   4
                                               Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage




Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
E-Verify rate, defined as the number of E-Verify queries divided by the total number of new hires in the
referenced firm size bin(s), on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year-quarter fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0").




                                                                                     36
   Figure 4: Event Studies for QWI-Based Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County-level)
                             .2




                                                                                                              .2
    Hispanic Employment (asinh)




                                                                                    Hispanic Separations (asinh)
                    0




                                                                                                      0
            -.2




                                                                                            -.2
    -.4




                                                                                   -.4
                                  -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4                                        -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                        Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                           .2
    Hispanic Hires (asinh)
         -.2       0
                  -.4




                                  -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                        Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage



Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year-quarter fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Employment,
separations and hires measures reflect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective
measures for Hispanic workers.




                                                                              37
Table 1: State-level E-Verify Mandates




                 38
Table 2: E-Verify Query Rates and QWI-Based Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County Level)

                       (1)        (2)        (3)          (4)       (5)         (6)        (7)          (8)
                          E-Verify            Employment              Separations               Hires
                            Rate                 (asinh)                (asinh)                (asinh)
Any Private Firm    0.164 0.136           -0.087 -0.076          -0.133 -0.090          -0.139 -0.097
(Passage)            (0.022)    (0.023)    (0.028)     (0.025)    (0.040)     (0.038)    (0.040)     (0.035)
All Private Firms               0.106                   -0.040               -0.160                 -0.156
(Enforcement)                   (0.057)                (0.050)                (0.050)                (0.046)
Year-Quarter FE         X          X          X            X         X           X          X            X
County FE               X          X          X            X         X           X          X            X
Observations         92,609     92,609     82,099      82,099     82,099      82,099     82,099       82,099
 Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for
 whether any private sector E-Verify mandate has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter and All
 Private Firms (Enforcement) is an indicator for whether a private sector E-Verify mandate covering all firms
 is being enforced by the end of the given year-quarter. E-Verify rate is defined as the number of E-Verify
 queries divided by the contemporaneous total number of (Hispanic and non-Hispanic) hires. Employment,
 separations and hires measures reflect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective measures for
 Hispanic workers.
 Standard errors are clustered by state.
 * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.




                                                39
  Table 3: QWI-Based Non-Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County Level)

                       (1)          (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)
                        Employment               Separations                Hires
                           (asinh)                 (asinh)                 (asinh)
Any Private Firm    -0.029 -0.029           -0.083 -0.061           -0.073 -0.050
(Passage)            (0.010)     (0.009)     (0.022)     (0.020)     (0.024)     (0.021)
All Private Firms                 -0.002                -0.085                  -0.086
(Enforcement)                    (0.018)                 (0.015)                 (0.019)
Year-Quarter FE         X            X          X           X           X           X
County FE               X            X          X           X           X           X
Observations         82,099      82,099      82,099      82,099      82,099       82,099
 Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. Any Private Firm (Pas-
 sage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate has been passed
 by the end of the given year-quarter and All Private Firms (Enforcement) is an indica-
 tor for whether a private sector E-Verify mandate covering all firms is being enforced
 by the end of the given year-quarter. Employment, separations and hires measures re-
 flect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective measures for non-Hispanic
 workers.
 Standard errors are clustered by state.
 * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1
 percent level.




                                           40
                                                 Table 4: ACS-Based Employment Outcomes (County Level)

                           (1)          (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)            (6)         (7)            (8)            (9)
                        Hispanics   Non-Hispanics    Probabilistically   Probabilistically   Probabilistically    All      Low-Skilled   Young, Male    Old, Male
                                                     Undocumented         Documented         Undocumented        Natives     Natives     Low-Skilled   Low-Skilled
                                                        Hispanics           Hispanics         (All Workers)                                Natives       Natives
     Any Private Firm   -0.165          -0.006           -0.175             -0.132              -0.190            -0.009    -0.027        -0.068          -0.007
     (Passage)           (0.047)       (0.010)           (0.091)             (0.050)             (0.062)         (0.010)     (0.012)       (0.021)       (0.010)
     Year FE                X             X                 X                   X                   X               X           X             X              X
     County FE              X             X                 X                   X                   X               X           X             X              X
     Observations        23,246        23,246            23,246              23,246               23,246         23,246      23,246        23,246        23,246
      Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year. Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate has
      been passed by the end of the given year. Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the number of employed individuals with the
      referenced characteristic(s). Undocumented is a probabilistic measure corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have not completed high
      school. Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented. Low-Skilled corresponds to respondents who have
      no post-secondary education. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and Old corresponds to
      respondents aged 41-64.
      Standard errors are clustered by state.




41
      * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.
     Table 5: QWI-Based Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County-by-Firm Size Level)

                                       (1)          (2)       (3)         (4)         (5)             (6)
                                        Employment              Separations                  Hires
                                           (asinh)                (asinh)                   (asinh)
Covered                             -0.058                 -0.133                  -0.140
(Passage)                            (0.024)                (0.032)                 (0.034)
Covered x Small Firms                             -0.019               -0.113                   -0.121
(Passage)                                        (0.023)                (0.036)                  (0.038)
Covered x Large Firms                           -0.092                 -0.158                   -0.165
(Passage)                                        (0.030)                (0.036)                  (0.038)
County-by-Firm Size Bin FE              X            X         X           X           X            X
Year-Quarter FE                         X                      X                       X
YearQuarter-by-Firm Size Bin FE                      X                     X                        X
Observations                        149,898      149,898    149,898     149,898     149,898      149,898
 Notes: The unit of observation is the firm size bin by county by year-quarter. Firm size bins are
 classified as small (fewer than 20 employees) or large (20 or more employees). Each outcome value is
 the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the given measure. Covered is an indicator for whether a given
 firm size bin-by-county cell is covered by E-Verify legislation that has been passed by the end of the
 given year-quarter.
 Standard errors are clustered by state.
 * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.




                                                 42
Table 6: CBP-Based Establishment Outcomes (County and County-by-Firm Size
Level)

                                    (1)         (2)      (3)         (4)         (5)     (6)
                                         Establishments             Establishments, Weighted
                                             (asinh)                          (asinh)
 Covered                           -0.016                         -0.034
 (Passage)                        (0.011)                          (0.013)
 Covered x Small Firms                        -0.008                           -0.016
 (Passage)                                   (0.009)                          (0.011)
 Covered x Big Firms                        -0.027                           -0.054
 (Passage)                                   (0.013)                          (0.020)
 Any Private Firm                                      -0.004                         -0.024
 (Passage)                                            (0.014)                          (0.011)
 County-by-Firm Size Bin FE          X           X                    X           X
 Year FE                             X                    X           X                   X
 Year-by-Firm Size Bin FE                        X                                X
 County FE                                                X                               X
 Observations                     49,181     49,181   24,809       49,181     49,181   24,809
  Notes: The unit of observation is the firm size bin by county by year in Columns (1)-(2)
  and (4)-(5) and the county by year in Columns (3) and (6). Firm size bins are classified
  as small (fewer than 20 employees) or large (20 or more employees). Each outcome value
  is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the referenced measure. Covered is an indicator
  for whether a given firm size bin-by-county cell is covered by E-Verify legislation that has
  been passed by the end of the first quarter of the given year (establishment count data
  is available annually for the first quarter). Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for
  whether any private sector E-Verify mandate has been passed by the end of the first quarter
  of the given year. Establishments (Weighted) scales the number of establishments in each of
  nine available firm size bins by the midpoint of the range of number of employees included
  in the given bin and then sums these scaled counts across the nine firm size bins.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent
  level.




                                               43
Table 7: E-Verify Query Rates and QWI-Based Hispanic Worker Outcomes as a Function of Pre-
dicted E-Verify Coverage (County Level)

                               (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)        (7)         (8)
                                 E-Verify            Employment              Separations              Hires
                                   Rate                 (asinh)                (asinh)               (asinh)
 Predicted Coverage         0.213 0.345          -0.104 -0.382           -0.154 -0.046         -0.159 -0.023
                            (0.026) (0.133)       (0.033)     (0.107)     (0.046)    (0.130)    (0.046)    (0.165)
 County FE                      X         X          X           X           X          X          X           X
 Year-Quarter FE                X                    X                       X                     X
 YearQuarter-by-State FE                  X                      X                      X                      X
 Observations                92,289    92,289     75,919      75,919      75,919     75,919     75,919      75,919
  Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. E-Verify rate is defined as the number of E-
  Verify queries divided by the contemporaneous total number of (Hispanic and non-Hispanic) hires. Employment,
  separations and hires measures reflect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective measures for
  Hispanic workers. To construct the Predicted Coverage measure, we first calculate the predicted share of workers
  covered by E-Verify legislation that has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter, as determined by the
  baseline (2004-2006) firm size distribution for all workers (in Columns 1-2) and for Hispanic workers (in Columns
  3-8). This measure is then scaled by 0.227 for workers in small firms (with fewer than 20 employees) to account
  for the relative intensity of E-Verify usage across smaller versus larger firms.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.




                                                 44
      Table 8: QWI-Based Spillover Analyses (Small Firm Employment)

                                   (1)       (2)      (3)           (4)         (5)       (6)
                                    Hispanic Employment            Non-Hispanic Employment
                                       in Small Firms                    in Small Firms
                                           (asinh)                           (asinh)
Predicted Coverage               -0.026    -0.027 0.353          -0.032 -0.034 0.069
                                (0.026) (0.019) (0.116)           (0.011)     (0.010)   (0.040)
County-by-Firm Size Bin FE          X         X        X             X           X         X
Year-Quarter FE                     X         X                      X           X
YearQuarter-by-State FE                                X                                   X
Observations                    74,005 67,756       74,005        74,005      67,756    74,005
 Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. Small firms are those with
 fewer than 20 employees. Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of
 (Hispanic or non-Hispanic) employment in small firms. Columns 2 and 5 restrict the sample
 to county-year-quarter cells in which small firms are not yet subject to E-Verify mandate
 enforcement. To construct the Predicted Coverage measure, we first calculate the predicted
 share of workers covered by E-Verify legislation that has been passed by the end of the given
 year-quarter, as determined by the baseline (2004-2006) firm size distribution for Hispanic
 workers (in Columns 1-3) and for non-Hispanic workers (in Columns 4-6). This measure is
 then scaled by 0.227 for workers in small firms (with fewer than 20 employees) to account
 for the relative intensity of E-Verify usage across smaller versus larger firms.
 Standard errors are clustered by state.
 * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent
 level.




                                               45
Table 9: ACS-Based Migration and Self-Employment Outcomes (County
Level)

                            (1)                 (2)              (3)           (4)
                     Probabilistically     In-migration            Self-Employment
                     Undocumented              Rate              All     Undocumented
                       Population        (Undocumented)       Workers       Workers
 Any Private Firm         -0.002               0.004           -0.014        0.170
                         (0.062)              (0.007)         (0.019)        (0.072)
 Year FE                     X                   X                X             X
 County FE                   X                   X                X             X
 Observations            23,246               22,522          23,246         23,246
  Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year. In Column (1), the outcome
  value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the number of probabilistically un-
  documented residents, defined as foreign-born, non-veterans who have not completed
  high school. The In-migration Rate measures the share of probabilistically undoc-
  umented respondents who moved to their current state of residence within the last
  year. The outcome measures in Columns (3)-(4) are the inverse hyperbolic sine trans-
  forms of the number of self-employed workers in each category. Any Private Firm
  (Passage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate has been
  passed by the end of the given year.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1
  percent level.




                                           46
                             Table 10: ACS-Based Per Capita and Household Annual Earnings Measures (County Level)

                           (1)          (2)                (3)                  (4)                 (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)           (9)
                        Hispanics   Non-Hispanics    Probabilistically    Probabilistically   Probabilistically    All       Low-Skilled   Young, Male    Old, Male
                                                     Undocumented          Documented         Undocumented        Natives      Natives     Low-Skilled   Low-Skilled
                                                        Hispanics            Hispanics         (All Workers)                                 Natives       Natives

                                                                              Panel A: Per Capita Wage Income

     Any Private Firm   -0.180         -0.040              -0.122             -0.147              -0.263          -0.036      -0.045         -0.077         -0.024
     (Passage)           (0.053)        (0.014)           (0.115)              (0.056)             (0.125)         (0.015)     (0.020)        (0.029)      (0.018)

                                                                    Panel B: Per Capita Business (Self-Employment) Income

     Any Private Firm     0.203        -0.117             0.324                 0.218              0.225          -0.115      -0.132        -0.384        -0.109
     (Passage)           (0.180)        (0.036)           (0.181)              (0.321)            (0.164)          (0.036)     (0.036)       (0.089)       (0.047)

                                                                    Panel C: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Income




47
     Any Private Firm    -0.090        -0.039              -0.157             -0.104             -0.269           -0.036      -0.043        -0.079         -0.029
     (Passage)           (0.050)        (0.013)           (0.105)              (0.049)            (0.082)          (0.013)     (0.018)       (0.029)       (0.016)

                                                            Panel D: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Household Income

     Any Private Firm     -0.064       -0.029              -0.091               -0.083             -0.042         -0.027      -0.024        -0.045          -0.019
     (Passage)           (0.047)        (0.010)           (0.106)              (0.056)            (0.073)          (0.011)     (0.010)       (0.011)       (0.012)
     Year FE                X              X                 X                    X                  X                X           X             X             X
     County FE              X              X                 X                    X                  X                X           X             X             X
     Observations        23,196         23,239            19,948               23,182             22,522           23,239      23,239        23,239        23,239
      Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year. Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of mean annual earnings from the specified
      category for individuals with the referenced characteristic(s). Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate
      has been passed by the end of the given year. Undocumented is a probabilistic measure corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have not
      completed high school. Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented. Low-Skilled corresponds to respondents
      who have no post-secondary education. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and Old corresponds
      to respondents aged 41-64.
      Standard errors are clustered by state.
      * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.
Appendix

Figure A1: Event Studies for QWI-Based Non-Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County-level)
    Non-Hispanic Employment (asinh)




                                                                                       Non-Hispanic Separations (asinh)
                              .1




                                                                                                                  .1
                      0




                                                                                                         0
             -.1




                                                                                                -.1
     -.2




                                                                                        -.2
                                      -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4                                           -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                            Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                                     Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                              .1
      Non-Hispanic Hires (asinh)
    -.2     -.1       0




                                      -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                            Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage



Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year-quarter fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Employment,
separations and hires measures reflect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective
measures for non-Hispanic workers.




                                                                                  48
                           Figure A2: Event Studies for ACS-Based Worker Outcomes (County-level)




                                                                                                                              Undocumented Hispanic
   -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4




                                                             -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4




                                                                                                                                 -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
                                                               Non-Hispanic
         Hispanic




                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                           Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
   Documented Hispanic




                                                             Undocumented (All)
     -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4




                                                              -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4




                                                                                                                              -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4
                                                                                                                                     Natives
                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                           Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                                                             Young Male Low-Skill Natives




                                                                                                                              Old Male Low-Skill Natives
   Low-Skill Natives
   -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4




                                                                  -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4




                                                                                                                                  -.6 -.4 -.2 0 .2 .4

                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                           Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage




Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Each outcome
value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the number of employed individuals with the referenced
characteristic(s). Undocumented is a probabilistic measure corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran
respondents who have not completed high school. Probabilistically documented workers are those not
classified as probabilistically undocumented. Low-Skilled corresponds to respondents who have no
post-secondary education. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to
respondents aged 16-40 and Old corresponds to respondents aged 41-64.




                                                                                                      49
Figure A3: Event Studies for QWI-Based Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County-by-Firm
Size Level)                   .2




                                                                                                            .2
     Hispanic Employment (asinh)




                                                                                     Hispanic Hires (asinh)
                     0




                                                                                                    0
             -.2




                                                                                          -.2
    -.4




                                                                                                  -.4
                                    -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4                                    -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                          Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                              Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                               .2
     Hispanic Separations (asinh)
    -.4      -.2       0




                                    -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                          Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage



Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-by-firm size bin level
regression of the referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first
private sector E-Verify mandate that covers the relevant firm size bin has been passed in the state in
which a given county is located. Specifications include county-by-firm size bin and year-quarter fixed
effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first relevant private sector E-Verify mandate is passed
and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Employment, separations and
hires measures reflect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective measures for Hispanic
workers in a given firm size bin. Firm size bins are classified as small (fewer than 20 employees) or large
(20 or more employees).




                                                                                50
Figure A4: Event Studies for CBP-Based Establishment Outcomes (County and County-
by-Firm Size Level)




                                                                                     Weighted Establishments by Firm Size
                               .2




                                                                                                                   .2
     Establishments by Firm Size
                        .1




                                                                                                            .1
                 0




                                                                                                       0
           -.1




                                                                                               -.1
    -.2




                                                                                        -.2
                                    -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4                                               -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                          Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                   .2




                                                                                                                .2
                                                                                        Weighted Establishments
                .1




                                                                                                          .1
    Establishments
           0




                                                                                                   0
    -.1




                                                                                            -.1
                   -.2




                                                                                     -.2




                                    -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4                                               -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                          Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage



Notes: The upper two panels plot coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-by-firm size
bin level regression of the referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after
the first year by which a private sector E-Verify mandate that covers the relevant firm size bin has been
passed by the end of Q1. Specifications include county-by-firm size bin and year fixed effects. y = 0
represents the year in which the first relevant private sector E-Verify mandate is passed and y = -1 is
the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Firm size bins are classified as small (fewer
than 20 employees) or large (20 or more employees). Establishments (Weighted) scales the number of
establishments in each of nine available firm size bins by the midpoint of the range of number of
employees included in the given bin and then sums these scaled counts across the nine firm size bins.
The lower two panels plot coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first year by which a
private sector E-Verify mandate has been passed by the end of Q1 in the state in which a given county
is located. Specifications include county and year fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the
first private sector E-Verify mandate is passed by the end of Q1 and y = -1 is the omitted year (with
the coefficient set equal to "0").




                                                                                51
Figure A5: Event Studies for QWI-Based Spillover Analyses (Small Firm Employment)
                        .05




                                                                                                                    .05
                                                                                              Small Firm Non-Hispanic Employment (asinh)
    Small Firm Hispanic Employment (asinh)
                                        0




                                                                                                                                   0
                        -.05




                                                                                                                    -.05
          -.1




                                                                                                      -.1
                        -.15




                                                                                                                    -.15




                                             -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4                                                     -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                                   Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                                               Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage



Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year-quarter fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Small Firm
Employment measures total (Hispanic or non-Hispanic) county-level employment in firms with fewer
than 20 employees and the associated outcome measures are inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of
these values.




                                                                                         52
Figure A6: Event Studies for ACS-Based Migration and Self-Employment Outcomes
(County Level)




                                                                                    In-Migration Rate (Undocumented)
                             1




                                                                                                                1
      Undocumented Population
                     .5




                                                                                                          .5
                0




                                                                                                     0
          -.5




                                                                                              -.5
    -1




                                                                                       -1
                                   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4                                                -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                                          Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage



                                                                                    Self-Employment: Undocumented Workers
    Self-Employment: All Workers
                              1




                                                                                                                  1
                        .5




                                                                                                            .5
                0




                                                                                                       0
          -.5




                                                                                                -.5
    -1




                                                                                          -1




                                   -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4                                                -4   -3   -2   -1    0    1     2   3   4
                                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                                          Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage



Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0").
Undocumented Population is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the number of probabilistically
undocumented residents, defined as foreign-born, non-veterans who have not completed high school.
The In-migration Rate measures the share of probabilistically undocumented respondents who moved to
their current state of residence within the last year. The Self-Employment measures are the inverse
hyperbolic sine transforms of the number of self-employed workers in each category.




                                                                               53
   Figure A7: Event Studies for ACS-Based Per Capita Wage Income (County Level)




                                                                                                                            Undocumented Hispanic
             1




                                                           -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                                                               -1 -.5 0 .5 1
                                                            Non-Hispanic
   -1 -.5 0 .5
      Hispanic




                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
   Documented Hispanic




                                                           Undocumented (All)
     -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                            -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                                                            -1 -.5 0 .5   1
                                                                                                                                Natives
                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                                                           Young Male Low-Skill Natives




                                                                                                                            Old Male Low-Skill Natives
   -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                 -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                                                                 -1 -.5 0 .5 1
   Low-Skill Natives




                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage




Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Each outcome
value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of mean annual per capita wage income for individuals
with the referenced characteristic(s). Undocumented is a probabilistic measure corresponding to
foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have not completed high school. Probabilistically
documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented. Low-Skilled corresponds
to respondents who have no post-secondary education. The sample is restricted to respondents aged
16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and Old corresponds to respondents aged 41-64.




                                                                                                    54
 Figure A8: Event Studies for ACS-Based Per Capita Business Income (County Level)




                                                                                                                            Undocumented Hispanic
             2




                                                            -1 0 1 2




                                                                                                                              -2 -1 0 1 2
                                                           Non-Hispanic
   -1 0 1
    Hispanic
             -2




                                                                          -2
                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
   Documented Hispanic




                                                           Undocumented (All)
    -2 -1 0 1 2




                                                           -2 -1 0 1 2




                                                                                                                            -1 0 1        2
                                                                                                                              Natives
                                                                                                                                          -2
                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                                                           Young Male Low-Skill Natives




                                                                                                                            Old Male Low-Skill Natives
   -2 -1 0 1 2




                                                               -2 -1 0 1 2




                                                                                                                                -2 -1 0 1 2
    Low-Skill Natives




                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage




Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Each outcome
value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of mean annual per capita business (self-employment)
income for individuals with the referenced characteristic(s). Undocumented is a probabilistic measure
corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have not completed high school.
Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented.
Low-Skilled corresponds to respondents who have no post-secondary education. The sample is
restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and Old
corresponds to respondents aged 41-64.




                                                                                                    55
   Figure A9: Event Studies for ACS-Based Per Capita Total Income (County Level)




                                                                                                                            Undocumented Hispanic
             1




                                                           -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                                                               -1 -.5 0 .5 1
                                                             Non-Hispanic
   -1 -.5 0 .5
       Hispanic




                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
   Documented Hispanic




                                                           Undocumented (All)
     -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                            -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                                                            -1 -.5 0 .5   1
                                                                                                                                 Natives
                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                                                           Young Male Low-Skill Natives




                                                                                                                            Old Male Low-Skill Natives
   -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                                                                -1 -.5 0 .5 1
   Low-Skill Natives




                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage




Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Each outcome
value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of mean annual per capita total (wage and business)
income for individuals with the referenced characteristic(s). Undocumented is a probabilistic measure
corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have not completed high school.
Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented.
Low-Skilled corresponds to respondents who have no post-secondary education. The sample is
restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and Old
corresponds to respondents aged 41-64.




                                                                                                    56
   Figure A10: Event Studies for ACS-Based Household Total Income (County Level)




                                                                                                                            Undocumented Hispanic
             1




                                                           -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                                                              -1 -.5 0 .5 1
                                                             Non-Hispanic
   -1 -.5 0 .5
       Hispanic




                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
   Documented Hispanic




                                                           Undocumented (All)
    -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                            -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                                                            -1 -.5 0 .5   1
                                                                                                                                 Natives
                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage
                                                           Young Male Low-Skill Natives




                                                                                                                            Old Male Low-Skill Natives
   -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                -1 -.5 0 .5 1




                                                                                                                                -1 -.5 0 .5 1
    Low-Skill Natives




                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                            -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4                                          -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4
                         Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                  Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage                                Years Pre/Post E-Verify Passage




Notes: Each panel plots coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from a county-level regression of the
referenced outcome measure on a set of dummies for years before and after the first private sector
E-Verify mandate has been passed in the state in which a given county is located. Specifications include
county and year fixed effects. y = 0 represents the year in which the first private sector E-Verify
mandate is passed and y = -1 is the omitted year (with the coefficient set equal to "0"). Each outcome
value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of mean annual household total (wage and business)
income for individuals with the referenced characteristic(s). Undocumented is a probabilistic measure
corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have not completed high school.
Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented.
Low-Skilled corresponds to respondents who have no post-secondary education. The sample is
restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and Old
corresponds to respondents aged 41-64.




                                                                                                    57
      Table A1: QWI-Based Non-Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County-by-Firm Size Level)

                                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)           (5)             (6)
                                            Employment               Separations                     Hires
                                                (asinh)                 (asinh)                     (asinh)
Covered                                  -0.022                  -0.082                   -0.075
(Passage)                                (0.010)                  (0.023)                  (0.025)
Covered x Small Firms                                -0.021                  -0.087                     -0.081
(Passage)                                            (0.010)                  (0.025)                    (0.027)
Covered x Large Firms                                -0.029                  -0.088                     -0.081
(Passage)                                            (0.011)                  (0.025)                    (0.027)
County-by-Firm Size Bin FE                   X           X           X           X            X             X
YearQuarter FE                               X                       X                        X
YearQuarter-by-Firm Size Bin FE                          X                       X                          X
Observations                             149,898 149,898          149,898 149,898          149,898       149,898
  Notes: The unit of observation is the firm size bin by county by year-quarter. Firm size bins are classified as
  small (fewer than 20 employees) or large (20 or more employees). Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic
  sine transform of the given measure. Coverage is an indicator for whether a given firm size bin-by-county cell is
  covered by E-Verify legislation that has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.




                                                58
Table A2: E-Verify Query Rates and QWI-Based Hispanic Worker Outcomes as a Function of
Predicted E-Verify Coverage (County Level): Alternative Predicted Coverage Definition

                               (1)       (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)          (8)
                                 E-Verify            Employment              Separations               Hires
                                   Rate                 (asinh)                (asinh)                (asinh)
 Predicted Coverage         0.215 0.282          -0.086 -0.190           -0.148 -0.125         -0.147 -0.208
                            (0.029) (0.139)       (0.030)     (0.066)     (0.040)    (0.076)    (0.040)     (0.059)
 County FE                      X         X          X           X           X          X          X           X
 Year-Quarter FE                X                    X                       X                     X
 YearQuarter-by-State FE                  X                      X                      X                      X
 Observations                92,289    92,289     75,919      75,919      75,919     75,919     75,919       75,919
  Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. Employment, separations and hires measures reflect
  inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective measures for Hispanic workers. Predicted Coverage is
  defined by the share of workers covered by E-Verify legislation that has been enforced by the end of the given
  year-quarter, as determined by the baseline (2004-2006) firm size distribution for all workers (in Columns 1-2) and
  for Hispanic workers (in Columns 3-8).
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.




                                                 59
Table A3: QWI-Based Non-Hispanic Worker Outcomes as a Function of Pre-
dicted E-Verify Coverage (County Level)

                               (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)
                               Employment             Separations              Hires
                                  (asinh)               (asinh)               (asinh)
 Predicted Coverage         -0.035 -0.078         -0.100 -0.032         -0.088 -0.025
                             (0.012)    (0.042)    (0.027)    (0.058)    (0.029)    (0.072)
 County FE                      X          X          X          X          X          X
 Year-Quarter FE                X                     X                     X
 YearQuarter-by-State FE                   X                     X                     X
 Observations                75,919     75,919     75,919     75,919     75,919      75,919
  Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. Employment, separations
  and hires measures reflect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective mea-
  sures for non-Hispanic workers. To construct the Predicted Coverage measure, we first
  calculate the predicted share of non-Hispanic workers covered by E-Verify legislation that
  has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter, as determined by the baseline
  (2004-2006) firm size distribution for non-Hispanic workers. This measure is then scaled
  by 0.227 for workers in small firms (with fewer than 20 employees) to account for the
  relative intensity of E-Verify usage across smaller versus larger firms.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1
  percent level.




                                            60
                Table A4: ACS-Based Per Capita and Household Annual Earnings Measures (County Level Lagged Specifications)

                           (1)           (2)                (3)                  (4)                 (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)           (9)
                        Hispanics    Non-Hispanics    Probabilistically    Probabilistically   Probabilistically    All       Low-Skilled   Young, Male    Old, Male
                                                      Undocumented          Documented         Undocumented        Natives      Natives     Low-Skilled   Low-Skilled
                                                         Hispanics            Hispanics         (All Workers)                                 Natives       Natives

                                                                               Panel A: Per Capita Wage Income

     Any Private Firm   -0.169         -0.039              -0.240              -0.152              -0.314          -0.035      -0.046        -0.085          -0.025
     (Lagged Passage)    (0.051)        (0.012)            (0.119)              (0.049)             (0.139)         (0.013)     (0.018)       (0.028)       (0.016)

                                                                     Panel B: Per Capita Business (Self-Employment) Income

     Any Private Firm     0.222        -0.138               0.224                0.144              0.136          -0.133      -0.154        -0.369        -0.132
     (Lagged Passage)    (0.211)        (0.033)            (0.239)              (0.318)            (0.198)          (0.033)     (0.035)       (0.109)       (0.049)

                                                                     Panel C: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Income




61
     Any Private Firm     -0.072       -0.039              -0.222              -0.112              -0.240          -0.036      -0.044        -0.087        -0.030
     (Lagged Passage)    (0.052)        (0.011)            (0.121)              (0.053)             (0.090)         (0.012)     (0.015)       (0.028)       (0.013)

                                                             Panel D: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Household Income

     Any Private Firm     -0.089       -0.028               -0.055             -0.134               -0.095         -0.025      -0.023        -0.046         -0.020
     (Lagged Passage)    (0.056)        (0.009)            (0.118)              (0.064)            (0.076)          (0.010)     (0.009)       (0.011)       (0.010)
     Year FE                X              X                  X                    X                  X                X           X             X             X
     County FE              X              X                  X                    X                  X                X           X             X             X
     Observations        23,196         23,239             19,948               23,182             22,522           23,239      23,239        23,239        23,239
      Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year. Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of mean annual earnings from the specified
      category for individuals with the referenced characteristic(s). Any Private Firm (Lagged Passage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate
      has been passed by the end of the prior year. Undocumented is a probabilistic measure corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have not
      completed high school. Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented. Low-Skilled corresponds to respondents
      who have no post-secondary education. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and Old corresponds
      to respondents aged 41-64.
      Standard errors are clustered by state.
      * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.
Table A5: E-Verify Query Rates and QWI-Based Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County Level):
Additional Specifications

                        (1)        (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)             (8)
                           E-Verify             Employment               Separations                   Hires
                            Rate                   (asinh)                 (asinh)                    (asinh)

                                                Panel A: County Linear Time Trends

 Any Private Firm    0.069      0.063         -0.033     -0.028      -0.061      -0.052        -0.054        -0.047
 (Passage)            (0.019)    (0.021)     (0.024)     (0.016)     (0.035)      (0.022)     (0.040)       (0.030)
 Any Private Firm                0.123                  -0.077                  -0.144                     -0.116
 (Enforcement)                   (0.061)                 (0.017)                  (0.027)                   (0.044)
 Observations         92,609     92,609      82,099      82,099      82,099       82,099      82,099        82,099

                                         Panel B: County Linear Time Trends + Covariates

 Any Private Firm    0.066      0.061         -0.029     -0.026      -0.061     -0.055         -0.054      -0.049
 (Passage)            (0.018)    (0.022)     (0.019)     (0.014)      (0.029)    (0.015)      (0.035)      (0.026)
 Any Private Firm               0.121                   -0.061                  -0.127                    -0.104
 (Enforcement)                   (0.057)                 (0.019)                 (0.020)                   (0.034)
 Observations         92,609     92,609      82,099      82,099      82,099      82,099       82,099       82,099

                                                         Panel C: All States

 Any Private Firm    0.174      0.091       -0.086       -0.047     -0.141        -0.058     -0.152         -0.070
 (Passage)            (0.025)    (0.025)     (0.030)     (0.026)     (0.043)     (0.039)      (0.044)      (0.042)
 All Private Firms              0.151                     -0.066                -0.193                    -0.187
 (Enforcement)                   (0.058)                 (0.047)                 (0.047)                   (0.048)
 Observations        138,524    138,524     124,293      124,293     124,293     124,293     124,293       124,293

 Year-Quarter FE        X           X          X            X           X           X           X               X
 County FE              X           X          X            X           X           X           X               X
  Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for
  whether any private sector E-Verify mandate has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter and All
  Private Firms (Enforcement) is an indicator for whether a private sector E-Verify mandate covering all firms
  is being enforced by the end of the given year-quarter. E-Verify rate is defined as the number of E-Verify
  queries divided by the contemporaneous total number of (Hispanic and non-Hispanic) hires. Employment,
  separations and hires measures reflect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective measures for
  Hispanic workers.
  Panel A includes county linear time trends. Panel B includes county linear time trends as well as controls for
  the following covariates: lagged state-level unemployment rate, lagged state-level log GDP per capita, lagged
  state-level log housing starts, lagged state-level log government expenditures, and indicators for whether a
  state has any legislation in place to facilitate information-sharing with federal law enforcement, to restrict
  public benefits access for undocumented immigrants, or to strengthen protections for undocumented immi-
  grants. Panel C presents benchmark specification estimates for all states (including states that have passed
  E-Verify legislation that covers only public sector workers and/or state contractors/subcontractors). All Panel
  C specifications include an indicator (omitted from the table) that is equal to one if a public sector or contrac-
  tor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate but no private sector mandate has been passed by the end of the given
  year-quarter. Even-numbered columns in Panel C also include an indicator (omitted from the table) that is
  equal to one if a public sector or contractor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate but no comprehensive private
  sector mandate is being enforced by the end of the given year-quarter.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.            62
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.
Table A6: QWI-Based Non-Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County Level): Ad-
ditional Specifications

                             (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)             (5)             (6)
                              Employment                  Separations                      Hires
                                 (asinh)                    (asinh)                       (asinh)

                                           Panel A: County Linear Time Trends

 Any Private Firm          -0.010       -0.010        -0.018        -0.014         -0.006        -0.002
 (Passage)                (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.028)       (0.022)        (0.032)       (0.027)
 Any Private Firm                       -0.005                      -0.061                       -0.064
 (Enforcement)                         (0.008)                     (0.048)                      (0.050)
 Observations             82,099       82,099        82,099        82,099         82,099        82,099

                                  Panel B: County Linear Time Trends + Covariates

 Any Private Firm        -0.009        -0.009         -0.017        -0.015         -0.005        -0.002
 (Passage)                (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.022)       (0.019)        (0.028)       (0.025)
 Any Private Firm                        0.004                      -0.039                       -0.048
 (Enforcement)                          (0.004)                    (0.036)                      (0.040)
 Observations             82,099        82,099       82,099        82,099         82,099        82,099

                                                      Panel C: All States

 Any Private Firms       -0.042        -0.032       -0.099          -0.039      -0.092           -0.031
 (Passage)                (0.017)       (0.013)      (0.026)       (0.027)       (0.028)        (0.029)
 All Private Firms                       -0.014                   -0.124                       -0.124
 (Enforcement)                          (0.019)                    (0.025)                      (0.027)
 Observations             124,293      124,293       124,293       124,293       124,293        124,293

 Year-Quarter FE             X            X             X              X             X              X
 County FE                   X            X             X              X             X              X
  Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. Any Private Firm (Passage) is an
  indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate has been passed by the end of the given
  year-quarter and All Private Firms (Enforcement) is an indicator for whether a private sector E-Verify
  mandate covering all firms is being enforced by the end of the given year-quarter. Employment, sep-
  arations and hires measures reflect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective measures
  for non-Hispanic workers.
  Panel A includes county linear time trends. Panel B includes county linear time trends as well as
  controls for the following covariates: lagged state-level unemployment rate, lagged state-level log GDP
  per capita, lagged state-level log housing starts, lagged state-level log government expenditures, and
  indicators for whether a state has any legislation in place to facilitate information-sharing with federal
  law enforcement, to restrict public benefits access for undocumented immigrants, or to strengthen
  protections for undocumented immigrants. Panel C presents benchmark specification estimates for all
  states (including states that have passed E-Verify legislation that covers only public sector workers
  and/or state contractors/subcontractors). All Panel C specifications include an indicator (omitted
  from the table) that is equal to one if a public sector or contractor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate
  but no private sector mandate has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter. Even-numbered
  columns in Panel C also include an indicator (omitted from the table) that is equal to one if a public
  sector or contractor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate but no comprehensive private sector mandate is
  being enforced by the end of the given year-quarter.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.




                                                   63
                                    Table A7: ACS-Based Employment Outcomes (County Level): Additional Specifications

                              (1)             (2)                   (3)                   (4)                   (5)               (6)           (7)               (8)               (9)
                           Hispanics      Non-Hispanics       Probabilistically     Probabilistically     Probabilistically       All        Low-Skilled      Young, Male        Old, Male
                                                              Undocumented           Documented           Undocumented           Natives       Natives        Low-Skilled       Low-Skilled
                                                                 Hispanics             Hispanics           (All Workers)                                        Natives           Natives

                                                                                       Panel A: County Linear Time Trends

     Any Private Firm        -0.093            -0.012               -0.016                -0.108                 -0.084           -0.013        -0.027             -0.029         -0.029
     (Passage)               (0.052)          (0.008)              (0.130)                (0.060)               (0.075)          (0.008)        (0.014)           (0.021)          (0.011)
     Observations            23,246           23,246               23,246                 23,246                23,246           23,246         23,246            23,246           23,246

                                                                               Panel B: County Linear Time Trends + Covariates

     Any Private Firm        -0.085          -0.013                 -0.010                -0.096                 -0.081          -0.014        -0.025            -0.028           -0.027
     (Passage)               (0.047)          (0.006)              (0.137)                (0.053)               (0.082)           (0.006)       (0.012)          (0.014)           (0.011)
     Observations            23,246           23,246               23,246                 23,246                23,246            23,246        23,246           23,246            23,246




64
                                                                                                 Panel C: All States

     Any Private Firm       -0.136             -0.004               -0.099               -0.119                 -0.126            -0.009       -0.025           -0.066              -0.003
     (Passage)               (0.048)          (0.009)              (0.100)                (0.047)               (0.063)          (0.009)        (0.011)          (0.019)           (0.010)
     Observations            34,523           34,523               34,523                 34,523                34,523           34,523         34,523           34,523            34,523

     Year FE                    X                X                    X                      X                     X                X              X                 X                X
     County FE                  X                X                    X                      X                     X                X              X                 X                X
      Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year. Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate has been passed by the end of the
      given year. Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the number of employed individuals with the referenced characteristic(s). Undocumented is a probabilistic
      measure corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have not completed high school. Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically
      undocumented. Low-Skilled corresponds to respondents who have no post-secondary education. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents
      aged 16-40 and Old corresponds to respondents aged 41-64.
      Panel A includes county linear time trends. Panel B includes county linear time trends as well as controls for the following covariates: lagged state-level unemployment rate, lagged
      state-level log GDP per capita, lagged state-level log housing starts, lagged state-level log government expenditures, and indicators for whether a state has any legislation in place to
      facilitate information-sharing with federal law enforcement, to restrict public benefits access for undocumented immigrants, or to strengthen protections for undocumented immigrants.
      Panel C presents benchmark specification estimates for all states (including states that have passed E-Verify legislation that covers only public sector workers and/or state contrac-
      tors/subcontractors). All Panel C specifications include an indicator (omitted from the table) that is equal to one if a public sector or contractor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate but no
      private sector mandate has been passed by the end of the given year.
      Standard errors are clustered by state.
      * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.
Table A8: QWI-Based Hispanic Worker Outcomes (County-by-Firm Size Level): Addi-
tional Specifications

                                               (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)              (5)             (6)
                                                Employment                  Separations                       Hires
                                                   (asinh)                    (asinh)                        (asinh)

                                                             Panel A: County Linear Time Trends

 Covered                                    -0.040                      -0.067                       -0.054
 (Passage)                                   (0.016)                    (0.034)                     (0.034)
 Covered x Small Firms                                     -0.007                      -0.037                       -0.027
 (Passage)                                                (0.019)                     (0.042)                      (0.046)
 Covered x Large Firms                                   -0.065                      -0.108                       -0.095
 (Passage)                                                (0.022)                     (0.037)                      (0.036)
 Observations                               149,898       149,898       149,898       149,898       149,898       149,898

                                                                 Panel B: No Interpolation Sample

 Covered                                    -0.050                     -0.125                      -0.132
 (Passage)                                   (0.023)                    (0.032)                     (0.034)
 Covered x Small Firms                                     -0.014                    -0.118                      -0.121
 (Passage)                                                (0.024)                     (0.036)                     (0.039)
 Covered x Large Firms                                   -0.080                      -0.137                      -0.147
 (Passage)                                                (0.027)                     (0.033)                     (0.035)
 Observations                               122,833       122,833       122,833       122,833       122,833       122,833

                                                                        Panel C: All States

 Covered                                    -0.054                     -0.140                      -0.150
 (Passage)                                   (0.025)                    (0.034)                     (0.036)
 Covered x Small Firms                                     -0.016                    -0.113                      -0.128
 (Passage)                                                (0.024)                     (0.035)                     (0.038)
 Covered x Large Firms                                   -0.088                      -0.175                      -0.180
 (Passage)                                                (0.030)                     (0.039)                     (0.039)
 Observations                               228,190       228,190       228,190       228,190       228,190       228,190

 County-by-Firm Size Bin FE                    X             X             X             X             X               X
 Year-Quarter FE                               X                           X                           X
 YearQuarter-by-Firm Size Bin FE                             X                           X                             X
  Notes: The unit of observation is the firm size bin by county by year-quarter. Firm size bins are classified as small (fewer
  than 20 employees) or large (20 or more employees). Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the
  given measure. Covered is an indicator for whether a given firm size bin-by-county cell is covered by E-Verify legislation
  that has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  Panel A includes county linear time trends. Panel B presents benchmark specification estimates that drop rather
  than linearly interpolate missing outcome values. Panel C presents benchmark specification estimates for all states
  (including states that have passed E-Verify legislation that covers only public sector workers and/or state contrac-
  tors/subcontractors). All Panel C specifications include an indicator (omitted from the table) that is equal to one if
  a public sector or contractor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate but no private sector mandate has been passed by the end
  of the given year-quarter.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.



                                                           65
Table A9: CBP-Based Establishment Outcomes (County and County-by-Firm Size
Level): Additional Specifications

                                               (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)      (5)          (6)
                                                 Establishments (asinh)       Establishments, Weighted (asinh)
                                                             Panel A: County Linear Time Trends
 Covered                                     -0.008                            -0.007
 (Passage)                                  (0.007)                           (0.011)
 Covered x Small Firms                                   -0.003                          0.008
 (Passage)                                              (0.007)                         (0.015)
 Covered x Big Firms                                  -0.021                            -0.028
 (Passage)                                              (0.007)                         (0.015)
 Any Private Firm                                                  -0.015                            -0.006
 (Passage)                                                          (0.004)                         (0.007)
 Observations                               49,181      49,181      24,809     49,181   49,181       24,809

                                                   Panel B: County Linear Time Trends + Covariates
 Covered                                     -0.006                         -0.009
 (Passage)                                  (0.006)                        (0.009)
 Covered x Small Firms                                 -0.001                         0.007
 (Passage)                                            (0.005)                        (0.012)
 Covered x Big Firms                                 -0.020                         -0.030
 (Passage)                                            (0.007)                        (0.015)
 Any Private Firm                                              -0.012                            -0.006
 (Passage)                                                      (0.004)                         (0.005)
 Observations                               49,181    49,181    24,809     49,181    49,181     24,809

                                                                             Panel C: All States
 Covered                                     -0.024                                   -0.047
 (Passage)                                  (0.015)                                    (0.019)
 Covered x Small Firms                                      -0.014                                         -0.031
 (Passage)                                                 (0.011)                                         (0.016)
 Covered x Big Firms                                      -0.039                                          -0.065
 (Passage)                                                 (0.019)                                         (0.025)
 Any Private Firm                                                           -0.008                                          -0.036
 (Passage)                                                                 (0.014)                                           (0.017)
 Observations                               73,278         73,278          37,021           73,278         73,278            37,021

 County-by-Firm Size Bin FE                    X               X                               X              X
 Year FE                                       X                               X               X                                 X
 Year-by-Firm Size Bin FE                                      X                                              X
 County FE                                                                     X                                                 X
  Notes: The unit of observation is the firm size bin by county by year in Columns (1)-(2) and (4)-(5) and the county by year in Columns
  (3) and (6). Firm size bins are classified as small (fewer than 20 employees) or large (20 or more employees). Each outcome value is
  the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the referenced measure. Covered is an indicator for whether a given firm size bin-by-county
  cell is covered by E-Verify legislation that has been passed by the end of the first quarter of the given year (establishment count data is
  available annually for the first quarter). Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate
  has been passed by the end of the first quarter of the given year. Establishments (Weighted) scales the number of establishments in
  each of nine available firm size bins by the midpoint of the range of number of employees included in the given bin and sums these
  scaled counts across the 9 firm size bins.
  Panel A includes county linear time trends. Panel B includes county linear time trends as well as controls for the following covariates:
  lagged state-level unemployment rate, lagged state-level log GDP per capita, lagged state-level log housing starts, lagged state-level log
  government expenditures, and indicators for whether a state has any legislation in place to facilitate information-sharing with federal
  law enforcement, to restrict public benefits access for undocumented immigrants, or to strengthen protections for undocumented
  immigrants. Panel C presents benchmark specification estimates for all states (including states that have passed E-Verify legislation
  that covers only public sector workers and/or state contractors/subcontractors). All Panel C specifications include an indicator
  (omitted from the table) that is equal to one if a public sector or contractor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate but no private sector
  mandate has been passed by the end of Q1 of the given year.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.


                                                                   66
Table A10: E-Verify Query Rates and QWI-Based Hispanic Worker Outcomes as a Function of
Predicted E-Verify Coverage (County Level): Additional Specifications

                               (1)       (2)           (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)      (7)             (8)
                                 E-Verify               Employment             Separations                Hires
                                   Rate                    (asinh)                (asinh)                (asinh)

                                                       Panel A: County Linear Time Trends

 Predicted Coverage         0.089       0.006       -0.041       0.014      -0.073      0.235     -0.057       0.370
                            (0.023)    (0.141)     (0.028)      (0.108)     (0.043)    (0.183)   (0.051)      (0.311)
 Observations                92,289    92,289      75,919       75,919      75,919     75,919    75,919       75,919

                                                        Panel B: No Interpolation Sample

 Predicted Coverage         0.213      0.345      -0.104       -0.399      -0.154       -0.045   -0.159        -0.014
                            (0.026)    (0.133)     (0.033)      (0.120)     (0.046)    (0.142)    (0.046)     (0.163)
 Observations                92,289    92,289      75,919       75,919      75,919     75,919     75,919      75,919



                                                                Panel C: All States

 Predicted Coverage         0.223      0.345      -0.106       -0.382      -0.164       -0.046   -0.175        -0.023
                            (0.030)    (0.133)     (0.036)      (0.106)     (0.050)    (0.129)    (0.051)     (0.164)
 Observations               138,098    138,098     115,730      115,730     115,730    115,730    115,730     115,730

 County FE                     X          X            X           X          X           X         X              X
 Year-Quarter FE               X                       X                      X                     X
 YearQuarter-by-State FE                  X                        X                      X                        X
  Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. E-Verify rate is defined as the number of E-
  Verify queries divided by the contemporaneous total number of (Hispanic and non-Hispanic) hires. Employment,
  separations and hires measures reflect inverse hyperbolic sine transformations of the respective measures for
  Hispanic workers. To construct the Predicted Coverage measure, we first calculate the predicted share of workers
  covered by E-Verify legislation that has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter, as determined by the
  baseline (2004-2006) firm size distribution for all workers (in Columns 1-2) and for Hispanic workers (in Columns
  3-8). This measure is then scaled by 0.227 for workers in small firms (with fewer than 20 employees) to account
  for the relative intensity of E-Verify usage across smaller versus larger firms.
  Panel A includes county linear time trends. Panel B presents benchmark specification estimates that exclude
  interpolated firm size bin level employment values in the construction of the Predicted Coverage measure. Panel
  C presents benchmark specification estimates for all states (including states that have passed E-Verify legislation
  that covers only public sector workers and/or state contractors/subcontractors). Odd-numbered columns in Panel
  C include an indicator (omitted from the table) that is equal to one if a public sector or contractor/subcontractor
  E-Verify mandate but no private sector mandate has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.




                                                  67
Table A11: QWI-Based Spillover Analyses (Small Firm Employment): Additional
Specifications

                                   (1)        (2)      (3)            (4)       (5)      (6)
                                     Hispanic Employment             Non-Hispanic Employment
                                        in Small Firms                    in Small Firms
                                            (asinh)                           (asinh)

                                              Panel A: County Linear Time Trends

 Predicted Coverage             -0.046      -0.053       -0.080    -0.022      -0.024       0.061
                                 (0.018)     (0.017)    (0.109)     (0.010)     (0.010)    (0.042)
 Observations                    74,005      67,756     74,005      74,005      67,756     74,005

                                                Panel B: No Interpolation Sample

 Predicted Coverage               -0.022      -0.021    0.436      -0.028     -0.029        0.037
                                 (0.027)     (0.020)     (0.095)    (0.012)    (0.009)     (0.058)
 Observations                    60,723      55,417      60,723     60,723     55,417      60,723

                                                       Panel C: All States

 Predicted Coverage               -0.016     -0.018     0.353      -0.043     -0.041       0.069
                                 (0.027)    (0.019)      (0.116)    (0.017)    (0.014)    (0.040)
 Observations                    112,972    106,723     112,972    112,972     106,723    112,972

 County-by-Firm Size Bin FE         X          X           X          X           X          X
 Year-Quarter FE                    X          X                      X           X
 YearQuarter-by-State FE                                   X                                 X
  Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year-quarter. Small firms are those with fewer
  than 20 employees. Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of (Hispanic
  or non-Hispanic) employment in small firms. Columns 2 and 5 restrict the sample to county-
  year-quarter cells in which small firms are not yet subject to E-Verify mandate enforcement.
  To construct the Predicted Coverage measure, we first calculate the predicted share of workers
  covered by E-Verify legislation that has been passed by the end of the given year-quarter, as
  determined by the baseline (2004-2006) firm size distribution for Hispanic workers (in Columns
  1-3) and for non-Hispanic workers (in Columns 4-6). This measure is then scaled by 0.227 for
  workers in small firms (with fewer than 20 employees) to account for the relative intensity of
  E-Verify usage across smaller versus larger firms.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  Panel A includes county linear time trends. Panel B presents benchmark specification estimates
  that exclude interpolated firm size bin level employment values. Panel C presents benchmark
  specification estimates for all states (including states that have passed E-Verify legislation
  that covers only public sector workers and/or state contractors/subcontractors). All Panel C
  specifications include an indicator (omitted from the table) that is equal to one if a public
  sector or contractor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate but no private sector mandate has been
  passed by the end of the given year-quarter.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent
  level.


                                                68
Table A12: ACS-Based Migration and Self-Employment Outcomes (County
Level): Additional Specifications

                           (1)                  (2)            (3)          (4)
                     Probabilistically     In-migration          Self-Employment
                     Undocumented              Rate            All     Undocumented
                       Population        (Undocumented)       Workers     Workers

                                    Panel A: County Linear Time Trends

 Any Private Firm          0.074                -0.014          0.001          0.003
 (Passage)                (0.062)               (0.007)        (0.013)        (0.169)
 Observations             23,246                22,522         23,246         23,246

                            Panel B: County Linear Time Trends + Covariates

 Any Private Firm          0.085                -0.013          -0.001         -0.027
 (Passage)                (0.058)               (0.007)        (0.014)        (0.167)
 Observations             23,246                22,522         23,246         23,246

                                             Panel C: All States

 Any Private Firm          0.031                 0.003          -0.014        0.165
 (Passage)                (0.061)               (0.006)        (0.018)        (0.072)
 Observations             34,523                33,660         34,523         34,523

 Year FE                     X                    X               X              X
 County FE                   X                    X               X              X
  Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year. In Column (1), the outcome
  value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of the number of probabilistically un-
  documented residents, defined as foreign-born, non-veterans who have not completed
  high school. The In-migration Rate characterizes the share of probabilistically un-
  documented respondents who moved to their current state of residence within the
  last year. The outcome measures in Columns (3)-(4) are the inverse hyperbolic sine
  transforms of the number of self-employed workers in each category.
  Panel A includes county linear time trends. Panel B includes county linear time trends
  as well as controls for the following covariates: lagged state-level unemployment rate,
  lagged state-level log GDP per capita, lagged state-level log housing starts, lagged
  state-level log government expenditures, and indicators for whether a state has any
  legislation in place to facilitate information-sharing with federal law enforcement,
  to restrict public benefits access for undocumented immigrants, or to strengthen
  protections for undocumented immigrants. Panel C presents benchmark specification
  estimates for all states (including states that have passed E-Verify legislation that
  covers only public sector workers and/or state contractors/subcontractors). All Panel
  C specifications include an indicator (omitted from the table) that is equal to one if
  a public sector or contractor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate but no private sector
  mandate has been passed by the end of the given year.
  Standard errors are clustered by state.
  * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1
  percent level.


                                           69
        Table A13: ACS-Based Per Capita and Household Annual Earnings Measures (County Level with County Linear Time Trends)

                           (1)          (2)                (3)                 (4)                 (5)            (6)         (7)            (8)           (9)
                        Hispanics   Non-Hispanics    Probabilistically   Probabilistically   Probabilistically    All      Low-Skilled   Young, Male    Old, Male
                                                     Undocumented         Documented         Undocumented        Natives     Natives     Low-Skilled   Low-Skilled
                                                        Hispanics           Hispanics         (All Workers)                                Natives       Natives

                                                                            Panel A: Per Capita Wage Income

     Any Private Firm     0.000          -0.007           0.169               0.066               -0.182          -0.006      -0.009        -0.009        0.001
     (Passage)           (0.126)        (0.010)          (0.134)             (0.164)             (0.188)         (0.010)     (0.010)       (0.013)       (0.013)

                                                                Panel B: Per Capita Business (Self-Employment) Income

     Any Private Firm     0.008          0.010            0.065               0.379               0.031           0.008       -0.031       -0.305         0.001
     (Passage)           (0.360)        (0.050)          (0.347)             (0.482)             (0.308)         (0.057)     (0.064)       (0.162)       (0.094)

                                                                 Panel C: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Income




70
     Any Private Firm     -0.004         -0.001           0.084               0.037               -0.205          -0.001      -0.008        -0.007        -0.001
     (Passage)           (0.133)        (0.007)          (0.103)             (0.121)             (0.131)         (0.008)     (0.008)       (0.014)       (0.011)

                                                           Panel D: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Household Income

     Any Private Firm     0.056          -0.001           -0.004              0.076               0.055           -0.001      -0.005        -0.005        0.003
     (Passage)           (0.093)        (0.006)          (0.143)             (0.084)             (0.114)         (0.006)     (0.007)       (0.013)       (0.010)
     Year FE                X              X                X                   X                   X               X           X             X             X
     County FE              X              X                X                   X                   X               X           X             X             X
     Observations        23,196         23,239           19,948              23,182              22,522          23,239      23,239        23,239        23,239
      Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year. Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of mean annual earnings from the specified
      category for individuals with the referenced characteristic(s). Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate
      has been passed by the end of the given year. Undocumented is a probabilistic measure corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have
      not completed high school. Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented. Low-Skilled corresponds to
      respondents who have no post-secondary education. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and
      Old corresponds to respondents aged 41-64.
      All specifications include county linear time trends.
      Standard errors are clustered by state.
      * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.
     Table A14: ACS-Based Per Capita and Household Annual Earnings Measures (County Level with County Linear Time Trends and
     Additional Covariates)

                             (1)          (2)                 (3)                 (4)                 (5)            (6)         (7)            (8)             (9)
                          Hispanics   Non-Hispanics     Probabilistically   Probabilistically   Probabilistically    All      Low-Skilled   Young, Male      Old, Male
                                                        Undocumented         Documented         Undocumented        Natives     Natives     Low-Skilled     Low-Skilled
                                                           Hispanics           Hispanics         (All Workers)                                Natives         Natives

                                                                               Panel A: Per Capita Wage Income

      Any Private Firm      -0.016         -0.007             0.170              0.047               -0.207          -0.007      -0.007         -0.011         0.005
      (Passage)            (0.112)        (0.006)            (0.155)            (0.150)             (0.197)         (0.006)     (0.009)        (0.015)        (0.012)

                                                                   Panel B: Per Capita Business (Self-Employment) Income

      Any Private Firm      -0.045         0.010              0.011              0.338               -0.020          0.009       -0.028        -0.315          0.013
      (Passage)            (0.328)        (0.051)            (0.391)            (0.477)             (0.328)         (0.058)     (0.065)        (0.172)        (0.086)




71
                                                                    Panel C: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Income

      Any Private Firm      -0.021         -0.001             0.058              0.014               -0.234          -0.001      -0.006         -0.009         0.003
      (Passage)            (0.117)        (0.004)            (0.131)            (0.104)             (0.139)         (0.004)     (0.009)        (0.016)        (0.011)

                                                              Panel D: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Household Income

      Any Private Firm      0.051          -0.001             0.067              0.067               0.005           -0.000      -0.005         -0.009         0.005
      (Passage)            (0.072)        (0.005)            (0.118)            (0.064)             (0.124)         (0.005)     (0.007)        (0.015)        (0.011)
      Year FE                 X              X                  X                  X                   X               X           X              X              X
      County FE               X              X                  X                  X                   X               X           X              X              X
      Observations         23,196         23,239             19,948             23,182              22,522          23,239      23,239         23,239         23,239
       Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year. Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of mean annual earnings from the specified
       category for individuals with the referenced characteristic(s). Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate
       has been passed by the end of the given year. Undocumented is a probabilistic measure corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have
       not completed high school. Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented. Low-Skilled corresponds to
       respondents who have no post-secondary education. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and
       Old corresponds to respondents aged 41-64.
       All specifications include county linear time trends as well as controls for the following covariates: lagged state-level unemployment rate, lagged state-level log
       GDP per capita, lagged state-level log housing starts, lagged state-level log government expenditures, and indicators for whether a state has any legislation in
       place to facilitate information-sharing with federal law enforcement, to restrict public benefits access for undocumented immigrants, or to strengthen protections
       for undocumented immigrants.
       Standard errors are clustered by state.
       * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.
             Table A15: ACS-Based Per Capita and Household Annual Earnings Measures (County Level with All States Included)

                           (1)          (2)                (3)                  (4)                 (5)            (6)          (7)            (8)           (9)
                        Hispanics   Non-Hispanics    Probabilistically    Probabilistically   Probabilistically    All       Low-Skilled   Young, Male    Old, Male
                                                     Undocumented          Documented         Undocumented        Natives      Natives     Low-Skilled   Low-Skilled
                                                        Hispanics            Hispanics         (All Workers)                                 Natives       Natives

                                                                              Panel A: Per Capita Wage Income

     Any Private Firm   -0.173         -0.043              -0.067             -0.145              -0.208          -0.038      -0.045        -0.080          -0.023
     (Passage)           (0.045)        (0.014)           (0.114)              (0.050)            (0.110)          (0.014)     (0.019)       (0.029)       (0.016)

                                                                    Panel B: Per Capita Business (Self-Employment) Income

     Any Private Firm     0.220        -0.117             0.310                 0.226              0.246          -0.115      -0.123        -0.306        -0.122
     (Passage)           (0.163)        (0.034)           (0.185)              (0.272)            (0.176)          (0.034)     (0.035)       (0.078)       (0.041)

                                                                    Panel C: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Income




72
     Any Private Firm    -0.094        -0.040              -0.143             -0.105             -0.252           -0.036      -0.042        -0.078         -0.029
     (Passage)            (0.044)       (0.012)           (0.100)              (0.044)            (0.072)          (0.013)     (0.017)       (0.028)       (0.015)

                                                            Panel D: Per Capita Total (Wage and Business) Household Income

     Any Private Firm     -0.069       -0.031              -0.079               -0.094             -0.048         -0.029      -0.028        -0.053         -0.020
     (Passage)           (0.048)        (0.010)           (0.101)              (0.059)            (0.067)          (0.010)     (0.010)       (0.013)       (0.011)
     Year FE                X              X                 X                    X                  X                X           X             X             X
     County FE              X              X                 X                    X                  X                X           X             X             X
     Observations        34,472         34,516            30,375               34,454             33,660           34,516      34,516        34,516        34,516
      Notes: The unit of observation is the county by year. Each outcome value is the inverse hyperbolic sine transform of mean annual earnings from the specified
      category for individuals with the referenced characteristic(s). Any Private Firm (Passage) is an indicator for whether any private sector E-Verify mandate
      has been passed by the end of the given year. Undocumented is a probabilistic measure corresponding to foreign-born, non-veteran respondents who have not
      completed high school. Probabilistically documented workers are those not classified as probabilistically undocumented. Low-Skilled corresponds to respondents
      who have no post-secondary education. The sample is restricted to respondents aged 16-64. Young corresponds to respondents aged 16-40 and Old corresponds
      to respondents aged 41-64.
      This table presents benchmark specification estimates for all states (including states that have passed E-Verify legislation that covers only public sector
      workers and/or state contractors/subcontractors). All specifications include an indicator (omitted from the table) that is equal to one if a public sector or
      contractor/subcontractor E-Verify mandate but no private sector mandate has been passed by the end of the given year.
      Standard errors are clustered by state.
      * significant at 10 percent level; ** significant at 5 percent level; *** significant at 1 percent level.
