                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           TARGET DATE FUNDS AND PORTFOLIO CHOICE IN 401(K) PLANS

                                        Olivia S. Mitchell
                                         Stephen Utkus

                                       Working Paper 26684
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26684


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




This research is part of the NBER programs on Aging and Labor Studies and the Household
Finance Working Group, and it was undertaken pursuant to a grant from the US Social Security
Administration (SSA) to the Michigan Retirement Research Center (MRRC). This research
support is gratefully acknowledged along with that of the Pension Research Council and Boettner
Center at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, and Vanguard. The authors
would like to thank Gary Koenig, Alberto Rossi and Jean Young for helpful comments, and Yong
Yu for exceptional research assistance. They acknowledge Vanguard's efforts in the provision of
anonymized recordkeeping data under restricted access conditions. All findings, interpretations,
and conclusions represent the views of the authors and not those of the Wharton School or the
Pension Research Council, the SSA, any agency of the Federal Government, Vanguard, the
MRRC, or any other institution with which the authors are affiliated. ©2020 Mitchell and Utkus.
All rights reserved. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26684.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen Utkus. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Target Date Funds and Portfolio Choice in 401(k) Plans
Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen Utkus
NBER Working Paper No. 26684
January 2020
JEL No. D12,D14,D91,G5,G51,J32

                                         ABSTRACT

Target date funds in corporate retirement plans grew from $5B in 2000 to $734B in 2018, partly
because federal regulation sanctioned these as default investments in automatic enrollment plans.
We show that adopters delegated pension investment decisions to fund managers selected by plan
sponsors. Including these funds in retirement saving menus raised equity shares, boosted bond
exposures, curtailed cash/company stock holdings, and reduced idiosyncratic risk. The adoption
of low-cost target date funds may enhance retirement wealth by as much as 50 percent over a 30-
year horizon.


Olivia S. Mitchell
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
3620 Locust Walk, St 3000 SH-DH
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6302
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

Stephen Utkus
Vanguard
100 Vanguard Boulevard, G13
Malvern, PA 19355
steve_utkus@vanguard.com
                                                                                                                       1




                 Target Date Funds and Portfolio Choice in 401(k) Plans
         Although U.S. employers are legally responsible for selecting and overseeing investment options

in the 401(k) plans offered to their workers, employees have traditionally been responsible for selecting

their own portfolios given the fund menus offered. 1 A concern with this approach is that many participants

appear to be ill-equipped to make these portfolio decisions, potentially undermining old-age retirement

security, due to financial illiteracy or behavioral biases. 2

         This paper shows how the introduction of target date funds (TDFs) into 401(k) plans has

fundamentally altered the decision-making dynamic in U.S. defined contribution retirement saving plans.

A target date fund menu consists of a series of fund offerings with portfolio allocations described in terms

of an expected year of retirement; usually offered in five-year increments (e.g., a 2015, 2020, etc., fund), a

target date fund series may include up to a dozen funds. Participants in voluntary choice plans must actively

select among target date and other fund offerings; by contrast, a participant in an automatic enrollment plan

is initially defaulted into a single target date fund based on the employee's current age and assumed

retirement date (usually age 65), with the option to move to other investments subsequently.

         Target date fund assets in 401(k) plans have grown phenomenally over time, from $5B in 2000 to

$734B in 2018 (ICI, 2019). In part, this growth was spurred by a Department of Labor regulation issued

under the 2006 Pension Protection Act designating target date funds as an eligible default investment option

for automatic enrollment plans. 3 By 2018, 80 percent of 401(k) plans offered these funds (ICI, 2019), and



1
  Here we use the term 401(k) plans to refer broadly to private-sector defined contribution plans which can include
profit-sharing, money purchase, and 403(b) plans along with 401(k) plans.
2
  Research on the role of financial illiteracy and behavioral biases in investing and savings decisions includes Bekaert,
Hoyem, Hu, and Ravina (2017), Benartzi and Thaler (2001. 2002), Beshears, Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2018),
Goda, Levy, Manchester, Sojourner and Tasoff (2019), Lusardi and Mitchell (2007, 2011, 2104), Mitchell and Lusardi
(2011), Mottola and Utkus (2008), Dimmock, Kouwenberg, Mitchell, and Peijnenberg (2016), and van Rooij, Lusardi,
and Alessie (2011).
3
  The Department of Labor regulations were effective December 24, 2007. 72 Fed. Reg. 60451. Eligible "qualified
default investment alternatives" (QDIAs) include target date funds, traditional balanced funds, and managed account
advice services. QDIA regulations provide sponsors so-called 404(c) protection for participant portfolio choices,
meaning there is a presumption that employers are not liable for participant portfolio decisions when participants hold
QDIAs. The sponsor retains liability for selecting and monitoring the QDIA itself.
                                                                                                                      2


two-thirds of new 401(k) plan entrants were automatically enrolled, with target funds the dominant choice

for default investments (Vanguard, 2019). This rising reliance on automatic enrollment and default portfolio

choice in the U.S. conforms to a global move toward default portfolio choice in defined contribution

systems (OECD, 2015).

           Compared to other multi-asset class portfolios such as traditional balanced and risk-based lifecycle

funds, a target date family offers retirement savers two unique advice-related features. First, each fund is

identified with an anticipated retirement year which serves as an implicit recommendation regarding which

types of investors should hold each fund. If investors must make their own portfolio choices, the date

labeling transforms a potentially complex decision about how to assemble a portfolio with the available

funds on the menu into a simpler decision heuristic, namely to simply select the fund associated with the

employee's anticipated retirement date. 4 Second, target date risk levels are automatically rebalanced over

time by fund managers who follow an "equity glide path," reducing risk as participants near their target

dates. 5

           In what follows, we evaluate how the introduction of target date funds into 401(k) investment

menus has reshaped participants' portfolio choice decisions, drawing on an anonymized, restricted-access

longitudinal dataset from Vanguard, a major 401(k) plan administrator and investment manager. The target

date funds we study are almost exclusively indexed portfolios, diversified across global equity and fixed

asset classes, with management fees under 20 basis points. As a result, our dataset represents a real-world

benchmark for the provision of low-cost, highly diversified professional portfolio advice to an important

group of nonprofessional investors.

           To assess the impact of target date fund introduction, we examine participant adoption and portfolio

exposures one year after the first appearance of the funds in the 401(k) investment menus. We show that



4
 Prior to the advent of target date funds, no investment funds provided age-related rebalancing in 401(k)
plans.
5
  Here we take no stance on the desirability of a declining equity share with age. Some analysts favor it based on labor
income profiles with age (e,g., Campbell and Viceira, 2002; Cocco, Gomes and Maenhout, 2005), while others do not
(e.g., Basu, Byrne and Drew, 2011).
                                                                                                             3


28.4 percent of new entrants into voluntary enrollment plans adopted target date funds in their retirement

saving accounts, whereas only 10.2 percent of existing employees (workers in the plan prior to the funds'

appearance) switched out of existing investments into these funds. This difference we describe as an active

choice effect, reflecting the fact that new entrants in voluntary enrollment plans had to make an active choice

to join the 401(k) plan, whereas existing employees faced a discretionary choice of whether to switch to

new options. By contrast, in plans with new-hire automatic enrollment, 78.7 percent of new entrants adopted

target date funds, representing a substantial default effect. In addition, 21.7 percent of existing employees

in these plans invested in the funds, double the rate of existing employees in voluntary choice plans. We

take this latter result as a default-related endorsement effect: the employer's selection of target date funds

as a default investment for new hires influenced existing employees' willingness to switch to the funds.

Similar effects are observed for other measures, such as the propensity to be a pure target date investor

(investing all of one's savings in a single target date fund) or a mixed target date investor (combining a

target date fund with other options).

        In terms of portfolio effects, adoption of target date funds had sizeable effects on equity share and

risk factor exposures: relative to non-target date investors, participants' equity share rose an average of 24

percentage points for pure investors, and by 13 percentage points for mixed investors. Pure and mixed target

date investors' equity share also declined with age, whereas non-target date investors had a hump-shaped

equity share by age. As a result of increased equity and bond market exposures, expected factor returns for

pure investors rose by 2.3 percent per year and for mixed investors by 1.7 percent per year, relative to non-

target date investors. Holdings in cash and company stock fell, as did uncompensated idiosyncratic risk, in

our sample of indexed target date funds.

        Accordingly, the introduction of target date funds produced an important shift away from

participants' 401(k) plan portfolio selections and toward the target date managers selected by employers.

This change will have sizeable benefits: for instance, we estimate that improved returns could raise expected

retirement wealth by as much as 50 percent over a 30-year savings horizon, for a pure investor in a low-

cost target date series. Inasmuch as employers may have introduced the funds responding to concerns over
                                                                                                                 4


participants' poor portfolio construction patterns, we cannot assert that the results are completely

attributable to the `treatment effect' of target date fund introduction. Nevertheless, employees who moved

into the target date funds could have previously made the portfolio changes on their own and realize the

potential benefits, yet they did not.

         Our paper is informed by an extensive literature examining how default arrangements shape

employee savings and investment decisions, though no prior study has explored the varieties of `choice

architecture' studied here.6 There is also research asking whether peoples' portfolio choice is influenced by

investment illiteracy or behavioral biases, 7 suggesting that retirement investment menus can shape, or

"frame," portfolio allocation patterns due to inertia or naïveté, 8 or in reaction to excessive complexity (also

known as "choice overload"). 9 Our contribution is to show how introducing target date funds into the

401(k) investment menu substantially altered portfolio outcomes across a diverse set of firms in voluntary

choice and automatic enrollment as well as non-autoenrollment settings.

        In what follows, we describe key elements of the plan choice architecture relevant to the target date

setting. We then turn to an empirical analysis of adoption behavior and changes in portfolio composition,

before versus after the introduction of the new fund family. We conclude with a discussion of implications

of our findings for household finance and for the potential benefits that scalable, low-cost investment advice

can provide.




6
  On the savings side, see Carroll, Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2009); Choi, Laibson, and Madrian (2004);
Choi, Laibson, Madrian, and Metrick (2003, 2004, 2006); Clark and Young (2018); and Madrian and Shea (2001).
On portfolio allocation, see Agnew, Balduzzi and Sunden (2003); Ameriks and Zeldes (2004); Benartzi (2001);
Benartzi and Thaler (2001, 2002); Benartzi, Peleg and Thaler (2007); Calvet, Campbell, and Sodini (2009); Mitchell,
Mottola, Utkus and Yamaguchi (2006a, 2006b); and O'Donoghue and Rabin (1999; 2001).
7
  See Barber and Odean (2001); Bekaert, Hoyem, Hu, and Ravina (2017); Benartzi and Thaler (2001, 2002); Beshears,
Choi, Laibson and Madrian (2018); Goda, Levy, Manchester, Sojourner and Tasoff (2019); Lusardi and Mitchell
(2007, 2011, 2014); Mottola and Utkus (2008); and Mitchell and Lusardi (2011); and van Rooij, Lusardi, and Alessie
(2011).
8
  Examples include Agnew and Szykman (2005); Elton, Gruber and Blake (2007); Huberman and Jiang (2006);
Brown, Liang and Weisbenner (2007); McDonald, Richardson, and Rietz (2019); Thaler and Sunstein (2008); Tang,
Mitchell, Mottola, and Utkus (2010); and Pool, Sialm, and Stefanescu (2016).
9
  See for example Iyengar, Huberman, and Jiang (2004); and Iyengar and Kamenica (2010).
                                                                                                                   5


401(k) Choice Architecture and Participant Portfolio Choice

          Our analysis draws on administrative records for 880 defined contribution plans that introduced

target date funds between January 2003 and June 2015 (a period of 12.5 years or 150 months). These data

were provided by Vanguard, a leading US 401(k) recordkeeper, on an anonymous, restricted-access basis. 10

Table 1 illustrates how the target date funds related to their target maturity dates, and it also indicates how

each fund utilized a different mix of passively-managed U.S. equity (including large-, mid- and small-

capitalization stocks), international equity (both developed and emerging markets), and high-quality

domestic bonds. 11 For instance, total equity exposure in the funds for young participants (column 7)

averaged 90 percent (in the 2040 through 2055 Funds), versus 30 percent for participants in the Income

Fund (intended for retirees). 12

Table 1 here

          To analyze target date fund portfolio choice, we selected a research sample of over 1.2 million

active participants from the 880 plans that introduced target date funds January 2003-June 2015. 13 Both

adoption and portfolio composition statistics were gathered for each plan 12 months following the first

appearance of target date funds in the investment menu. Plan participants in the firm prior to the adoption

of target date funds and still in the plan one year later were classified as existing participants; those entering

the plan after the target date fund introduction date and still in the plan at the 12-month window were

classified as new entrants.




10
     All target date funds offered were Vanguard-managed.
11
   In February 2013 the funds added an allocation of international bonds. We illustrate the allocations at the end of
2010 because they were typical of the period we study.
12
   The Vanguard funds were all indexed except for holdings of inflation-indexed bonds available to only a small
fraction of retired participant portfolios; accordingly, we refer to the funds as indexed. Fund fees were below 0.20%
during the 2003-15 period (at the end of our analysis period, even lower-cost versions of the target date funds were
introduced in a few large plans). During 2010, a small number of target date funds offered by other investment
managers were introduced but these accounted for below 1% of participants studied.
13
   Active 401(k) participants were those who are currently contributing to their employer's retirement plan. We only
include plans for which we observe plan and participant records both prior to and subsequent to the introduction of
the target date funds. Plans transferring to the Vanguard recordkeeping service for the first time during our sample
period and adopting target date funds at that point are excluded from our sample because we cannot observe plan
holdings prior to the funds' introduction.
                                                                                                                           6


         This distinction is important for understanding portfolio choice decisions. When target date funds

first arrive in the 401(k) menu, existing participants must decide whether they will switch their portfolios

to the new funds, away from funds previously selected. Factors influencing this decision could include the

appeal of the key features of target date funds, namely their labeling as a form of investment advice and

their automatic age-based rebalancing feature. Factors hindering adoption could include behavioral factors

such as inertia and procrastination, as well as an endowment effect (whereby funds already owned may

appear to be more valuable than those not yet owned). By contrast, new entrants would likely be more

strongly influenced by a plan's choice architecture. In voluntary choice plans, new entrants making

investment decisions would need a degree of financial literacy to navigate through the entire plan

investment menu, compare target date funds relative to other options, and construct their portfolios on their

own. Auto-enrolled new entrants, by contrast, would be directly invested into a single target date fund.

These latter individuals could either take no action and remain in the single target date fund assigned to

them, or make a switch to some other portfolio with different features.

         Table 2 arrays our data by plan and individual characteristics, using period average statistics. 14 Two

key outcome variables indicate the plan choice architecture shaping participants' choices: TDFDefault,

indicating whether the target date series was designated as the plan's default option; and New-hire auto

enrollment, indicating whether the plan automatically enrolled new hires, regardless of the type of default

fund used by the plan. 15 The first column in Panel A reveals that 52 percent of participants were in plans

where target date funds became the plan default. 16 One-third (32.9 percent) of participants were in plans

where new hires were automatically enrolled in the firm's plan, regardless of the type of default fund used.



14
   The average statistics pertain to plan-specific 12-month windows, rather than end-of-period characteristics.
Appendix Table 1 provides more detail on target date fund patterns by year.
15
   Under new-hire automatic enrollment, newly eligible participants have contributions deducted automatically from
their first eligible pay (with the right to opt out); their contributions are invested in the plan's designated default fund.
Our automatic enrollment indicator is for new hires only. Some employers have "swept" (i.e., automatically enrolled)
existing eligible non-participants, because our dataset does not include an indicator for such "sweeps." Accordingly
our estimates should be viewed as lower bounds.
16
   A plan may designate a fund as a default for several purposes, including automatic enrollment or as a fund for
depositing administrative corrections.
                                                                                                                      7


Panel A also indicates that 24.7 percent of participants became target date investors with the advent of the

new funds on the menu. 17 Two-thirds of these (15.7 percent) were pure target date investors contributing

only a single target date fund, while the remaining one-third (9 percent) were mixed investors, holding a

target date fund plus some other funds. The right side of Table 2 reports the percentage of pure, mixed, and

non-target date investors having the plan features indicated. For instance, 72.1 percent of pure investors

were in plans where the target date funds were the default, and 49.5 percent of pure investors were in plans

where new hires were auto-enrolled. By contrast, fewer participants holding mixed portfolios (64.9 percent)

and only 46.3 percent of non-target date fund investors were in plans where target date funds were the

default. As also noted, plan menus averaged 25.6 funds in size, 48.4 percent of participants were offered

employer stock as an investment option, and most employees (88.4 percent) had access to plan loans.

Table 2 here

         Turning to Panel B of Table 2, we see that 19.7 percent of older participants were new entrants who

joined their plans after target date fund introduction, within the 12-month observation period. 18 Other

participant information included 401(k) account balances and contribution patterns, plan investments, and

participant characteristics such as age, sex, household income, job tenure, and non-retirement financial

wealth. 19 In terms of investor patterns, we see that pure target date investors were younger and more likely

to be female, had low/moderate incomes, and held smaller account balances (Column 2, Table 2). Mixed

target date fund investors had the opposite characteristics and above-average balances (Column 3). Because

the panel spanned by our data included the 2008-9 financial crisis period, we also include an indicator for

whether the 12-month plan window occurred during that period.



Adoption of Target Date Funds


17
   Consistent with prior studies of participant investment behavior, we measure portfolio allocations using contribution
designations rather than existing portfolio holdings, as the former better reflect forward-looking intentions.
18
   Not all new entrants are new hires: while most plans do allow new hires to become immediately eligible to
contribute, a few impose a 6- or 12-month waiting period.
19
   Household income and non-retirement wealth were provided to Vanguard by Acxiom; amounts are imputed using
zip code (zip+4) averages.
                                                                                                               8


           To assess the distinct impacts of default versus active choice on participants' portfolio selection,

we estimate three multivariate models of target date fund adoption. Each model relates a distinct measure

of target date adoption to default, participant, plan, and other factors, as in equation (1):

          ,, =  +  +  +  +  +  + ,, (1)

Here TDFAdoptioni,j,t indicates whether employee i adopted a target date fund in plan j in month t, measured

using total contributions to the target date fund (from both the employee and employer). Model A examines

the extensive margin of target date adoption by estimating a Probit specification. Here the dependent

variable takes a value of 1 if the participant had contributed to a target date fund a year after the target date

funds' introduction to the menu (0 otherwise). The mean value of this time-weighted adoption rate was 24.7

percent over the 2003-15 period. Model B measures the intensive margin of adoption, where the dependent

variable in the OLS equation is the share of employees' contributions directed to target date funds; the mean

time-weighted value for our sample was 18.9 percent (which includes non-target date investors).20 Model

C uses a multinomial Logit framework where the dependent variable is zero if the participant was a non-

target date investor (the reference category); 1 if the participant was a "mixed" target date fund investor

(directing 1-99 percent of contributions to one or more target date funds); or 2 if the participant was a "pure"

target date fund investor (directing all contributions to a single target date fund). In Model C, the mean

time-weighted proportion of pure investors was 15.7 percent, and of mixed investors, 9.0 percent.

           All three models use the dataset described in Table 2, which included all active participants in our

he 401(k) sample: a single observation is available for each participant 12 months following the first

appearance of target date fund in his plan menu. Explanatory variables in equation (1) include attributes of

the plan default architecture, DEFAULT, discussed above; plus a PLAN vector of other characteristics such

as the size of the plan menu, the availability of plan loans; and a comprehensive set of participant




20
     This figure includes both those holding target date funds and those with zero holdings.
                                                                                                                           9


characteristics, PARTICIPANT, including age, sex, income, 401(k) account wealth, and a measure of non-

retirement-account financial wealth. 21

            Rather than elaborate on each estimated coefficient separately (all are reported in Appendix Table

2), Table 3 uses these estimates to derive predicted effects for existing employees and new entrants under

both voluntary choice and automatic enrollment architectures. The overall probability of an employee

adopting target date funds one year after they were introduced averaged 24.7 percent. In voluntary

enrollment plans, 10.2 percent of existing employees adopted these funds, versus the new entrant adoption

rate almost three times as large (28.4 percent). This sizeable difference we attribute to an active choice

effect among new plan entrants: they had to actively select investments to enroll in the plan, versus existing

employees who had already enrolled and only had to make the switch to the new funds. In automatic

enrollment plans, 21.7 percent of existing employees adopted the funds, and 78.7 percent of auto-enrolled

new entrants. The former result we interpret as due to the endorsement effect, whereby the employer's

decision to choose the target date fund as a default investment for new entrants influenced the willingness

of existing employees to switch. It is more than twice as large as the adoption rate by existing employees

in voluntary enrollment plans. The latter effect is a very strong default effect. Panel 3 of Table 3 summarizes

the relative sizes of these outcomes.

Table 3 here

            The second column of Table 3 addresses the fraction of contributions that employees directed to

target date funds. These effects are similar in direction and magnitude to column the first column. Column

3 shows that automatic enrollment was especially powerful in influencing participants to become pure

target date investors, another measure of the intensive adoption margin. Again, the same three effects are

at work. In terms of the active choice effect, 3.9 percent of existing employees in voluntary choice plans

switched all of their contributions to a single target date fund when the funds were first introduced, while



21
     The models also control for plan-level heteroskedasticity (  i ), time fixed effects (  t ), and industry fixed effects,
along with missing data dummies. All models also include a financial crisis control, defined here as the period
September 2008-June 2009.
                                                                                                                      10


the figure rose to 14.5 percent for new enrollees. In terms of the default effect, 74.9 percent of automatically

enrolled new entrants were pure target investors, more than five times the voluntary enrollment new entrant

rate. And finally, in terms of the endorsement effect, only 3.9 percent of existing employees in voluntary

plans switched to become pure investors, but this rate rose to 14.1 percent for existing employees in

automatic enrollment plans.

         Comparing Columns 3 and 4 also provides another lesson regarding the impact of plan choice

architecture on portfolio choice. Specifically, new entrants to voluntary enrollment plans were roughly

equally likely to be either pure (14.5 percent) or mixed (13.2 percent) target date fund investors, whereas

new entrants to automatic enrollment plans were five times more likely to be pure versus mixed investors

(74.9 versus 17.2 percent). 22 One potential explanation for this difference is that employers who defaulted

their participants into target date funds under automatic enrollment may have done so anticipating employee

preferences for the age-based labeling or age-related rebalancing features unique to target date funds. An

alternative explanation, consistent with the household finance literature on inertia and malleable preferences

in financial decision-making, is that the default effect is very strong and overrides participant demand for

mixed investments.

         Our default-related adoption effects across the 880 firms we study are similar in magnitude to prior

individual company case studies of automatic enrollment (Madrian and Shea, 2001; Choi, Laibson, Madrian

and Metrick, 2004, 2005), where automatically enrolled new entrants remained entirely in the default fund,

at rates ranging from 46 to 90 percent. Their results differ from ours due to firm-specific design factors,

different methods of measurement, and, in most cases, the fact that their default funds tended to be low-risk

money market funds instead of target date funds. Other results on voluntary choice are not directly

comparable to ours as these case studies measured the effects of a default fund that had previously been



22
   Both Agnew et al. (2012) and Ameriks et al. (2011) have reported that some participants elect a mixed strategy,
believing that this enhances diversification; in other words they fail to recognize that each target date fund is already
a highly-diversified multi-asset-class fund. This view may reflect a naïve understanding of diversification or a desire
to diversify across multiple managers. Pagliaro and Utkus (2017a) demonstrate how different types of mixed investors
diversify their portfolios, including those who alter risk levels and active/passive share.
                                                                                                                11


included in the menu as a voluntary enrollment option, unlike in our setting where we focus on the first

appearance of target date funds in the menu. Our measured endorsement effects are meaningfully higher

than in previous studies: for example, Benartzi (2001) reported that employees were over 1.5 times more

likely to invest their own contributions in employer stock when the employer match to their account was in

stock rather than cash (29 versus 18 percent). 23 In our results, the endorsement effect is associated with a

two to nearly four times higher propensity to hold target date funds by existing employees, depending on

the exact measure. Moreover, the endorsement effect we measure comes from a default designation

affecting employees' co-workers rather than defaulted employees' own accounts.

        We have demonstrated that plan choice architecture clearly has a potent impact on target date use,

but other factors correlated with the outcomes are also worth mentioning (for details see Appendix Table

2). Target date adoption was highest among low-balance participants, and it fell for those with larger

balances. Younger participants (under age 35) were also more likely to adopt target date funds, either as

pure or mixed investors, even after controlling for the effects of new hire auto enrollment. This suggests

that workers were either less financially sophisticated or more willing to adopt novel strategies or

technologies earlier in their life cycles; hence they found target date funds attractive even aside from their

default effects. We also note that target date portfolio choice decisions did not change significantly during

the 2008-2009 financial crisis, indicating that the sharp decline in stock prices during the financial crisis

did not alter participant demand.



Portfolio Effects from Adoption of Target Date Funds

        Having examined how plan architecture influenced retirement savers' portfolios, we next assess

how the arrival of target date funds to fund menus shaped adopters' portfolio risk and return characteristics.

To this end, we compare pure and mixed target date fund investors with their non-target date fund



23
  Evidence of an `endorsement effect' resulting from an employer's designation of employer stock as the default for
matching contributions has been found by Benartzi (2001), Brown, Liang, and Weisbenner (2007), and Choi,
Laibson, and Madrian (2004).
                                                                                                                     12


counterparts in terms of equity shares, portfolio return, risk, Sharpe ratios, and nonsystematic or

idiosyncratic portfolio risk or variance (reported as a share of total variance, or NSR/TV). We further

compare factor risk exposures of each participant subgroup.

         As with adoption behavior, we measure several aspects of participants' portfolio allocations one

year after the first appearance of target date funds in the plan menu. Equity allocations refer to the fraction

of participants' portfolios held in equities in that month. 24 Risk and return characteristics are estimated

using a six-factor asset pricing model over the prior 60 months drawing on monthly returns data for plan

menu investments over a 17.5 year period (including the 150 month period under analysis, and the preceding

five years). For example, if target date funds first appeared in a plan in September 2005, savers' portfolio

allocations were observed a year later, in September 2006, and risk and return characteristics were estimated

for the 60 months preceding and then predicted for September 2006. Factor returns were calculated using

six factors: the market, size, value, and momentum factors for equities, and term and default factors for

bonds. 25

         We note that over our January 1998-June 2015 analysis period, the mean equity factor return (the

return of the equity market less the risk-free rate) was 5.95 percent (standard deviation of 16.1 percent),

while the mean term premium for bonds (the return of long-dated government bonds less the risk-free rate)

was 5.41 percent (standard deviation of 10.5 percent). In other words, over the period, the risk premium

from equities over long-dated government bonds was small, and long-dated government bonds had a

superior Sharpe ratio to equities. Our results should be interpreted in light of how future return and risk

characteristics might resemble, or deviate from, these historical data.




24
   Equity share is the percentage of employer and employee contributions directed to U.S. and international equity
funds, company stock, and a percentage of balanced and target date funds. The equity percentage for balanced and
target date funds is calculated based on each fund's holdings and differs from one target age fund to another.
25
   To calculate portfolio returns over a given 60-month period, we construct a risk-loading matrix for all k investment
options in a given plan by regressing the excess return (over Treasury bill returns) for each of the k assets on the six
factors. The factor return for each 401(k) investment option in the predicted month is simply its factor exposure in
that month times the average factor returns over the prior 60-month period; the participant's factor return is simply
the weighted average return of his or her factor exposures over the period.
                                                                                                                                              13


            Figure 1 summarizes equity share by age for four categories of investors: pure, mixed, non-target

date investors, and all participants. Most notable is the higher equity allocation at virtually all ages for pure

and mixed target date investors versus non-target date investors. In addition, pure and mixed investors

followed a distinctive age-based gradient or glide path, whereas equity shares among non-target date

investors followed a hump-shape by age.

Figure 1 here

            Table 4 summarizes portfolio characteristics for our three groups of interest and the entire sample.

Panel A shows the allocation of total contributions (employer and employee) by major asset class, including

cash or principal-guaranteed funds (including money market and guaranteed investment contract funds),

bonds, balanced or target date funds (including traditional balanced funds and static allocation or risk-based

funds), U.S. equity funds, international equity funds, and employer stock. Panel B indicates equity shares,

monthly systematic returns, and portfolio risk, Sharpe ratios, and nonsystematic risk. 26 Panel C summarizes

portfolio risk exposures.

Table 4 here

              Panel A indicates that non-target date investors held 22.3 percent of their portfolios in cash (i.e.,

money market instruments and guaranteed investment contracts), while Panel B shows they held an average

of 63 percent in equities. By contrast, target date fund investors invested substantially more equity: 80.8

percent for pure investors, and 76.1 percent for mixed investors. This difference produces higher market

risk exposures in Panel C: 61.6 percent for non-target date investors, 68.9 percent for pure, and 71 percent

for mixed investors. Panel B also indicates that, before controlling on other observables, target date fund



26
     Specifically,       NSR / TVi ,t = ^ idio
                                          i    /^ i.              We estimate the variance-covariance matrix for all assets     ^ , which in
turn is used to estimate the total portfolio variance for the ith participant, ^ .
                                                                                i
                                                                                                               ^ =^ '^ f^ +D
                                                                                                                           ^ , where D^ is a
diagonal matrix with elements computed as the square of the                        ^k estimated in equation (2).      The asset variance can be

decomposed into systematic risk,                    ^ sys = 
                                                            ^ '^ f^                            ^
                                                                        and idiosyncratic risk D
                                                                                                   idio
                                                                                                          . Individual portfolio variance is then
decomposed                     into                  its             systematic              and            idiosyncratic          components:
^ =         '
                      ^ =          '
                                             (   ^ ) = 
                                              ^ +D
                                              sys            ^ +
                                                           idio ^          sys    idio
                                                                                         .
 i         i , k ,t    i , k ,t   i , k ,t          i , k ,t               i      i
                                                                                                                     14


portfolios yielded higher monthly systematic returns (60 to 70 basis points versus 36 basis points for non-

target date fund investors), slightly higher monthly volatility (2.8-3.1 versus 2.7 percent), lower monthly

Sharpe ratios (13.1-15.5 versus 16.7), and substantially lower idiosyncratic or uncompensated risk (3.6-

12.1 versus 25.3 percent). The most notable result in Panel C, besides the market risk increase already

reported, are the sharply higher bond market and default premium terms, particularly for pure investors

where these exposures doubled (e.g., 0.201 for pure investors versus 0.096 for non-target date investors,

for the default premium).

           We also seek to determine how these portfolio metrics vary when controlling for observable

differences in plan choice architecture and participant characteristics. Accordingly, we estimate a

multivariate model of the following form:

         ,, =  +  +  +  +  +  + ,, (2)

where PORTFOLIOi,j,t is a vector of the five outcome measures of interest--equity share, return, risk,

nonsystematic risk and Sharpe ratio--and INVESTORS is a matrix representing the type of target date fund

investor (pure or mixed, with non-target date as the reference) and type of employee (new entrant, with

existing employee as the reference). PLAN and PARTICIPANT characteristics are also included as above

in Equation (1). 27

           Table 5 presents marginal effects for equity share, where Model 1 is as in equation (2), and Model

2 adds age interactions with target date behavior. Results in Model 1 indicate that, on average, pure target

date fund adopters held 24 percentage points more equity compared to non-target date investors, whereas

mixed target date investors held 13 percentage points more. Model 2 indicates that young pure investors

(those under age 35) had an equity share averaging 34 percent points above the reference category, while

older pure investors (those over age 55) had an equity share 7 percentage points higher. This implies an

increase in the difference of 26 points, underscoring the fundamental feature of target date funds, namely




27
     As in Equation (1), our models also control for plan-level heteroskedasticity ( i ), time fixed effects (  t ), and
industry fixed effects, along with missing data dummies. All models also include a financial crisis control.
                                                                                                                     15


their intentional age glide path. By contrast, among non-target date investors, the equity share was only one

point higher for young investors and 10 points lower for the older age group, a difference of only 11 points.

Table 5 here

         Table 6 presents estimated marginal effects for other portfolio characteristics of interest. Monthly

factor returns for pure target date fund investors were 19 basis points per month higher (equivalent to 2.3

percent on an annualized basis), while mixed investors were 14 basis points per month higher (1.7 percent

annualized). These are sizeable increases relative to the mean factor return of 44 basis points per month in

our dataset (5.4 percent annualized). It is also not surprising that pure (mixed) target date investors

experienced larger portfolio standard deviations by 32 (29) basis points, given their higher equity

allocations. Interestingly, predicted Sharpe ratios were statistically insignificantly different for target date

investors compared to non-target date investors, suggesting that target date adoption moved participants up

the efficient frontier compared to non-target date investors, in that they were exposed to more equity, higher

expected returns, and more risk. Yet non-target date investors ­ who principally owned diversified mutual

fund portfolios and cash equivalents ­ were also on the efficient frontier but at a lower risk/return point, as

noted in Table 4. 28

Table 6 here

         One other finding from Table 6 is the large impact of target date funds on nonsystematic risk as a

percentage of total variance. Idiosyncratic risk overall was around 21 percent of total variance across the

entire sample. For pure investors, diversifiable risk was essentially eliminated, with an estimated marginal

reduction of 27 percentage points; for mixed investors, it was substantially lower, by 13 percentage points.

These results reflect the index nature of the target date funds provided to participants.

         Finally, Table 7 compares factor risk exposures across types of participants. Given that plan

investment menus were dominated by diversified equity funds prior to the arrival of target date funds, mean

market exposure was already 64 percent. Pure (mixed) target date adoption raised this further, by 14 (9)


28
  80 percent of the assets of all investors were held in low-cost Vanguard mutual funds and trusts, including both
active and passive strategies, and the remainder in a range of non-Vanguard funds or trusts.
                                                                                                                     16


percentage points. The second most sizeable equity factor was value (HML), at 8 percent; both the pure

and mixed target date options raised the value exposure of adopters materially, relative to that 8 percent.

Another clear difference is the increase in exposure to bonds among target date versus non-target date

investors. For example, pure investors had nearly double the exposure to the default factor (10 percentage

point increase on a mean of 12 percent) and the term premium (7 point increase on a mean of 8 percent);

similar-sized effects apply to the term factor. Accordingly, target date funds extended participants out the

yield curve and boosted their exposure to corporate debt, while materially reducing their cash holdings.29

Table 7 here

         These changes represent an important change in 401(k) plan participants' portfolio choice: adopters

have moved away from the own-portfolio choice approach, to an environment created by the target date

fund managers and the employers who hire them. To illustrate the potential benefits of target date adoption,

a hypothetical 30-year-old participant earning $35,000 per year and saving 10% of wages would generate

retirement wealth of nearly $300,000 over a 30-year period, assuming the mean excess return of 5.4% seen

over our time period. At the end of that same period, the retirement nest egg would be an estimated 50

percent higher for pure investors, and one third higher for mixed investors, given a low-cost well-

diversified target date series such as that examined here. 30

         We cannot attribute these effects solely to the causal treatment by target date funds, because as

previously noted, there may be employer and participant selection effects. For instance, some employers

could have introduced the funds or designated them as defaults under automatic enrollment because they

felt that participants needed remedial portfolio help ­ for example, they may have held too much cash,

invested too little in bonds, been under-diversified, or failed to rebalance with age. Also, in voluntary

enrollment settings, participants could have selected target date funds because of the convenient retirement-


29
   This is consistent with anecdotal observations about inexperienced investors and their relative lack of understanding
of, and exposure to, the bond market (a bond market participation problem).
30
   This computation uses the mean return changes for pure and mixed target-date investors, respectively 2.4% and
1.7% annualized, from Table 5. We assumed 1% real wage growth, and importantly no leakage from retirement
accounts over the period; the calculations follow the end-of-period convention. Calculations are available from the
authors on request.
                                                                                                           17


date labeling which acts as an implicit advice feature, or the convenience of the age-based rebalancing.

Nevertheless, we are convinced that target date funds are associated with sizeable shifts in retirement

savers' portfolio risk factors and potential increases in future retirement wealth among adopters, relative to

non-target date investors. Moreover, as Tang, Mitchell, Mottola, and Utkus (2010) showed, adopters could

have "rolled their own" portfolios to mimic the age-relevant target date fund mix using funds available

prior to the inclusion of the target date funds on the menu--but chose not to until the introduction of target

date funds.



Conclusions and Discussion

         Retirement savers in U.S. 401(k) plans have traditionally been responsible for constructing their

own retirement investment portfolios, but the advent of target date funds has altered the playing field for

workers saving for retirement. We examine 880 retirement plans covering 1.2 million participants to

highlight key behavioral mechanisms shaping target date adoption, and in turn, how target date fund

adoption has substantively changed portfolio risks and returns among adopters.

         We have identified three distinct behavioral effects influencing adoption when target date funds

are introduced in either voluntary or automatic enrollment environments. One is an active choice effect in

voluntary enrollment plans: here, 28.4 percent of new entrants adopted target date funds in their 401(k)

portfolios, compared to only 10.2 percent of existing employees. The second is a substantial default effect

in new hire automatic enrollment plans: 78.7 percent of new entrants in plans with new-hire automatic

enrollment adopted target date funds, versus 28.4 percent in voluntary plans. The third is a default-related

endorsement effect: that is, in new-hire automatic enrollment plans, 21.7 percent of existing employees not

subject to auto-enrollment invested in the funds, double the rate of existing employees in voluntary choice

plans.

         We have also shown that retirement portfolios are dramatically altered when target date funds are

adopted in 401(k) plans, as demonstrated by important changes in portfolio risk-taking. For example, pure

investors adopting a single fund had a higher equity share (+24 percentage points), a sharper age equity
                                                                                                                     18


share gradient (+26 points), and higher factor returns (+2.3% annualized), versus non-target date holders.

Besides boosting equity shares for pure and mixed investors, target date funds also produced a distinctive

age-based gradient in risk-taking, compared to a hump-shaped equity allocation among non-target date

investors. We show that target date participants took on the factor exposures embedded in the target date

series offered by fund managers and selected by employers. In our data, that entailed more market risk

exposure, greater exposures to term and default premia, and reduced idiosyncratic risk. 31

         These changes are likely to be welfare-enhancing, under the joint assumptions that the target date

design represents an efficient portfolio frontier (selected by sponsors and fund managers), and that workers

without target date funds would fail to construct efficient portfolios or would select suboptimal points on

that frontier due to financial illiteracy and behavioral biases. One illustration of the potential welfare

benefits stemming from having higher equity exposure is that pure target date investors in a low-cost

broadly diversified target date series could potentially realize up to 50 percent more retirement wealth,

relative to non-target date investors. For mixed investors, the wealth increment could be up to 30 percent.

         Given these estimates of potential benefits, one might ask what plan sponsors and policymakers

might do if they wished to boost target date adoption among existing 401(k) participants. One approach

might be to use `reenrollment,' whereby the plan sponsors could transfer existing employees' investments

into age-specific target date funds (or any other default fund), with advance notification to employees and

the right to opt out. Reenrollment could lead to similar changes as outlined here for existing non-target date

investors. 32 Our results also point to the potential effects of providing low-cost, scalable investment advice

more broadly. That is, low-cost lifecycle investment algorithms such as target date funds or robo-advice

services 33 could potentially help reduce portfolio construction deficiencies in other settings such as retail

investment accounts or personal pensions, possibly reducing the heterogeneity of returns across households

(Campbell, Ramadorai, and Ranish, 2019).


31
   A similar result is reported by Keim and Mitchell (2018) who analyzed target date fund introduction at a single
firm.
32
   For more discussion of reenrollment, see Pagliaro and Utkus (2016, 2017b)
33
   See Agnew and Mitchell (2019).
                                                                                                     19


References
Agnew, Julie, Pierluigi Balduzzi, and Annika Sunden. 2003. "Portfolio Choice and Trading in a Large
        401(k) Plan." American Economic Review, 93(1): 193-215.
Agnew, Julie and Olivia S. Mitchell, eds. 2019. The Disruptive Impact of FinTech on Retirement Systems.
        Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Agnew, Julie and Lisa Szykman. 2005. "Asset Allocation and Information Overload: The Influence of
        Information Display, Asset Choice and Investor Experience." Journal of Behavioral Finance. 6(2):
        57-70.
Agnew, Julie, Lisa Szykman, Stephen P. Utkus, and Jean A. Young. 2012. "Target Date Funds: Survey
        and       Administrative      Evidence."      Working       Paper.      https://www.aeaweb.org/
        conference/2013/retrieve.php?pdfid=460
Ameriks, John, Dean J. Hamilton, and Liqian Ren. 2011. Investor Comprehension and Usage of Target
        Date Funds: 2010 Survey. Vanguard Investment Counseling and Research, Malvern, PA.
Ameriks, John and Stephen Zeldes. 2004. "How Do Household Portfolio Shares Vary with Age?" TIAA-
        CREF Institute Working Paper 6-120101.
Basu, Anup K., Alistair Byrne, and Michael E. Drew, 2011. "Dynamic Lifecycle Strategies for Target Date
        Retirement Funds." Journal of Portfolio Management. Winter. 37(2): 83-96.
Bekaert, Geert, Kenton Hoyem, Wei-Yin Hu, and Enrichetta Ravina, 2017. "Who is Internationally
        Diversified? Evidence from the 401(k) Plans of 296 Firms." Journal of Financial Economics.
        124(1): 86-112.
Benartzi, Shlomo. 2001. "Excessive Extrapolation and the Allocation of 401(k) Accounts to Company
        Stock." Journal of Finance. 56(5): 1747-1764.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler. 2001. "Naïve Diversification Strategies in Defined Contribution
        Savings Plans." American Economic Review. 91(1): 79-98.
Benartzi, Shlomo and Richard H. Thaler. 2002. "How Much Is Investor Autonomy Worth?" Journal of
        Finance. 57(4): 1593-1616.
Benartzi, Shlomo, Ehud Peleg, and Richard H. Thaler. 2007. "Choice Architecture and Retirement Savings
        Plans." SSRN Working Paper. July.
Beshears, John, James J. Choi, David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2018. "Behavioral Household
        Finance." In Handbook of Behavioral Economics: Foundations and Applications 1, B. Douglas
        Bernheim, Stefano DellaVigna, and David Laibson, eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 177­276.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Nellie Lang, and Scott Weisbenner. 2007. "Individual Account Investment Options and
        Portfolio Choice: Behavioral Lessons from 401(k) Plans." Journal of Public Economics. 91(10):
        1992-2013.
Calvet, Laurent E., John Y. Campbell, and Paolo Sodini. 2009. "Fight or Flight? Portfolio Rebalancing
        by Individual Investors." Quarterly Journal of Economics. 124: 301-348.
Campbell, J. and L. Viceira. 2002. Strategic Asset Allocation: Portfolio Choice for Long-term Investors.
        New York: Oxford University Press.
Campbell, J., T. Ramadorai, and B. Ranish. 2019. "Do the Rich Get Richer in the Stock Market? Evidence
        from India." AER: Insights. 1(2): 225-240.
Carroll, Gabriel D., James J. Choi, David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2009.
        "Optimal Defaults and Active Decisions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 124(4): 1639-1674.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, and Brigitte C. Madrian. 2004. "Plan Design and 401(k) Savings
        Outcomes." National Tax Journal. 57(2): 275-298.
Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2003. "Optimal Defaults."
        American Economic Review. 93(2): 180-185.
Choi James J., David Laibson, Brigitte Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2004. "For Better or For Worse:
        Default Effects and 401(k) Savings Behavior." In Perspectives in the Economics of Aging, Ed
        David Wise. University of Chicago Press: pp. 81-121.
                                                                                                      20


Choi, James J., David Laibson, Brigitte C. Madrian, and Andrew Metrick. 2006. "Saving for Retirement on
        the Path of Least Resistance." In Behavioral Public Finance: Toward a New Agenda, Ed
        McCaffrey and Joel Slemrod, eds. New York: Russell Sage Foundation, pp. 304-351.
Clark, Jeffrey W. and Jean A. Young, 2018. Automatic Enrollment: The Power of the Default. Vanguard
        Center for Investor Research. Valley Forge: The Vanguard Group.
Cocco, J., F. Gomes, and P. Maenhout. 2005. "Consumption and Portfolio Choice over the Life Cycle."
        Review of Financial Studies 18:401­533.
Dimmock, Stephen G., Roy Kouwenberg, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kim Peijnenberg. 2016. "Ambiguity
        aversion and Household Portfolio Choice Puzzles. Journal of Financial Economics. 119: 559-577.
Elton, Edwin J., Martin J. Gruber, and Christopher R. Blake. 2007. "Participant Reaction and the
        Performance of Funds Offered by 401(k) Plans." Journal of Financial Intermediation. 16: 249­
        271.
Goda, G., M. Levy, C. Manchester, A. Sojourner and J. Tasoff. 2019. "Who is a Passive Saver Under
        Opt-In and Auto-Enrollment?" NBER Working Paper 26078.
Huberman, Gur and Wei Jiang. 2006. "Offering vs. Choices in 401(k) Plans: Equity Exposure and Number
        of Funds." Journal of Finance. 41(2): 763-801.
ICI. 2019. Release: Quarterly Retirement Market Data, First Quarter 2019. Washington, DC: Investment
        Company Institute. https://www.ici.org/research/stats/retirement.
Iyengar, Sheena, Gur Huberman, and Wei Jiang. 2004. "How Much Choice is Too Much? Contributions
        to 401(k) Retirement Plans." In Pension Design and Structure: New Lessons from Behavioral
        Finance, Olivia S. Mitchell and Stephen P. Utkus, eds. Oxford: Oxford University Press: 83-96.
Iyengar, Sheena and Emir Kamenica. 2010. "Choice Proliferation, Simplicity Seeking and Asset
        Allocation." Journal of Public Economics. 94(7-8): 530-539.
Keim, Donald B. and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2018. "Simplifying Choices in Defined Contribution Retirement
        Plan Design." Journal of Pension Economics and Finance. 17(3): 363-384.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2007. "Baby Boomer Retirement Security: The Role of
        Planning, Financial Literacy, and Housing Wealth. Journal of Monetary Economics. 54(1)
        January: 205-224.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2011. "Financial Literacy and Retirement Planning in the
        United States." Journal of Pension Economics & Finance. 10(4): 509-525.
Lusardi, Annamaria and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2014. "The Economic Importance of Financial Literacy: Theory
        and Evidence." Journal of Economic Literature. 52(1): 5-44.
Madrian, Brigitte and Dennis F. Shea. 2001. "The Power of Suggestion: Inertia in 401(k) Participation and
        Savings Behavior." Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4): 1149-1525.
McDonald, Robert L. David P. Richardson, and Thomas A. Rietz. 2019. "The Effect of Default Target Date
        Funds on Retirement Savings Allocations." TIAA Institute Working Paper.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Annamaria Lusardi, eds. 2011. Financial Literacy: Implications for Retirement
        Security and the Financial Marketplace. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mitchell, Olivia S., Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus, and Takeshi Yamaguchi. 2006a. "The Inattentive
        Participant: Portfolio Trading Behavior in 401(k) Plans." Pension Research Council Working
        Paper 2006-05. Philadelphia, PA.: Wharton School.
Mitchell, Olivia S., Gary R. Mottola, Stephen P. Utkus and Takeshi Yamaguchi. 2006b. "Winners and
        Losers: 401(k) Trading and Portfolio Performance." Pension Research Council Working Paper
        2006-26. Philadelphia, PA.: Wharton School.
Mottola, Gary R. and Stephen P. Utkus. 2008. "Red, Yellow, and Green: Measuring the Quality of 401(k)
        Portfolio Choices." In Overcoming the Savings Slump: How to Increase the Effectiveness of
        Financial Education and Saving Programs, Annamaria Lusardi, ed. Chicago: University of
        Chicago Press, pp.199-139.
OECD, 2015. The OECD Roadmap for the Good Design of Defined Contribution Pension Plans.
        http://www.oecd.org/finance/private-pensions/50582753.pdf
                                                                                                      21


O'Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. 1999. "Procrastination in Preparing for Retirement." In Behavioral
        Dimensions of Retirement Economics, Henry Aaron, ed. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution
        Press and Russell Sage Foundation: 125-156.
O'Donoghue, Ted and Matthew Rabin. 2001. "Choice and Procrastination." Quarterly Journal of
        Economics. 116(1): 121-160.
Pagliaro, Cynthia A. and Stephen P. Utkus. 2016. Reshaping Participant Outcomes through Reenrollment.
        Vanguard Center for Investor Research. Valley Forge: The Vanguard Group.
Pagliaro, Cynthia A. and Stephen P. Utkus. 2017a. A Different Kind of Target Date Investor. Vanguard
        Center for Investor Research. Valley Forge: The Vanguard Group.
Pagliaro, Cynthia A. and Stephen P. Utkus. 2017b. Reenrollment: One Year Later. Vanguard Center for
        Investor Research. Valley Forge: The Vanguard Group.
Pool, Veronika K., Clemens Sialm, and Irina Stefanescu, 2016. "It Pays to Set the Menu: Mutual Fund
        Investment Options in 401(k) Plans." Journal of Finance. 71(4): 1779-1812.
Tang, Ning, Olivia S. Mitchell, Gary R. Mottola, and Stephen P. Utkus. 2010. "The Efficiency of Sponsor
        and Participant Portfolio Choices in 401(k) Plans." Journal of Public Economics. 94(11-12): 1073-
        1085.
Thaler, Richard and Cass Sunstein. 2008. Nudge: Improving Decisions about Health, Wealth, and
        Happiness. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Vanguard. 2019. How America Saves 2019: A Report on Vanguard 2018 Defined Contribution Plan Data.
        Vanguard Center for Investor Research. Valley Forge: The Vanguard Group.
van Rooij, Maarten, Annamaria Lusardi, and Rob Alessie. 2011. "Financial Literacy and Stock Market
        Participation." Journal of Financial Economics. 101(2): 449-472.
                                                                                                22




   Table 1. Target Date Fund Characteristics
                                                                                     U.S.
                               Equity                                  U.S.        inflation-
              Participant    allocation   U.S. stocks Non-U.S.        nominal     protected
TDF Fund      Age in 2010        (%)         (%)      stocks (%)     bonds (%)    bonds (%)      Cash (%)
  2055             20             90         63.0        27.0          10.0            0.0         0.0
  2050             25             90         63.0        27.0          10.0            0.0         0.0
  2045             30             90         63.0        27.0          10.0            0.0         0.0
  2040             35             90         63.0        27.0          10.0            0.0         0.0
  2035             40             89         62.5        26.8          10.8            0.0         0.0
  2030             45             82         57.2        24.5          18.3            0.0         0.0
  2025             50             74         52.0        22.3          25.8            0.0         0.0
  2020             55             67         46.7        20.0          33.3            0.0         0.0
  2015             60             59         41.3        17.7          40.0            1.0         0.0
  2010             65             49         34.0        14.6          40.4           10.7         0.4
  2005             70             34         24.0        10.3          43.9           17.9         3.9
 Income            75             30         21.0         9.0          45.0           20.0         5.0

   Note: Fund asset mix measured as of December 2010. Source: Authors' tabulations using
   Vanguard data; see text.
                                                                                                23




Table 2. Descriptive Characteristics of Plans and Participants

A. Plan Features and Participant Outcomes (% of accounts)

                                                               Pure      Mixed
                                                               TDF       TDF Non-TDF
                                                   All       Investors Investors Investors
Choice architecture features
TDF Default                                          52.0        72.1       64.9         46.3
New-hire auto enrollment                             32.9        49.5       27.4         30.1
TDF adoption
TDF investor                                         24.7       100.0      100.0          0.0
Pure TDF investor                                    15.7       100.0        0.0          0.0
Mixed TDF investor                                    9.0         0.0      100.0          0.0
Other plan features
N Funds offered (mean)                              25.6         24.5       24.4       26.0
Employer stock offered                              48.4         46.6       53.0       48.3
Loans offered                                       88.4         88.0       92.8       87.9
N plans                                              880          852        824        880
N unique accounts                              1,262,506      198,242    114,161    950,103


B. Participant Attributes (% of accounts)
                                                               Pure      Mixed
                                                               TDF       TDF Non-TDF
                                                   All       Investors Investors Investors
New entrants                                         19.7         54.5      24.2      11.8
Log account balance (2015$)                            9.9         8.1      10.1      10.2
Job tenure (years)                                   10.0          5.0       8.7      11.3
Young (%<35)                                         25.1         41.3      28.2      21.4
Middle (% 35-55)                                     59.6         49.3      59.2      61.9
Old (% >55)                                          15.2          9.4      12.6      16.8
Male (%)                                             69.4         65.7      69.3      70.2
Low HH income (% <$62.5K)                            31.0         37.9      27.0      30.0
Mid. HH income (% $62.5-$87.5K)                      26.7         28.9      26.9      26.2
High HH income (% >$87.5K)                           42.3         33.1      46.0      43.7
Low non-ret. fin. wealth (% <$7.3K)                  17.9         28.2      17.4      15.9
Mid. non-ret. fin, wealth (% $7.3K-$61.2K)           32.2         39.0      34.2      30.6
High non-ret. fin. wealth (% >$61.2K)                49.9         32.8      48.4      53.6
Financial crisis (% of year)                           8.1         8.6      10.1       7.8

Note: Source: Authors' tabulations using Vanguard data; see text and Appendix Table 3.
                                                                                                                                                                 24


Table 3. Summary of Predicted Effects of Plan Choice Architecture on Target Date Fund Adoption

                                                                 Probability of         Total
                                                                 TDF Adoption      Contributions to     Probability of     Probability of
  In percent                                                          (1)            TDFs (2)           Pure TDF (3)       Mixed TDF (4)

  Sample mean                                                          24.7               18.9                15.7                 9.0

  Choice Architecture
  I. Voluntary choice
        A. Existing employees                                          10.2                7.6                 3.9                5.6
        B. New entrants                                                28.4               27.4                14.5               13.2

  II. Auto enroll of new entrants to TDF
        A. Existing employees                                          21.7               18.7                14.1                7.9
        B. New entrants                                                78.7               73.2                74.9               17.2

  III. Summary of effects
        Active choice effect (IB v. IA)                                 2.8                 3.6                3.8                 2.3
        Endorsement effect (IIA v. IA)                                  2.1                 2.5                3.6                 1.4
        Default effect (IIB v. IB)                                      2.8                 2.7                5.2                 1.3



 Note: Predicted effects derived from model estimates appearing in Appendix Table 2 (Probit model of probability of adoption; OLS model of total contributions,
 which includes both employer and employee contributions; and a multinomial Logit model of pure versus mixed versus non-target date adopters), with all other
 variables held at sample means. `New entrants' are participants who enrolled with target date funds available in the investment menu; "existing participants" are
 those who enrolled prior to target date funds being introduced in the menu. Adoption effects are measured one year after first target date fund appearance in menu.
 Source: Authors' tabulations using Vanguard data; see text and Appendix Table 3.
                                                                                                                                                                 25


  Table 4. Contribution Allocations and Portfolio Characteristics of Participants in Plans Adopting Target Date Funds

  A. Contribution allocations (%)
                                                              Cash          Bonds       Balanced/ U.S. Equities International           Company
                                                                                             TDF                     Equities              Stock
  All investors                                                17.3             6.4          29.6         34.3            6.6                5.7
  Non TDF investors                                            22.3             7.7          13.7         41.9            7.7                6.8
  Pure TDF investors                                            0.0             0.0         100.0          0.0            0.0                0.0
  Mixed TDF investors                                           5.9             7.2          39.9         31.1            9.3                6.5


  B. Portfolio characteristics (%)                                    Six-factor CAPM, Predicted
                                                      Equity share         Monthly Monthly Risk Sharpe Ratio             NSR/TV
                                                                            Returns          ()
  All investors                                                67.0            0.44        2.75         16.2                  20.7
  Non TDF investors                                            63.0            0.36        2.71         16.7                  25.3
  Pure TDF investors                                           80.8            0.70        2.77         15.5                   3.6
  Mixed TDF investors                                          76.1            0.60        3.07        13.1                   12.1


  C1. Portfolio risk exposures
                                                            (Mkt)         (SMB)           (HML)          (UMD)         (Default)         (Term)        (RMSE)
  All investors                                              0.636          -0.011           0.084          -0.008          0.117           0.080           0.010
    New entrants                                             0.621          -0.024           0.086          -0.002          0.150           0.099           0.008
    Existing employees                                       0.640          -0.008           0.083          -0.010          0.109           0.075           0.010
  Non TDF investors                                          0.616           0.001           0.079          -0.011          0.096           0.065           0.010
  Pure TDF investors                                         0.689          -0.073           0.099           0.005          0.201           0.138           0.007
  Mixed TDF investors                                        0.710          -0.006           0.093          -0.005          0.151           0.103           0.011

Note: All of the following  differences are significant at the 1% level: new entrants versus existing employees; pure versus mixed investors; pure versus nontarget
date fund; and mixed versus nontarget date fund investors. Source: Authors' computations using Vanguard data; see text and Appendix Table 3 for variable
definitions.
                                                                                                          26


Table 5. Marginal Effects of Equity Share and Target Date Treatment

                                                             Equity Share         Equity Share
                                                   Mean
                                                                  (1)                  (2)
            TDF investors (%)
            Pure TDF Investors                     15.7          0.240 **              0.212   **
            Mixed TDF Investors                    9.0           0.126 **              0.116   **
            Young*Pure TDF Investors (%)           6.5                                 0.125   **
            Old*Pure TDF Investors (%)             1.5                                -0.139   **
            Young*Mixed TDF Investors (%)          2.6                                 0.062   **
            Old*Mixed TDF Investors (%)            1.1                                -0.043   **
            Choice architecture
            New-hire auto enrollment (%)           32.9         -0.017                -0.018
            New entrants                           19.7         -0.016                -0.022
            Participant characteristics
            Log balance (mean 2015$)               9.9           0.024   **            0.024   **
            Job tenure (years)                     10.0         -0.002   **           -0.002   **
            Young (% <35)                          25.1          0.046   **            0.010   *
            Old (% >55)                            15.2         -0.117   **           -0.100   **
            Male (%)                               69.4          0.032   **            0.032   **
            HH income low (% <$62.5K)              31.0         -0.026   **           -0.027   **
            HH income high (%>$87.5K)              42.3          0.015   **            0.015   **
            Wealth low (%<$7.3K)                   17.9         -0.028   **           -0.029   **
            Wealth high (%>$61.2K)                 49.9          0.025   **            0.024   **
            Financial crisis (% months)            8.1          -0.012                -0.010
            Intercept                                            0.445   **            0.458   **
            Controls                                                         Yes
            Observations                                                  1,262,506
            Number of clusters (plans)                                       880
            R-squared                                            0.151                0.158
            Mean of dependent variable                          67.0%                 67.0%

Note: Equity share is percentage of participant contributions direct to stock market investments. Controls
include plan-level controls for number of funds, employer stock, and loans offered. Standard errors clustered
at the plan level. * Significant at 5%, *** significant at 1%. Source: Authors' computations using Vanguard
data; see text and Appendix Table 3 for variable definitions.
                                                                                                                                                    27




Table 6. Marginal Effects of Portfolio Outcomes and Target Date Treatment

                                                                  Monthly       Monthly Risk       Sharpe
                                                        Mean      Return            ()              Ratio          NSR/TV
                   TDF investors (%)
                   Pure TDF Investors                   15.7       0.0019 *        0.0032 **      -0.0687          -0.2703 **
                   Mixed TDF Investors                   9.0       0.0014 *        0.0029 **      -0.0348          -0.1344 **
                   Choice architecture
                   New-hire auto enrollment (%)         32.9      -0.0014         -0.0010         -0.0722           0.0051
                   New entrants                         19.7      -0.0006         -0.0012 **      -0.0209           0.0225
                   Participant characteristics
                   Log balance (mean 2015$)              9.9       0.0004          0.0008   **    -0.0015          -0.0165   **
                   Job tenure (years)                   10.0       0.0000         -0.0001   **     0.0022   **      0.0015   **
                   Young (% <35)                        25.1       0.0002          0.0013   **    -0.0079          -0.0019
                   Old (% >55)                          15.2      -0.0006         -0.0041   **     0.0401   **      0.0440   **
                   Male (%)                             69.4       0.0003          0.0013   **     0.0089          -0.0033
                   HH income low (% <$62.5K)            31.0      -0.0004 **      -0.0011   **     0.0028           0.0182   **
                   HH income high (%>$87.5K)            42.3      -0.0001          0.0005   **    -0.0111   *      -0.0080   **
                   Wealth low (%<$7.3K)                 17.9       0.0001         -0.0009   **     0.0250   *       0.0224   **
                   Wealth high (%>$61.2K)               49.9      -0.0002          0.0009   **    -0.0182   **     -0.0148   **
                   Financial crisis (% months)           8.1      -0.0528 **       0.0006         -1.3855   **      0.0385   *
                   Intercept                                       0.0320 **       0.0286 **       1.0203   **      0.3548   **
                   Controls                                                                 Yes
                   Observations                                                          1,262,506
                   Number of clusters (plans)                                               880
                   R-squared                                        0.514           0.247          0.447             0.179
                   Mean of dependent variable                      0.0044          0.0275          0.1621           0.2069
Note: See text for definition of dependent variables. Controls include plan-level controls for number of funds, employer stock and loans offered.
Standard errors clustered at the plan level. * Significant at 5%, ** significant at 1%. Source: Authors' computations using Vanguard data; see
text and Appendix Table 3 for variable definitions.
                                                                                                                                                28


Table 7. Marginal Effects of Portfolio Risk Exposures and Target Date Treatment

                                        Mean      (Mkt)          (SMB)        (HML)        (UMD)        (Default)     (Term)      (RMSE)
    TDF investors (%)
    Pure TDF Investors                   15.7     0.135 **      -0.084 **      0.026 **     0.012 **      0.101 **    0.072 **     -0.002 **
    Mixed TDF Investors                  9.0      0.090 **      -0.015 **      0.013 **     0.004 **      0.050 **    0.040 **      0.001 *
    Choice architecture
    New-hire auto enrollment (%)         32.9    -0.018         -0.002        -0.011 *      0.002        -0.008      -0.005        -0.001 *
    New entrants                         19.7    -0.015          0.014 **      0.000        0.003 **      0.001      -0.003         0.000
    Participant characteristics
    Log balance (mean 2015$)             9.9      0.022 **       0.003 **      0.002 **     0.000         0.002 **    0.000         0.000 **
    Job tenure (years)                   10.0    -0.002 **      -0.001 **      0.000        0.000 *      -0.001 **   -0.001 **      0.000 *
    Young (% <35)                        25.1     0.032 **       0.005 **      0.011 **     0.003 **      0.011 **   -0.007 **      0.001 **
    Old (% >55)                          15.2    -0.100 **      -0.009 **     -0.013 **    -0.001 **     -0.010 **    0.012 **     -0.001 **
    Male (%)                             69.4     0.028 **       0.006 **      0.001        0.000         0.002      -0.004 **      0.001 **
    HH income low (% <$62.5K)            31.0    -0.026 **      -0.003 **     -0.003 **     0.000        -0.003 **   -0.001 *       0.000 **
    HH income high (%>$87.5K)            42.3     0.015 **       0.004 **      0.002 **     0.000         0.002 **    0.001         0.000 **
    Wealth low (%<$7.3K)                 17.9    -0.028 **      -0.002 **     -0.001        0.000        -0.003 *    -0.001 *       0.000 **
    Wealth high (%>$61.2K)               49.9     0.024 **       0.003 **      0.000        0.000         0.001       0.000         0.000 **
    Financial crisis (% months)          8.1     -0.004         -0.005         0.013        0.003         0.003       0.004         0.001
    Intercept                                     0.451 **      -0.048 **      0.065 **    -0.022 **      0.027 *     0.053 **      0.007 **
    Controls                                                                                  Yes
    Observations                                                                          1,262,506
    Number of clusters (plans)                                                                880
    R-squared                                     0.111          0.140         0.098        0.111         0.247       0.151         0.151
    Mean of dependent variable                    0.636         -0.011         0.084       -0.008         0.117       0.080         0.010
Note: See text for definition of dependent variables. Controls include plan-level controls for number of funds, employer stock and loans offered.
Standard errors clustered at the plan level. * Significant at 5%, ** significant at 1%. Source: Authors' computations using Vanguard data; see text
and Appendix Table 3 for variable definitions.
                                                  29


Figure 1. Equity Share by Age and Investor Type




Source: Authors' calculations.
                                                                                                                                                           30


Appendix Table 1. Year-by-Year Target Date Fund Adoption Patterns and Other Trends
                                                                                                                                                       Entire
                                     By Year                                                                                                          Period
                                        2003    2004      2005      2006      2007      2008     2009     2010     2011    2012     2013     2014    2003-2014
Default architecture
TDFDefault (%)                           0.0      8.0     14.9      29.1      70.5      84.6      66.9     93.5    80.7     80.3     14.7    72.1         52.0
New-hire auto enrollment (%)             0.0      0.1     26.5      43.2      38.1      37.7      35.5     45.2    31.9     2.8      11.6    36.2         32.9
New entrant (%)                         16.1     13.9     22.6      18.2      26.7      13.1       9.1     12.1    22.2     14.5     11.9    15.8         19.7
Other plan characteristics
N funds offered (mean)                  69.2     38.5     19.0      22.7      25.8      24.7      27.1     28.5    24.4     29.1     28.9    23.5         25.6
Employer stock offered (%)               0.0      7.4     58.7      45.3      56.3      54.0      51.5     14.2    0.0      0.0      84.0    0.0          48.4
Loan offered (%)                         3.5     56.7     88.7      96.1      94.1      83.8      91.2     98.8    92.7     76.8     97.1    95.8         88.4
SA enabled (%)                          100.0    60.9     28.8      32.3      63.3      74.0      86.3     81.9    87.7     79.0     11.9    70.4         55.4
Participant characteristics
Log balance (mean 2015$)                10.1      9.8     10.0       9.9       9.5      10.1      10.3     10.2    9.4      10.4     11.4    9.1           9.9
Job tenure (years)                       4.6      8.2     11.5       8.8       9.5      11.0      13.0     10.7    8.8      8.9      12.2    9.7          10.0
Young (<35, %)                          26.4     26.2     23.2      26.5      25.7      25.6      21.4     23.0    23.1     24.7     23.1    22.8         25.1
Middle (35-55, %)                       62.3     60.5     61.5      59.3      60.7      57.8      57.3     58.3    57.6     59.0     54.3    53.2         59.6
Old (>55, %)                            11.3     13.3     15.3      14.3      13.6      16.5      21.3     18.7    19.3     16.3     22.6    24.1         15.2
Male (%)                                30.9     62.6     59.4      72.6      75.6      65.2      71.3     77.9    64.1     60.6     79.6    69.1         69.4
HH income low (<$62.5K, %)              22.0     27.3     33.1      33.8      32.1      29.5      29.2     28.5    32.9     27.3     21.4    19.1         31.0
HH income medium ($62.5-$87.5K, %)      22.6     26.1     29.3      25.0      26.9      26.2      27.1     26.2    33.9     27.5     22.6    33.7         26.7
HH income high (>$87.5K)                55.4     46.5     37.6      41.2      41.0      44.2      43.7     45.3    33.2     45.2     56.0    47.2         42.3
Low (<$7.3K, %)                          3.4      9.1     15.5      19.7      19.7      18.1      18.8     18.9    33.7     20.8     18.7    21.6         17.9
Average ($7.3K-$61.2K, %)               16.4     23.0     31.9      31.3      34.9      33.2      35.9     32.3    31.3     29.8     26.7    32.4         32.2
High (>$61.2K, %)                       80.3     67.9     52.6      49.0      45.4      48.7      45.3     48.8    35.0     49.4     54.6    46.1         49.9
Financial Crisis
Financial crisis (% of year)             0        0        0         0         0         1/3      1/3       0       0        0        0       0            8.1
TDF adoption (% of accounts)
TDF investor                             1.7     10.1     19.5      25.4      26.5      29.0      21.2     40.3    51.2     50.5     12.2    37.4         24.7
Pure TDF investor                        1.1      6.8     11.3      16.4      18.0      16.5      13.0     24.1    35.8     40.4     5.8     22.2         15.7
Mixed TDF investor                       0.6      3.3      8.2       9.0       8.5      12.5       8.2     16.2    15.4     10.1     6.4     15.2          9.0
Observations
N plans                                   6       93       109       157       168       129       63       48       43      27       22       15          880
N accounts                             11,310   87,514   189,648   204,932   403,984   208,196   46,046   42,177   8,224   19,282   37,172   4,021   1,262,506
Source: Authors' computations using Vanguard data; see text and Appendix Table 3 for variable definitions.
                                                                                                                                             31


Appendix Table 2. Estimated Determinants of Participant Target Date Fund Adoption Patterns




Source: Probit model of probability of adoption; OLS model of total contributions, which includes both employer and employee contributions; and
a multinomial logit model of pure versus mixed versus non-target date adopters. `New entrants' are participants who enrolled with target date
funds available in the investment menu; "existing participants" are those who enrolled prior to target date funds being introduced in the menu.
Adoption effects are measured one year after first target date fund appearance in menu. Source: Authors' computations using Vanguard data; see
text and Appendix Table 3 for variable definitions.
                                                                                                                                                       32


Appendix Table 3. Variable Descriptions

                   Variable                                         Description
                   TDF adoption (0/1)                                =1 if employee contributes to TDF funds, 0 else
                   Contributions to TDFs (%)                        Percentage of monthly contribution invested into TDF funds
                   Pure TDF Investors                                =1 if employee only contributes to TDF funds, 0 else
                   Mixed TDF Investors                               =1 if employee contributes to TDF and non-TDF funds, 0 else
                   Equity Allocations (%)                           Percentage of monthly contribution invested into equity assets
                   Monthly return (%)                               Monthly predicted factor return
                   Monthly Standard deviation () (%)                Monthly predicted standard deviation of factor return
                   Nonsystematic risk/total variance (NSR/TV) (%)   Ratio of non-sysmatic risk of total portfolio variance
                   Sharpe Ratio                                     Ratio of monthly predicted factor return to monthly predicted standard deviation
                   (Mkt)                                            Weighted estimated coefficient of benchmark Mkt
                   (SMB)                                            Weighted estimated coefficient of benchmark SMB
                   (HML)                                            Weighted estimated coefficient of benchmark HML
                   (UMD)                                            Weighted estimated coefficient of benchmark UMD
                   (Defaultprem)                                    Weighted estimated coefficient of benchmark Defaultprem
                   (Termprem)                                       Weighted estimated coefficient of benchmark Termprem
                   (RMSE)                                           Weighted estimated Root MSE
                   Default                                           =1 if TDF fund as default in plan, 0 else
                   New entrants                                      =1 if employee began contribution after TDF introduction, = else
                   New-hire auto enrollment                          =1 if the month is after Vanguard TDF auto enrollment date; =0 else
                   N Funds offered                                  # funds offered in plan
                   Employer stock offered                            =1 if plan offers company stock; =0 else
                   Loan offered                                      =1 if plan offers loan; =0 else
                   Log balance (mean 2015$)                          Natural logarithm of balance in 2015$
                   Job tenure (years)                               Years of job tenure
                   Young (age<35)                                    =1 if employee's age<35, =0 else
                   Old (age>55)                                      =1 if employee's age>55, =0 else
                   Male                                              =1 if employee is male, = 0 else
                   HH income low (<$62.5K)                           =1 if HH income<$62,500, =0 else
                   HH income high (>$87.5K)                          =1 if HH income>87,500, =0 else
                   Wealth low (<$7.3K)                               =1 if HH wealth<$7.3k, =0 else
                   Wealth high (>$61.2K)                             =1 if HH wealth>$61.2k; =0 else
                   Financial crisis                                  =1 if month is between 200809 and 200903, =0 else
