                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            INEQUALITY, INFORMATION FAILURES, AND AIR POLLUTION

                                      Catherine Hausman
                                       Samuel Stolper

                                      Working Paper 26682
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26682


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We are grateful to Laura Bakkensen, Ash Craig, Paul Courant, Brooks Depro, Ludovica Gazze,
Daniel Hausman, Gloria Helfand, Nick Kuminoff, Michael Moore, Lucija Muehlenbachs, Steve
Polasky, Ed Rubin, Carl Simon, David Thacher, Chris Timmins, Kathrine von Graevenitz, and
various seminar and conference participants for helpful comments. We thank Jesse Buchsbaum
for excellent research assistance with pollution and amenities data. The authors do not have any
financial relationships that relate to this research. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Catherine Hausman and Samuel Stolper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Inequality, Information Failures, and Air Pollution
Catherine Hausman and Samuel Stolper
NBER Working Paper No. 26682
January 2020
JEL No. D63,D83,Q53,Q56,R21

                                          ABSTRACT

Research spanning several disciplines has repeatedly documented disproportionate pollution
exposure among the poor and communities of color. Among the various proposed causes of this
pattern, those that have received the most attention are income inequality, discrimination, and
firm costs (of inputs and regulatory compliance). We argue that an additional channel ­
information ­ is likely to play an important role in generating disparities in pollution exposure.
We present multiple reasons for a tendency to underestimate pollution burdens, as well as
empirical evidence that this underestimation can disproportionately affect low-income
households. Using a model of housing choice, we then derive conditions under which "hidden"
pollution leads to an inequality ­ even when all households face the same lack of information.
This inequality arises because households sort according to known pollution and other
disamenities, which we show are positively correlated with hidden pollution. To help bridge the
gap between environmental justice and economics, we discuss the relationship between hidden
information and three different distributional measures: exposure to pollution; exposure to hidden
pollution; and welfare loss due to hidden pollution.


Catherine Hausman
Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
735 South State Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
chausman@umich.edu

Samuel Stolper
University of Michigan
School for Environment and Sustainability
440 Church Street
Dana 3006
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
sstolper@umich.edu
    Pollution exposure has repeatedly been found to be disproportionately experienced by
the poor and people of color. This observation is the foundation of the environmental justice
(EJ) movement and a frequent subject of study in several social science and medical fields,
including sociology, demography, geography, urban planning, public health, environmental
studies, and economics.1 Research has documented a persistent statistical correlation be-
tween race, ethnicity, and/or income on the one hand and the siting of hazardous waste
facilities on the other.2 Beyond just the siting of polluting facilities, ambient air quality
itself has been linked to socioeconomic and demographic indicators.3
    Understanding the causes of disproportionate exposure in any given context is vital to the
design of policy to address it; different causes suggest different solutions. A few potential
causal mechanisms receive the lion's share of attention in the academic literature. First,
income inequality may cause poorer people to "select" residential areas where environmental
quality is lower. This willingness-to-pay based story (commonly referred to as "coming
to the nuisance") "continues to receive the most attention from economists interested in
environmental justice questions" (Banzhaf, 2011). Second, direct discrimination on the part
of firms or government, by race or other demographic factor, could produce inequities in
pollution exposure ­ indeed, some use the term "environmental racism" interchangeably
with environmental injustice (Mohai, Pellow and Roberts, 2009). Third, firms could choose
to locate in places where their costs (including labor, land, transportation, and regulatory
compliance) are lowest (Wolverton, 2009), which may similarly be where the relative poor
and/or minorities are more likely to live. This mechanism extends to encompass the case
in which firms follow a "path of least resistance," targeting communities with less political
power on the grounds of cost minimization (Hamilton, 1995).
    In this paper, we argue that existing research on disproportionate pollution exposure
underweights the importance of another channel: information. There are many obstacles to
accurate information about environmental quality and its benefits: companies and govern-
ments may have incentives to hide pollution, there are only so many pollution monitors, and
our scientific understanding of health impacts continues to evolve. If households sort into
homes based on information about environmental amenities ­ or even just other attributes
that are correlated with them ­ then missing or wrong information has the potential to
affect the empirical distribution of pollution exposure. Though the economics literature has
   1
       For examples from each of these disciplines, see Bullard (1983); Taylor (2000); Holifield (2001); Pastor
Jr., Sadd and Hipp (2001); Agyeman, Bullard and Evans (2002); Brulle and Pellow (2018); Mohai and Saha
(2006); Mohai, Pellow and Roberts (2009); Mohai et al. (2009); Banzhaf (2012); Mohai and Saha (2015);
Banzhaf, Ma and Timmins (2019).
     2
       Seminal papers include United States General Accounting Office (1983); United Church of Christ (1987);
Bullard et al. (2007).
     3
       See, e.g., Kriesel, Centner and Keeler (1996); Depro and Timmins (2012); Tessum et al. (2019).


                                                      1
documented widespread cases of limited information regarding environmental quality,4 there
has been far less focus placed on the distributional and justice-related implications of this
market failure. We provide exactly that focus: we investigate the relationship between en-
vironmental quality and income in a model of residential location choice that nests various
forms of limited or missing information. Perhaps most closely related is work by Bakkensen
and Ma (2019), who models heterogeneity in preferences for flood risk in a setting of limited
information and find that improved information provision would be progressive.5
    We begin by highlighting some of the many potential reasons why information about en-
vironmental quality could be limited or missing, as well as reasons to believe that households
underestimate, rather than overestimate, air pollution. We document a steady tightening
in U.S. air pollution guidelines over time as well, motivated by advances in scientific under-
standing of health impacts. The steady expansion of toxic release reporting requirements to
cover more chemicals also suggests that households have had limited access to information
in recent US history. These facts are consistent with the notion that households undervalue
the health impacts of air quality when choosing a home because they are not fully informed.
In addition, we show evidence from the health literature that households are aware of some,
but not all, health impacts of pollutants, and that households experience psychological biases
when understanding pollution impacts.
    We also document two instances from recent history in which underestimation of pollution
burdens disproportionately impacted low-income and non-White neighborhoods. First, we
show that neighborhoods with higher airborne lead concentrations had lower percentages
of White occupants just prior to a tightening of federal lead standards in 2001 based on
new epidemiological research on lead's health impacts. Second, we show that neighborhoods
near refineries had lower income levels and lower percentages of White occupants in 1999,
just before the publication of evidence that the refining industry had widespread unreported
emissions. In each case, an observable, "pre-existing" disparity in physical pollution exposure
was exacerbated by a lack of full information.
    We next show that, in the U.S., air pollution is co-located with other, more salient
disamenities ­ namely, intrusive land uses and noise ­ and that these disamenities are, in
turn, negatively correlated with income.6 These empirical facts imply that even if households
   4
      Among the many examples are Foster and Just (1989); Chivers and Flores (2002); Leggett (2002);
McCluskey and Rausser (2003a); Pope (2008a,b); Mastromonaco (2015); Moulton, Sanders and Wentland
(2018); Von Graevenitz, Romer and Rohlf (2018); Barwick et al. (2019); Bishop et al. (2019).
    5
      Another recent paper is also somewhat related: Bakkensen and Barrage (2018) model heterogeneity in
beliefs about flood risk, in order to study the dynamic of the relationship between sea level rise and coastal
home prices.
    6
      Here and throughout, we use "salient" to refer to disamenities that are easily discernable, i.e., readily
apparent. We contrast these with "hidden" disamenities, like some forms of pollution. In our setting,



                                                      2
are completely uninformed about air pollution, they will still tend to sort into houses in
such a way that yields relatively higher pollution burdens for low-income households. In
fact, controlling for land use and noise significantly weakens the strength of the statistical
relationship between income and air quality. This finding is consistent with a setting in
which households sort based on salient disamenities and then are unequally impacted by
non-salient air pollution.
    Motivated by the above discussion and empirical facts, we develop a model of the housing
decision near a point source of pollution, when air quality is not precisely known. Our aim
with the model is to provide intuition for how information failures impact both physical
pollution exposure and welfare across households, with a particular focus on how the impacts
differ across income levels. While this model focuses on income inequality; we later turn to
extensions applying to racial inequality. We assume particular functional forms for utility
and the pollution dissipation process, to show an intuitive comparative statics analysis with
closed-form expressions.
    Under a typical dispersion process for an air pollutant, and assuming people are un-
derinformed about air pollution, we find that: (1) low-income households are exposed to
more pollution; (2) low-income households are exposed to more hidden pollution; and (3)
low-income households experience greater deadweight loss from a lack of information. While
the first relationship is well-known, the latter two results are novel. It is noteworthy that,
in our model, even uniformly limited information can produce disproportionate pollution
exposure and welfare loss among the poor. This occurs because households sort according
to known pollution, which is positively correlated with hidden pollution due to the way
pollution dissipates.
    We generalize the model by allowing the consumer to consider other salient neighborhood
amenities (besides air quality) that increase with distance to the point source, and by relaxing
assumptions on the functional forms of utility and the price of air quality. In equilibrium,
households sort into different air quality levels based on their willingness to pay for positively
correlated amenities. We replicate the first two results from our more parametric model:
low-income households are exposed to greater pollution exposure and also greater hidden
pollution exposure. Our third result does not always generalize, although both the physical
pollution dissipation process and declining marginal utility will work towards the third result
holding.
    Our findings build on a long literature in environmental justice (in economics, see, for
instance, reviews by Banzhaf 2011, Banzhaf 2012, Hsiang, Oliva and Walker 2019, and
Banzhaf, Ma and Timmins 2019). Until recently, household sorting has been the primary
differences in salience across amenities arise out of limited information, not out of behavioral biases.


                                                      3
mechanism for environmental disparities analyzed in the economics literature (Banzhaf and
Walsh, 2008; Gamper-Rabindran and Timmins, 2011; Depro, Timmins and O'Neil, 2015).
However, the broader, multi-disciplinary literature highlights several other mechanisms, and
empirical research in economics has begun supplying evidence of some of these. Lee (2017)
proposes and finds evidence that differential moving costs affect households' ability to "flee
the nuisance." Timmins and Vissing (2017) find that linguistic isolation affects bargaining
power in mineral lease negotiations. Shertzer, Twinam and Walsh (2016) show historical ev-
idence that non-White neighborhoods in Chicago were more likely to be zoned for industrial
uses. Christensen and Timmins (2018) identify discrimination in the real estate market that
steers minorities towards more polluted areas. We add to this literature by providing theo-
retical and empirical evidence that implies unequal pollution and welfare loss from limited
information.
    Though our focus in this paper is on air pollution and housing choice, our primary finding
emerges generically from the relationship between salient and hidden amenities. As such, we
believe hidden disamenities have the potential to create income-based or racial disparities
in other contexts where information is likely limited, such as climate change mitigation
(Heal and Park, 2016), groundwater source selection (Kremer et al., 2011), and demand
for environmental quality in developing countries more generally (Greenstone and Jack,
2015). Our findings also contribute to an active, cross-field literature on the economics of
information (Hastings and Weinstein, 2008; Ehrlich, 2014; Kurlat and Stroebel, 2015; Allcott,
Lockwood and Taubinsky, 2019). That a disparity can be produced simply by information
that is uniformly limited across individuals stands out in contrast with existing work that
focuses on heterogeneity in information and its costs.
    In light of our findings, we argue that estimation of marginal willingness to pay for en-
vironmental quality (MWTP) ­ a primary concern in environmental and public economics
­ must account for informational failures. Much of the related literature has used an as-
sumption of full information in analysis of revealed preferences. When limited information is
mentioned, it is generally in the context of noting that estimated willingness to pay reflects
beliefs about environmental quality.7 We show that our motivating empirical examples can
lead to biased estimates of willingness to pay, and that the bias can go in either direction.
As such, we argue for the explicit incorporation of information about beliefs, along the lines
of what is proposed by Bishop et al. (2019).
   7
      One exception is Kask and Maani (1992), who model the hedonic price as a function of information
level and uncertainty.




                                                  4
1        Context and Empirical Motivation
The choice of where to live has substantial consequences for the level of environmental quality
a household experiences. At the same time, of course, the housing choice entails decisions
about many other characteristics of homes and neighborhoods as well. In making a decision,
the potential home buyer must trade off these many characteristics (number of bedrooms,
the presence and size of a backyard, quality of the school district, neighborhood air quality,
etc.), while considering her household budget and the cost of the house. To the extent that
information about environmental quality and its impacts is hidden or missing, households
may fail to choose their privately optimal home.
    In this section, we discuss reasons why households may face limited information, as well
as the potential consequences of this information failure for the distribution of pollution
burdens. Note that throughout this section, we present empirical facts primarily to motivate
the theoretical model that follows. Thus the empirical exercises are not intended to in of
themselves prove welfare impacts, but rather to motivate the assumptions needed for the
theoretical modeling that does allow for analysis of welfare impacts.


1.1        Misestimation of Pollution
There are good reasons to believe that individuals are not fully informed about local air
quality. Pollution is not always visible, nor does it always produce an odor. Moreover,
the government's air quality monitoring network is sparse. Economists studying the con-
sequences of this sparseness have primarily focused on the measurement of fine particulate
matter (PM2.5 ) (Fowlie, Rubin and Walker, 2019; Sullivan and Krupnick, 2018; Zou, 2018),
but Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) monitoring is even sparser for other pollutants.
In 2016, the EPA reported monitors in around 140 counties for benzene and toluene, 260 for
nitrogen dioxide (NO2 ), 320 for sulfur dioxide (SO2 ), 610 for PM2.5 , and 790 for ozone ­ out
of a total of more than 3,000 counties.8
    In many places, the public must therefore infer air quality based on what might be
observable to them: air quality at distant monitors, or a proxy such as the existence of a
potentially polluting facility nearby. The use of distance as a proxy has empirical support
from research on how people "perceive" pollution (Bickerstaff and Walker, 2001). A house-
hold might be aware that concentrations of pollutants tend to be higher close to highways
(Currie and Walker, 2011; Herrnstadt et al., 2018), airports (Schlenker and Walker, 2016),
industrial facilities (Currie et al., 2015), and power plants (Massetti et al., 2017).9 In the
    8
        These numbers come from the EPA monitoring data that we introduce and use in Section 1.3.
    9
        Some pollutants are transported across long distance; for instance, concerns about cross-state transport


                                                        5
first part of our theoretical exercise, we will assume that households cannot observe true air
quality and instead use distance to a point source as a proxy.
    In principle, information limitations could cause a household to underestimate or over-
estimate pollution exposure and its health effects. We suspect that cases of underestimation
are widespread in practice, and we offer several pieces of evidence in support of this. First,
consider the way science has generally progressed: scientists tend to discover new biological
pathways for damages, rather than finding new health benefits of emissions or ruling out
previously-believed pathways for damages. In the United States, industries can typically use
new chemicals until damages have been documented by the EPA ­ suggesting that, ex post,
the US tends to discover that exposure was worse than thought.
    In fact, environmental standards have for the most part become stricter over time, as
these new biological pathways for damages are discovered. Figure 1 shows historical changes
in EPA standards and World Health Organization (WHO) guidelines for various indoor and
outdoor air pollutants (limited to pollutants for which the standards or guidelines have
changed). In almost all cases, the EPA and WHO have revised their air quality guidelines
downward, reflecting new information about the toxicity of pollutants. As an example, the
EPA standard for ambient lead concentrations changed in 2008, from 1.5 µg/m3 to 0.15
µg/m3 , motivated by "important new information coming from epidemiological, toxicologi-
cal, controlled human exposure, and dosimetric studies" (EPA, 2008, p. 66970).
    Given that EPA guidelines and measurements are often the best source of information
relevant to the evaluation (and valuation) of environmental quality, it seems likely that
households have historically sorted into homes based on the EPA's underestimated health
effects of pollution. To the extent that households have their own knowledge of the science
on health effects, however, they are still unlikely to know about all biological pathways. For
instance, even when households are aware of the negative respiratory impacts of air pollution,
they are frequently not aware of negative cardiovascular impacts (Nowka et al., 2011; Xu,
Chi and Zhu, 2017). In addition, consider that some cognitive impacts have only recently
been documented by academic researchers (e.g., Bishop, Ketcham and Kuminoff, 2018); it
thus seems plausible that the public is not yet fully aware of cognitive impacts.
    Another reason individuals may underestimate pollution damages is that they may un-
derstand the hazards stemming from some but not all pollutants. For instance, they may
associate refineries with sulfates (the foul-smelling air pollutants that are released by refiner-
ies) but not with benzene, toluene, and xylenes (chemicals emitted by the refining industry
with developmental and/or carcinogenic effects). A 2019 report on California refineries iden-
of air pollution led to regulations on power plants. Even so, power plants are also responsible for nearby
deposition of toxics such as chromium, mercury, and nickel (Massetti et al., 2017).



                                                    6
                   Figure 1: Air Pollution Guidelines Have Become Tighter




              Note: This figure plots the changes in EPA standards and WHO guidelines for selected
              air pollutants. The left axis is used for all pollutants except lead and the EPA's ozone
              standard, which use the right axis. Some guidelines use the midpoint of a range; see
              Appendix Table A1 for the full range. For time frames (e.g., 8-hour standards versus
              annual average standards), also see Appendix Table A1. This figure plots only those
              standards and guidelines that have changed over time; for information on standards that
              have not changed, see original sources: WHO (2000, 2005, 2010, 2017); EPA (2018).



tified 188 chemicals emitted, with varying degrees of toxicity and varying levels of odor
(Riveles and Nagai, 2019). It seems likely that individuals are not fully aware of all of these
chemicals and their health impacts. Their optimization decisions will incorporate only the
impacts of those disamenities of which they are aware. Research suggests that awareness of
air pollution depends in large part on whether the pollution is detectable either visually or
by smell (Bickerstaff and Walker, 2001; Hunter, Bickerstaff and Davies, 2004; Xu, Chi and
Zhu, 2017), so that invisible and odorless pollution may go unnoticed by the public.
     Even for individuals who actively seek out information on chemicals, rather than sim-
ply relying on visual or other clues, underestimation of exposure may occur. It is perhaps
instructive that the count of chemicals that facilities are required to report has grown sub-
stantially over time. Figure 2 plots over time the number of chemicals listed in the EPA's
Toxics Release Inventory (TRI), which requires firms to disclose their use and emissions of
listed chemicals; the time trend is dominated by periodic, large expansions to the list.10
  10
     Note that the Toxics Release Inventory was created as part of the 1986 Emergency Planning and
Community Right-to-Know Act and, as such, was originally intended to increase the information about
pollution available to communities and decision-makers.



                                                         7
                   Figure 2: Toxic Chemicals Reporting Has Grown Stricter




                 Note: This figure plots the count of TRI-listed chemicals over time. The TRI
                 program is an EPA-run mandatory reporting program for chemicals with cancer
                 effects, other chronic health effects, significant acute health effects, and significant
                 environmental effects. The source is EPA (2017).



Before a new chemical is added to the list, it is plausible that either (1) households are
unaware of the existence of that chemical at a point source, or (2) they believe the chemical
is not harmful to human health. Indeed, Moulton, Sanders and Wentland (2018) show that
the addition of new industries to the TRI in 2000 changed home prices near the most toxic
plants, which the authors attribute to a change in beliefs about pollution levels.
    Even if a household knows which pollutants are bad, and how bad they are, it will still
misestimate pollution damages if true levels of pollution are not readily available. Firms,
however, may have incentives to deceive regulators and underestimate their emissions (Duflo
et al., 2013). While some emissions are monitored (e.g., SO2 emissions from power plants),
the EPA relies on self-reporting for other types of emissions (e.g., toxic emissions from
industrial facilities). Moreover, companies have occasionally been prosecuted for tampering
with monitoring equipment.11 At the same time, regulators may have incentives to obscure
true pollution levels through strategic monitoring (Grainger, Schreiber and Chang, 2018;
Zou, 2018) ­ for instance, in order to avoid being in non-attainment with federal standards.
    Lastly, behavioral bias may well contribute to underestimation of pollution and its dam-
ages. According to the literature on pollution perceptions, when individuals do report knowl-
   11
      Consider, for instance, a 2017 case against Berkshire Power Company and Power Plant Management
Services, Inc. (https://cfpub.epa.gov/compliance/criminal prosecution), or the case against Volkswagen
(https://www.epa.gov/vw/learn-about-volkswagen-violations).



                                                            8
edge that air pollution in general is damaging, they may still believe that their own neigh-
borhood is not heavily polluted (Bickerstaff and Walker, 2001; Brody, Peck and Highfield,
2004; Xu, Chi and Zhu, 2017). This has been termed a "halo effect" or a "halo of optimism."
    Estimation of pollution levels and associated health damages could, of course, go in the
opposite direction, and psychologists have pointed to instances where the public overperceives
the level of risk relative to academic scientists. For instance, researchers have argued that
the public experiences "dread" of the risk of a nuclear power plant accident beyond what is
implied by actuarial risk (Abdulla et al., 2019). As another example, cleaned-up hazardous
waste sites may continue to be "stigmatized" (McCluskey and Rausser, 2003b). There are
also cases where some members of the public overestimate risk and others underestimate it,
such as with lifetime radon exposure (Warner, Mendez and Courant, 1996). We do not rule
out upward bias in perceived pollution, but we nonetheless focus on downward bias in the
remainder of our analysis, since we believe that direction of bias to be more widespread.


1.2     Who Is Impacted by Limited Information?
What might be the effect of underestimation and undervaluation on the distributions of
pollution exposure and health effects? To provide some intuition, we present some empirical
evidence on the distribution of pollution exposure just prior to the revelation of new infor-
mation about air quality. First, consider the EPA's 2008 tightening of the federal ambient
lead standard. We might infer that prior to 2008, communities experiencing elevated lead
concentrations were not fully aware of the emerging information about lead's health impacts.
We have no reason to suspect that the public was more aware of lead's impacts than were
EPA scientists and regulators. As such, it is worth considering which communities were
experiencing the highest ambient lead exposure at the time of the EPA's standard change.12
    To do so, we assemble EPA monitoring data on annual average concentrations of airborne
lead13 as measured by the speciated PM2.5 monitoring network.14 We locate each monitor
in a 5-digit Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA) using latitude and longitude data provided
by the EPA and shapefiles from the 2000 Census. To these data, we add demographic
characteristics of neighborhoods at the zip code level from the 2000 Census. Descriptive
statistics are in Appendix Table A2; we note that the mean level of measured lead is well
below the new standard.
   12
      Note that our analysis here does not focus on the change in the standard's level per se, but rather is
motivated by the existence of new scientific information that caused the standard to change.
   13
      Lead exposure can also occur via soil or water contamination, so the air concentrations on which we
focus do not represent all forms of lead exposure.
   14
      The EPA's Chemical Speciation Network measures the amount of various elements (e.g., arsenic, cad-
mium, lead, etc.) in collected particulate matter.


                                                     9
    We regress each demographic characteristic on the level of airborne lead (logged).15 We
include fixed effects at the level of a core-based statistical area (CBSA), to compare resi-
dents of the same metro area with low versus high levels of lead.16 As we show in Table 1,
communities with high lead concentrations tend to have lower incomes, greater unemploy-
ment rates, a higher proportion of families below the poverty line, and a higher proportion
of people of color. Unsurprisingly, the standard errors are large; only 206 zip codes had a
monitor for speciated particulate matter in this year, and we are relying for identification on
CBSAs with multiple zip codes containing monitors (n = 95). Regressions in the Appendix
(Table A3) without CBSA fixed effects yield the same directional impacts, and much greater
statistical significance. If we instead use modeled lead concentrations from the 2002 National
Air Toxics Assessment, which cover the entire US, we obtain qualitatively similar estimates
with more precision (again, see Appendix Table A3).
    Overall, the results suggest that low-income communities and people of color have histor-
ically been most physically impacted by incomplete scientific information about the health
impacts of lead. To understand the welfare implications, one could next examine whether
households moved following the release of the new scientific information. However, strong
assumptions would be needed on (1) the degree to which (and mechanisms by which) the
public became aware of the new scientific information; (2) moving costs; and (3) other po-
tential confounders in the housing market over this time period. Rather than conducting
such an empirical exercise, we turn below to a theoretical model to understand the nature
of the resulting welfare impacts.
    A second empirical example illustrates how underreporting of pollution may affect the
distributional impacts of emissions. In October 1999, the EPA issued an enforcement alert
for the petroleum refining sector. The alert stated that an EPA monitoring program had
shown "that the number of leaking valves and components is up to 10 times greater than
had been reported by certain refineries," and that as a result, emissions rates of volatile
organic compounds (some of them hazardous chemicals) were substantially higher than had
been reported by firms (EPA, 1999). We can assess who is likely to have been most im-
pacted by this historical underreporting by investigating the characteristics of people living
near refineries prior to the EPA's alert. We thus obtain information on the location of US
petroleum refineries from the EPA's National Emissions Inventory (NEI). Specifically, we
   15
      We use lead data from 2001, representing an intermediate year between the 2000 Census and the 2008
standard change. Lead monitoring in 1999 and 2000 (i.e., more closely matching the demographic data) is
very sparse. Results using data from 2008 (i.e., at the time of the standard change) are very similar to the
2001 results; see Appendix Table A3.
   16
      Around 4.5 percent of the population is in a Zip Code Tabulation Area that does not match to a CBSA;
we drop these ZCTAs from our regressions.



                                                    10
Table 1: Demographic Characteristics Were Correlated with Ambient Lead Exposure in 2001



                                     Income, '000s    % Unempl.      % Below Poverty     % White      % Black     % Latino/a


 Log airborne lead concentration          -4.21           0.44             2.67          -11.72**       5.50         5.27**
                                         (2.60)          (0.43)           (1.71)          (4.57)       (4.09)        (2.40)


 Observations                             203            203               203              203          203          203
 Within R2                               0.04            0.02             0.04              0.10        0.03         0.07
 Mean of dep. var.                       37.07           4.80             13.18            74.61        16.37        11.98

Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from six separate regressions. The dependent variable is listed above
each column. Lead concentrations are logged lead in PM2.5 form. The unit of observation is a 5-digit Zip Code Tabulation
Area. Income is the median household income in the zip code, in thousands of 1999 dollars. Percent below poverty refers to
the percentage of families below the poverty line. Percentage White, Black, and Latino/a refer to the percentage of individuals.
Data source: Census for demographics; EPA for ambient lead concentrations. All regressions include CBSA fixed effects. ***
Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




analyze all zip codes with a facility in the 1999 NEI that was classified in SIC sector 2911
(Petroleum Refining); 210 zip codes had such a facility in 1999. Using the 2000 Census data
described above, we examine differences in demographic characteristics across zip codes with
and without a refinery. Note that the 2000 Census asks about income in 1999, i.e., at the
time the Enforcement Alert was published.
    We regress each demographic variable on the refinery indicator, including CBSA fixed
effects, to compare communities in the same metro area.17 Results, in Table 2, show that zip
codes with refineries in them had significantly lower income levels and significantly higher
proportions of non-White families and families below the poverty line. (We again show results
without CBSA effects in the Appendix, in Table A4.) Thus, it appears that the communities
most physically impacted by the historical underreporting were economically disadvantaged
and non-White. Again, one could examine whether households moved following this change
in information about refineries, but strong assumptions would be needed for identification.
Alternatively, one could examine price impacts. However, our goal with this example is not
to demonstrate that this particular incident reflected a large-scale environmental injustice ­
rather, our goal is to provide examples of some of the many instances in which households
may have underestimated risk, with differential exposure resulting from this information
failure. In Section 2, we turn to a theoretical analysis to understand welfare impacts.
   17
      The NEI dataset appears to classify some facilities, such as tank farms, as SIC 2911, in addition to
refineries. We perform a fuzzy string match to match EPA NEI facilities to petroleum refineries listed in the
US Energy Information Administration's (EIA) Petroleum Supply Annual. Regressions using the subset of
facilities that match to the EIA report (located in 137 zip codes, rather than 210) yield similar results; see
Appendix Table A4.


                                                                11
          Table 2: Demographic Characteristics Were Different Near Refineries in 1999


                                Income, '000s    % Unempl.      % Below Poverty      % White      % Black     % Latino/a


        Refinery in zip code       -4.01***         0.43**           2.07***         -4.29***      2.10**       5.90***
                                    (1.03)          (0.21)            (0.53)          (1.17)       (1.00)        (0.68)


        Observations                23,952          23,892           23,833           23,912       23,912        23,912
        Within R2                     0.00           0.00             0.00              0.00        0.00          0.00
        Mean of dep. var.            42.24           3.42             9.00             85.68        8.53          7.15

       Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from six separate regressions. The dependent variable is
       listed above each column. The unit of observation is a 5-digit Zip Code Tabulation Area. Income is the median
       household income in the zip code, in thousands of 1999 dollars. Percent below poverty refers to the percentage
       of families below the poverty line. Percentage White, Black, and Latino/a refer to the percentage of individuals.
       Data source: Census for demographics; EIA'S Petroleum Supply Annual and EPA's National Emissions Inventory
       for refinery locations. All regressions include CBSA fixed effects. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; **
       5% level; * 10% level.




1.3       Co-located Amenities
Above, we have suggested that households may sort on proxies such as distance to point
sources, or they may sort based on the most salient pollutants. Next we show that, even in
the absence of any information about pollution, households may engage in sorting behavior
that, to the econometrician, appears to be pollution-based. This could occur because of co-
located amenities. In the absence of information about air quality, a household will choose
the best (i.e., highest-utility) residential location based on other, more salient attributes.
For instance, suppose a household is unaware of the work by Currie and Walker (2011)
documenting the health impact of roadway congestion, and as a result, it does not take into
consideration differential exposure according to distance to highways or other busy routes.
At the same time, the household does know that highways are noisy and ugly. All else equal,
it would not like to live too close to the highway, wishing to avoid noise and wanting a nicer
view.18 Similarly, suppose a household is unaware that small airports are sources of lead
exposure (Zahran et al., 2017) but wishes to avoid airport noise.
    This thought exercise suggests that the correlation between these salient amenities (i.e.,
lack of noise and lack of an ugly view) and the hidden amenity (lack of health-damaging
air pollutants) is an important determinant of experienced environmental quality.19 To
shed light on this correlation, we assemble data on air pollution, noise pollution, and land
  18
      Von Graevenitz (2018) shows empirical evidence on the value of reduced road noise.
  19
      Here and throughout, we refer to "experienced" environmental quality as the true level to which a
household is exposed, as opposed to "perceived" environmental quality, the level which the household believes
it is getting.



                                                               12
use. From the EPA's monitoring network, we collect ambient concentrations of four criteria
pollutants ­ NO2 , ozone, PM2.5 , and SO2 ­ and two toxic pollutants ­ benzene and toluene.
As described above, these latter two compounds are emitted by the refining industry (as well
as other industries) and have negative developmental and/or carcinogenic effects. We focus
on benzene and toluene both because (1) refining has been a focus of the environmental
justice movement (Fleischman and Franklin, 2017); and (2) the monitoring network of these
chemicals is denser than is the monitoring of other hazardous air pollutants.
    We observe annual average concentrations by monitor for the year 2001 (which matches
the time period of our land use data),20 and we locate each monitor in a 5-digit ZCTA using
latitude and longitude data provided by the EPA. Unfortunately, even for these six criteria
and hazardous pollutants (which have the densest coverage in the EPA dataset), monitoring
is quite incomplete; we observe the fewest zip codes for toluene (215 total) and the most for
ozone (1,116 zip codes) in our analysis.21
    We collect data on one additional measure of pollution exposure, modeled cancer risk,
from the EPA's 2002 National Air Toxics Assessment (NATA). This measure takes emissions
data from the National Emissions Inventory ­ covering both point and nonpoint sources ­
and imputes cancer risk.22 An advantage of these data is that the EPA presents estimates
for every zip code, so we have broader coverage than for the measured pollution concentra-
tion data.23 Additionally, the variable aggregates the risk associated with many different
pollutants. A disadvantage is that the risk is modeled based on NEI emissions, rather than
measured in the way that concentrations of our six criteria and toxic pollutants come directly
from pollution monitors.24
    We merge these pollution exposure variables with noise and land use data.25 Noise
data come from the Department of Transportation's National Transportation Map. Like
  20
      In Appendix Table A5, we show results using pollution measures from 2016.
  21
      We provide coverage maps in Appendix Figure A1.
   22
      More specifically, the NATA uses NEI emissions, dispersion and deposition models, and an inhalation
exposure model (which includes components such as a human activity pattern database).
   23
      The EPA NATA data are at the Census Tract level. We match these to zip codes using a 2010 US
Department of Housing and Urban Development crosswalk. Around 0.2 percent of the conterminous US
population is in a ZCTA that does not directly merge with the NATA data; we drop these ZCTAs from our
cancer risk regression.
   24
      The EPA cautions that NATA should not be used for analyses such as "pinpoint[ing] specific risk values
within a census tract," but argues that the results "help to identify geographic patterns and ranges of risks
across the country" (Environmental Protection Agency, 2011, p 5) We use the NATA data in ways consistent
with the latter, but caveat our results accordingly. Interestingly, one of the reasons EPA provides caution
about NATA data is that they have, over time, provided "a better and more complete inventory of emission
sources, an overall increase in the number of air toxics evaluated, and updated health data for use in risk
characterization" (Environmental Protection Agency, 2011, p 6) ­ supporting our argument that historically,
pollution exposure has been (uninentionally) underreported.
   25
      Again, we use 2000 Census shapefiles to match locations to ZCTAs.



                                                     13
our estimates of cancer risk, our estimates of noise are modeled, rather than measured.
They are based on information about major roadways as well as airports, and "represent
the approximate average noise energy due to transportation noise sources over the 24 hour
period."26 Meanwhile, land use data are published by the US Geological Survey at the
Department of the Interior.27 The key variable is a land use classification ­ such as "developed
- high intensity," "developed - medium intensity," "water," or "wetlands"­ derived from
satellite imaging. We tabulate descriptive statistics in Appendix Table A2.
    We start by examining the correlation between salient disamenities (noise and ugly views)
and NO2 . NO2 causes negative health effects such as asthma and cardiovascular conditions,
and mobile sources (trucks and cars) are a major contributor to NO2 . Figure 3 plots NO2
concentrations against noise levels and reveals a strong positive correlation between these two
disamenities. Figure 4 plots NO2 against a zip code's proportion of land dedicated to high-
intensity development; the fitted relationship is similarly positive. From these two figures,
then, it is clear that a household wishing to avoid noise or to avoid high-intensity development
(perhaps because of visual disamenities) would also likely avoid high concentrations of NO2 .

                          Figure 3: Noise Is Correlated with Pollution
                          Exposure




                          Note: This figure plots the annual average NO2 level (measured
                          in parts per billion) in a 5-digit Zip Code Tabulation Area in
                          2001 against the transportation noise in that area (measured
                          in LAeq , roughly equivalent to decibels). Data sources are the
                          EPA and the DOT; see text for details. The black line shows a
                          linear fit. Roughly 400 zip codes have NO2 monitors.


    We next turn to regression analysis. Table 3 shows regressions of each measure of pollu-
tion exposure on the more salient disamenities of noise and land use. The pollution exposure
  26
      This description is from http://osav-usdot.opendata.arcgis.com/. We use 2018 noise data; data for 2001
are not available.
   27
      Specifically, we use the 2001 Land Cover 100 Meter Resolution - Conterminous United States, Albers
Projection data.


                                                       14
                        Figure 4: Land Use Is Correlated with NO2
                        Pollution Exposure




                        Note: This figure plots the annual average NO2 level (measured
                        in parts per billion) in a 5-digit Zip Code Tabulation Area in
                        2001 against the portion of the land in that zip code dedicated
                        to high-intensity development. Data sources are the EPA and
                        the USGS; see text for details. The black line shows a linear fit.
                        Roughly 400 zip codes have NO2 monitors.



variables are all in logs, as is the noise variable. The land use variables each represent the
percentage of the zip code's area that is dedicated to a particular land use. The omitted
category of land use is forest. We include fixed effects at the level of a core-based statistical
area in all seven regressions. These regressions are not intended to provide causal estimates
of amenities on pollution exposure. Rather, they are intended to show cross-sectional cor-
relations between ambient amenities and pollution exposure. The thought experiment that
they are designed to replicate is: if an individual were to choose one zip code over another
(within a metro area) based on the geographic variation in noise level and land use, what
is the typical level of pollution to which she would be exposed? Because individuals make
these decisions infrequently, we rely solely on cross-sectional variation.
    Column 1 shows that a higher level of the salient disamenity implies a higher measure
of pollution exposure. When an individual accepts a doubling of noise, she also accepts a
roughly 13 percent higher concentration of NO2 , statistically significant at the one-percent
level. Similarly, if she were to move from an entirely forested area to an area that was
entirely high-intensity development, she would experience roughly 60 log points more NO2
(or more than 80 percent), again statistically significant at the one-percent level. As one
moves from high-intensity development down to low-intensity development, the pollution
exposure drops. Wetlands and barren land have the lowest levels of NO2 , conditional on the
CBSA fixed effects and on a level of noise.
    Ozone shows the opposite pattern. Ozone forms from the interaction of two separate


                                                       15
                   Table 3: Pollution Risk is Correlated with Other Disamenities


                                        NO2         Ozone       PM2.5         SO2        Benzene      Toluene     Cancer risk


  Noise                               0.13***      -0.01**      0.06***       0.06         0.19         0.19        0.04***
                                       (0.04)       (0.01)       (0.02)      (0.06)       (0.14)       (0.15)        (0.00)
  Land use:
   Developed, high intensity           0.60***     -0.22***     0.28***        0.22       0.55**       0.69**       0.93***
                                        (0.11)       (0.03)      (0.04)      (0.17)       (0.26)       (0.29)        (0.01)
    Developed, medium intensity        0.35***     -0.12***     0.21***       -0.06       0.59**        0.49*       0.55***
                                        (0.10)       (0.02)      (0.04)      (0.16)       (0.25)       (0.28)        (0.01)
    Developed, low intensity           0.33***       -0.05*     0.10**        -0.01        0.29        0.88**       0.53***
                                        (0.12)       (0.03)      (0.04)      (0.19)       (0.31)       (0.36)        (0.01)
    Developed, open space               0.40**        0.02       0.14**       -0.03        0.36          0.14       0.51***
                                        (0.19)       (0.04)      (0.06)      (0.27)       (0.44)       (0.47)        (0.01)
    Water                                 0.32        0.01        0.04         0.25        0.54         0.33        0.27***
                                        (0.22)       (0.06)      (0.10)      (0.43)       (0.47)       (0.51)        (0.02)
    Wetlands                          -0.75***      -0.10**       0.14        -0.00         0.39         0.47       0.16***
                                        (0.22)       (0.05)      (0.08)      (0.34)       (0.42)       (0.46)        (0.02)
    Farmland                              0.07        -0.02    0.17***        -0.12        -0.17        -0.38         0.00
                                        (0.10)       (0.02)      (0.04)      (0.18)       (0.28)       (0.31)        (0.01)
    Barren land                          -0.61        0.12     -0.96***        0.26         0.28        -0.30         0.02
                                        (0.41)       (0.10)      (0.23)      (1.07)       (2.36)       (2.55)        (0.06)


  Observations                          408         1,049         980         465          216          208          23,328
  Within R2                             0.49         0.21         0.32        0.04         0.28         0.34          0.48

 Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from seven separate regressions. The dependent variable in the first
 six columns is log ambient concentrations; in the last column it is log total cancer risk. The unit of observation is a 5-digit
 Zip Code Tabulation Area. The noise variable is also logged. Land use variables are the portion of the zip code dedicated
 to that land use; the omitted category of land use is forest. All regressions include CBSA fixed effects. *** Statistically
 significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




types of chemicals: nitrogen oxides (NOx ) and volatile organic compounds (VOCs). While
human activity emits both of these pollutant types, vegetation is major source of VOCs
(Auffhammer and Kellogg, 2011). As a result, rural and suburban areas can have high levels
of ozone concentration.
    PM2.5 , however, follows a pattern similar to that of NO2 , with the highest concentrations
in zip codes that are noisy and more intensely developed. As with NO2 , the concentrations
decline as one moves from high-intensity development to medium- and then low-intensity
development. SO2 does not follow this clear pattern, perhaps because it is travels fairly far
(Burtraw et al., 2005). However, "the largest threat of SO2 to public health is its role as
a precursor to the formation of secondary particulates, a constituent of particulate matter"
(Burtraw et al. 2005, p. 257), so the PM2.5 results are arguably more relevant for the thought
exercise we are carrying out. Benzene, toluene, and cancer risk all follow a pattern similar
to that of NO2 and PM2.5 .28
   28
    In the cancer risk regression, there is a positive and statistically significant coefficient on both the water
and wetlands variables. Part of the explanation may be that ports and other industrial facilities are located


                                                              16
    Overall, across the seven regressions, we see that five major types of pollutants are
closely and positively correlated with noise and land use. The two exceptions are ozone
(which displays the opposite relationship) and SO2 (for which no statistically significant
relationship appears in the regression results). We take this as evidence that non-salient
environmental disamenities are co-located with more salient ones, and we study the effects
of this co-location in the generalized form of our theoretical model.


1.4     Co-located Amenities Explain Variation in Socio-Economic
        Variables
Before developing the theoretical model, it is worth briefly examining whether these co-
located disamenities are correlated with household sorting decisions. Using the income data
from the 2000 Census that we described above, we regress median household income at the
zip code level on four types of disamenities. As before, we include CBSA fixed effects to
compare households within a metro area.
    First, we regress income on PM2.5 , the criteria pollutant we described above that has
substantial health impacts. Column 1 of Table 4 shows that zip codes with high levels of
PM2.5 have significantly lower incomes. A ten percent increase in PM2.5 concentrations is
associated with a seven percent decrease in income. Similarly, zip codes with higher cancer
risk have significantly lower incomes. A ten percent increase in cancer risk is associated with
a five percent decrease in income (Column 2).29
    Overall, it is clear that two important measures of health risk from pollution exposure are
correlated with income levels in economically and statistically significant ways. Low-income
communities are exposed to more damaging pollution. Is this because ambient environmental
quality is a normal good, in line with the "moving to the nuisance" story?
    To answer this question, we next run a "horse race" by including noise levels and land use
variables in the regression. Specifically, we regress zip code level log income on logged PM2.5 ,
logged noise levels, and variables representing the portion of land dedicated to different types
of development as opposed to, e.g., forest. As can be seen in Column 3 of Table 4, the
magnitudes of the coefficients on PM2.5 and cancer risk are much smaller than in Columns
1 and 2, and they lose statistical significance. In contrast, high-intensity development is
associated with a significantly lower income level. This suggests that co-located disamenities
near water. Coverage maps in Appendix Figure A2 show where water and wetlands appear.
   29
      To ease comparisons across columns, in Table 4 we have limited the sample in all columns to zip codes
with information on PM2.5 , cancer risk, noise, and land use. This drops the many zip codes without a PM2.5
monitor. To avoid limiting the sample further, we focus just on these two pollutants, which have important
health effects. Regressions for additional pollutants are provided in Appendix Tables A6 and A7.



                                                    17
                      Table 4: Income is Correlated with Disamenities


                                                            (1)          (2)          (3)


                      PM 2.5 (log)                       -0.65***                    -0.15
                                                          (0.09)                    (0.09)
                      Cancer risk, per million (log)                  -0.45***     -0.12**
                                                                       (0.04)       (0.05)
                      Log noise                                                     0.06*
                                                                                    (0.03)
                      Land use:
                       Developed, high intensity                                   -0.87***
                                                                                     (0.10)
                       Developed, medium intensity                                 -0.61***
                                                                                     (0.09)
                       Developed, low intensity                                     -0.19**
                                                                                     (0.09)
                       Developed, open space                                           0.07
                                                                                     (0.12)
                       Water                                                       -0.85***
                                                                                     (0.22)
                       Wetlands                                                       -0.18
                                                                                     (0.18)
                       Farmland                                                       -0.00
                                                                                     (0.09)
                       Barren land                                                 -1.42***
                                                                                     (0.49)


                      Observations                          980         980          980
                      Within R2                             0.09        0.17         0.39

                    Note: This table reports estimates and standard errors from three sepa-
                    rate regressions. The dependent variable in all columns is logged median
                    household income in 1999. The unit of observation is a 5-digit Zip Code
                    Tabulation Area. The noise, PM 2.5, and cancer risk variables are also
                    logged. Land use variables are the portion of the zip code dedicated to
                    that land use; the omitted category of land use is forest. All regressions
                    include CBSA fixed effects. All three columns restrict the sample to zip
                    codes with PM 2.5, cancer risk, noise, and land use data. *** Statisti-
                    cally significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




may be playing an important role in the decision of households of where to live.
    In the Appendix (Table A8), we show that similar results hold if one instead considers
sorting by race: in regressions of the portion of a zip code that is White on either PM2.5 or
on cancer risk, we estimate negative and statistically significance effects. However, in the
horse race regression, these coefficients' magnitudes again drop, while the coefficients on land
use are large and statistically significant. We also see similar results when the dependent
variable is home values and when the dependent variable is monthly renter costs. Overall,
much of the correlation between socio-economic variables and pollution is explained by land
use. Importantly, we note that households may still have a positive willingness to pay for
ambient environmental quality, because the small coefficients on PM2.5 and cancer risk in


                                                       18
the horse race regressions could reflect a lack of information rather than a lack of willingness
to pay.
    In summary, we have documented evidence, both from the existing literature and our
own empirical analysis, on the limited nature of information about local air quality and its
consequences. We highlight three stylized facts from this body of evidence. First, infor-
mation about pollution is generally incomplete, in stark contrast to the assumptions made
in many housing demand papers. Second, households likely underestimate the true level of
pollution exposure they face, or the health impacts of such pollution exposure. Moreoever,
we show two cases where this underestimation physically impacts low-income communities
disproportionately. Third, air pollution is generally co-located with more salient disamenities
like noise and intrusive land use. We use all of these stylized facts in the next two sections,
where we introduce and analyze our model. Our empirical exercises do not, on their own,
allow us to evaluate the welfare impacts of limited information and co-located amenities. A
comprehensive empirical exercise analyzing welfare changes would require strong assump-
tions on the exact level of information before and after a policy change and would need to
disentangle the change in information from other changes in the housing market. It would
also need to account for stickiness arising from moving costs. Instead, we turn to theoretical
models to understand the nature of the welfare impacts.


2        A Stylized Model of Location Choice
We begin with a simplified model of housing demand under limited information, drawing
on our previous discussion of pollution perception and misinformation. The model is fairly
standard in that it depicts a household optimizing over the choice of air quality and a
numeraire representing all other goods, given a budget constraint. We alter this setup to
capture the information limitation in which we are interested: the household cannot observe
air quality directly and instead uses distance to a point source as a proxy.30 We derive
demand for distance, i.e., air quality, under full information, and then we compare it with
what happens when the household underestimates the added utility gained by moving further
from the pollution source. As we noted in the previous section, this could occur, for example,
through underreporting by the point source or a lack of knowledge about the health impacts
    30
      Because we model housing demand as demand for distance, our model shares many features with a
monocentric city model in an Alonso-Muth-Mills framework. The primary differences are that (1) we are
interested in distance to a polluter (such that distance brings positive utility) rather than to a central business
district (such that distance brings commuting costs); and (2) we focus on income heterogeneity, whereas the
simplest monocentric city models begin with homogenous income. Income sorting in monocentric city models
is discussed in Arnott (2011) and Duranton and Puga (2015) and citations therein.



                                                        19
of pollution.
    In this section, we will assume a parameterization of the utility function, a parameteri-
zation of the physical pollution dissipation process, and a simplified housing price function.
After working through this more specific model, we present a more generalized model in the
next section that does not assume particular functional forms for demand, pollution dissi-
pation, and housing prices. This generalized model also incorporates the context in which
there are salient amenities that are co-located with environmental quality.
    Suppose a consumer gets utility from two goods:

    · q healthiness, a function of air quality. However, q is not directly observable by the
      consumer (nor by other market participants). Instead, the consumer has a belief about
      the level of q in a location, based on what is observable: distance x to the source of
      pollution.31 Thus, q is a function of x and exogenous parameters like the amount of
      pollution emitted at the point source.

    · y all other goods, both housing (e.g., square footage) and non-housing (e.g., cheese-
      burgers).32

Here we have collapsed the impact of the point source on pollution and the impact of pollution
on health into a single function, as the distinction is not important for our purposes. As
such, we refer to q throughout as "healthiness" and "air quality" interchangeably.
    In this section, we assume Cobb-Douglas preferences: U (q, y ) = q  y 1- . It is important
to note that, even though the consumer infers rather than observes the level of q at the
time she makes her decision, the true value of q is what ultimately impacts her utility. For
instance, she may immediately experience health impacts such as asthma, without knowing
that the asthma was caused by q . Or she may experience a delayed health impact such as
cancer. We are not the first to allow for an input into the utility function that is unobservable
to the agent (Foster and Just, 1989; Leggett, 2002; Just, Hueth and Schmitz, 2004).33
    The next component of the model is pollution decay: the relationship between emissions
and ambient air quality at different distances. A large literature has found that pollution
tends to decay exponentially with distance to its source. Much of this literature comes from
the environmental sciences (Hu et al., 1994; Rooarda-Knape et al., 1999; Zhu et al., 2002;
  31
      We consider proxies other than distance in the more generalized model that follows.
  32
      Note that here the numeraire embeds all housing characteristics other than pollution exposure ­ so that
we are implicitly assuming that other characteristics are not correlated with distance to the point source.
In the more generalized model that follows, we allow for additional characteristics that are correlated with
distance and therefore pollution exposure.
   33
      For a lengthier discussion of utility and preferences in the context of limited information, see Hausman
(2012).



                                                     20
                             Figure 5: Exponential Decay of Pollution




              Note: This figure plots the function C (x) =  +  exp(-x/k) for two levels of  : low
              0 and high 1 . Pollution is higher in  , and especially higher at small distances; put
              differently, air quality is lower in  , and especially lower at small distances.



Karner, Eisinger and Niemeier, 2010; Apte et al., 2017), but Currie et al. (2015) also doc-
ument such a relationship using econometric methods. Numerous airborne pollutants have
been evaluated, including criteria pollutants such as PM and NO2 and toxic pollutants such
as benzene. Additionally, while we focus here on pollution as the variable of interest, a sim-
ilar relationship has been found for health outcomes such as low birthweight and premature
birth (Currie and Walker, 2011).
    Figure 5 shows a typical pollution decay function, in which ambient pollution concentra-
tion C is a function of distance x: C (x) =  +  exp(-x/k ), where "the urban background
parameter  represents concentrations far-from-highway..., the near-road parameter  rep-
resents the concentration increment resulting from proximity to the highway, and the decay
parameter k governs the spatial scale over which concentrations relax to " (Apte et al.,
2017, p 7004). This particular quote is from research on roadways, but note that similar
decay has been found for other sources.
    We can re-write air quality q , i.e., the absence of pollution, as q (x) = ~ -  exp(-x/k ).
With this type of pollution dissipation, the effect of the near-source parameter  declines
                                           q            q
with distance x. Formally, note that          < 0 and x    > 0; air quality decreases with the
                                                                                   2q
near-source parameter and increases with distance, respectively. Furthermore, x         > 0; the
marginal effect of distance on air quality rises in  . An alternative interpretation is that the
negative impact of  gets closer to zero as distance increases.

                                                       21
    For intuition regarding the partial derivatives, consider the case where firms are hiding
their emissions, i.e., are misleading the public about the magnitude of the parameter  .
                                                                       q
Then, air quality everywhere is worse than the public believes (since    < 0) and air quality
                                         2
                                         q
is especially worse close to the firm ( x  > 0).
    To ease calculations in the model, we simplify this exponential decay process by taking
a linear approximation. Specifically, we assume that healthiness from air quality improves
with distance according to the following equation:34

                                          q = 0 - 1  + x                                              (1)

A larger  parameter lowers air quality, while also increasing the importance of distance for
air quality. For instance,  could represent the amount of pollution actually emitted by a
point source. Alternatively,  could represent the impact that a given level of pollution has
                                                                         q        q
on an individual's health. Note that, as in the exponential version,        < 0; x   > 0; and
 2q
x
     > 0.
    Figure 6 plots healthiness as a function of distance for two possible values of  . We
highlight two points about this function. First, air quality is linear in distance. In reality,
pollution dissipation is non-linear, as is the pollution-health dose response function. We
think of our linear parameterization as a starting point that provides a useful approximation
for small changes in distance. Second, the two lines depicted in Figure 6 cross at some
distance threshold, past which a larger  increases air quality. In the model that follows, we
assume that a household is living close enough to the point source that this case does not
occur.35
    The consumer's maximization problem is

                                 max U (q (x), y ) s.t. px + y = m                                    (2)
                                  x,y


where p is the price of distance, the price of y is normalized to one, and m is income. Here, we
assume that house price is linear in distance to the point source.36 We also assume that the
price schedule does not shift in response to changes in information; this assumption is most
appropriate when only a small number of households experience changes in information. In
Section 2.3, we relax these assumptions by allowing for endogenous prices in a pure exchange
economy.
  34
      This equation follows from a Taylor expansion of q (x) = ~ -  exp(-x/k ).
  35                                           q
      That is, we assume that x < 1 , so that     = -1 + x < 0.
   36
      House prices that increase with distance could arise from a standard hedonic model, as in Greenstone
(2017).



                                                   22
                  Figure 6: Environmental Quality Increases with Distance




              Note: This figure plots the function q = 0 - 1  + x for two levels of  : low 0 and
              high 1 . 0 and 1 values are identical for the two functions. Air quality is lower in 
              within this range, and especially lower at small distances.



    Because the consumer doesn't observe q , she doesn't incorporate it directly in her maxi-
mization problem. Instead she maximizes over what she can observe, by making an assump-
tion about the relationship between q and x. Under full information, the consumer knows
the true value of the  parameter that relates q and x, which we denote 1 . In contrast,
under limited information she believes that the parameter takes some perceived value 0 .
We assume that 0 < 1 (i.e., distance matters more for true utility than the consumer is
aware), but of course one could solve the model under the opposite assumption. So her true
utility is determined by the true air quality q (x, 1 ), but when misinformed, she will choose
x to maximize utility assuming q (x, 0 ).


2.1    Demand for Environmental Quality
We solve the consumer's utility maximization problem to obtain the demand for distance.
We begin by assuming the household correctly perceives the relationship between distance
and air quality. As we show in the Appendix (Section A2.1), demand for distance is given
by:
                                   m (1 -  )(0 - 1  )
                              x =     -                                              (3)
                                    p           




                                                      23
This is similar to the typical Cobb-Douglas demand equation, but with a linear shifter that
depends on preferences and on the relationship between air quality and distance.
    From this demand equation, it is straightforward to see that distance from the point
                                              q                    q 
source is a normal good: x m
                               = p
                                   > 0. Since x                          
                                                 =  , we have that m = p > 0: air quality

is also a normal good. This occurs because low-income households choose less distance to
the pollution source, due to their budget constraint. This result provides the basis for one
potential definition of an environmental injustice or disparity:

Environmental Justice Metric 1. Low-income households experience lower environmental
                                                                
quality, i.e., environmental quality is increasing in income: q
                                                              m
                                                                 > 0.

    This is the metric referred to in much of the economics literature on disproportionate
siting and pollution exposure. Environmental justice researchers have pointed to correlations
between air quality and income as evidence of the existence of an injustice.37 Economists have
frequently countered that low-income households have chosen to sort into neighborhoods
with low air quality, that is, to "move to the nuisance." The condition for EJ Metric 1
is the mathematical foundation of the policy prescription that economists tend to propose:
redistribution of income, rather than direct intervention in the housing market. Here and
throughout, our metrics do not imply a particular policy prescription on our part. Rather,
we wish to formalize existing concepts used in the literature, which we believe will allow for
more fruitful dialogue across disciplines going forward.
    This policy debate in part reflects underlying questions about whether the disparity is also
an injustice. In this paper, we generally refer to disparities and inequalities when outcomes
across individuals are different. We use the term "environmental injustice" in keeping with
a long-standing literature and social movement. We leave to the reader's judgment whether
the disparities we document fit the definition of an injustice, noting that the answer may
vary across contexts. The cause of income inequality may matter, such as whether it is in
part the result of racism or other discrimination. See, for example, Deaton (2013) for a
related debate on health inequalities and injustices.


2.2     Misinformation and Experienced Air Quality
Suppose now that the household misperceives  , believing it to be lower than it truly is.
She thus believes that air quality is higher than it really is, and that distance matters less
than it truly does. In this case, households experience worse air quality than they expect
regardless of income level. However, the amount of hidden pollution experienced varies across
  37
     Note that our model has thus far only incorporated income-based inequality. In Section 4, we discuss
extensions that apply to racial inequality.


                                                   24
                        Figure 7: Misinformation Regarding Air Quality




              Note: This figure plots the function q = 0 - 1  + x for perceived air quality (the dashed
              black line with a low  ) versus experienced air quality (the grey line with a high  ). The
              point A is the perceived air quality for a low-income household, and B the experienced
              air quality for that same household. C and D give believed and experienced air quality,
              respectively, for a high-income household.



households. We show this in Figure 7, which depicts perceived and experienced air quality
as a function of distance.
    A relatively lower-income household selects a distance x that yields perceived air quality
at point A. However, because air quality is worse than the household believes, it experi-
ences true air quality B. Because air quality is a normal good, the relatively higher-income
household chooses a greater distance, believing it has chosen air quality at point C but
in reality experiencing air quality at point D. Crucially, because of the physical pollution
dissipation process, the wedge between true and believed air quality is larger for the low-
income household than for the high-income household. This provides the basis for our second
environmental justice metric:

Environmental Justice Metric 2. Low-income households experience a greater hidden
level of pollution, i.e., the amount of hidden pollution is decreasing in income.

   EJ Metric 2 holds if:

                                  d (|q (x(0 ), 1 ) - q (x(0 ), 0 )|)
                                                                      < 0.                                 (4)
                                                 dm

The household experiences air quality q (x(0 ), 1 ), in which x is chosen as a function of 0

                                                         25
but translates into air quality (which impacts utility) as a function of 1 . In contrast, the
household has chosen x assuming 0 and believing it translates into air quality as a function
of 0 . We have written the metric in absolute value terms because, recalling that the amount
of hidden air quality is negative (the amount of hidden pollution is positive) ­ see Figure 7
­ we find that all households experience a negative amount of hidden air quality, and that
this amount is smaller in absolute value for high-income households.
    It is easy to see graphically that this holds in Figure 7, implying the existence of this kind
of environmental disparity. We provide a proof using the expressions for q (x(0 ), 1 ) and
q (x(0 ), 0 ) in the Appendix (Section A2.2). This metric incorporates some of the intuition
that one sees in advocacy reports, which sometimes argue that low-income households have
experienced greater levels of hidden pollution when, for instance, firms do not initially reveal
the full extent of their emissions or regulatory oversight is weak (United Church of Christ,
1987). Note that whether the disparity implies an injustice may depend in part on the cause
of hidden pollution ­ such illegal behavior by firms versus a function of lack of scientific
information.
    The second environmental justice metric is illuminating, but it is incomplete in two ways.
First, it is in units of physical pollution exposure, rather than in utility terms. Second,
a more appropriate counterfactual might be not to compare experienced air quality and
perceived air quality, but rather experienced air quality and the optimal air quality that
the household would have chosen, given full information. That is, whereas EJ Metric 2
compares q (x(0 ), 1 ) to q (x(0 ), 0 ), we might care more about a comparison between utility
associated with q (x(0 ), 1 ) and utility associated with q (x(1 ), 1 ). We thus turn to an
analysis that allows households to re-optimize all of their consumption decisions in response
to full information and then calculates the utility gain associated with that ability to fully
optimize.
    Recall that the demand for distance is given by (Equation 3)

                                      m (1 -  )(0 - 1  )
                                x =     -
                                      p         

for whatever  the household perceives, and that the true relationship between distance and
air quality is given by (Equation 1)

                                      q = 0 - 1 1 + 1 x

Substituting the expression for x into the expression for q , we can write optimal air quality




                                               26
under full information, which we denote q  , as

                                                    m (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 )
             q  = q (1 , x (1 )) = 0 - 1 1 + 1        -                                    (5)
                                                    p         1

In contrast, the chosen air quality under limited information, which we denote q  , is given
by
                                                   m (1 -  )(0 - 1 0 )
              q  = q (1 , x (0 )) = 0 - 1 1 + 1        -                                 (6)
                                                    p            0
Here x denotes the consumer's chosen distance under limited information, i.e., what she
believes to be the optimal distance given her information set. The difference between the
optimal and experienced level of air quality is q  - q  = (1- )(0 -1 1 )(1 -0 )
                                                                   0
                                                                                > 0. Under the
simplifying assumptions we have made, we see that all households would have re-optimized
to a higher level of air quality q  , and the amount by which they would have changed their
air quality purchase (q  - q  ) does not depend on income.
    Lost air quality leads to deadweight loss, and we next explore whether the level of that
utility loss varies with income. The difference in utility under full information and under
limited information for any household is given by:

                              U = (q  ) (y  )1- - (q  ) (y  )1-                            (7)

This gives us a third potential definition of an environmental disparity:

Environmental Justice Metric 3. Low-income households experience a greater deadweight
loss from incorrect information regarding pollution: ddm
                                                      U
                                                         < 0.

In the Appendix (Section A2.3), we derive the sign of the derivative of U with respect to
income, showing that ddm   U
                               < 0. Therefore, under the assumptions we have made (limited
information; Cobb-Douglas utility; etc.), an environmental disparity of this type exists. The
intuition for this is that the low-income household would have received greater marginal util-
ity from avoiding the hidden pollution than would have the high-income household (because
of declining marginal utility). Later, we expand on this intuition to show alternative frame-
works where it might not hold. We also give intuition using a consumer surplus framework,
below.
    One could also consider a "proportional" version of this metric, in which deadweight
loss is divided by income. Such a metric incorporates the idea that low-income households
experience greater pollution exposure while simultaneously having fewer economic resources
for dealing with the health effects of the hidden pollution, which has been highlighted in some
of the related literature (United Church of Christ, 1987; Fleischman and Franklin, 2017).

                                              27
The absolute version defined here is a stricter condition: if it holds, then the proportional
                                             d  U
version does, too (that is, if ddm
                                U
                                   < 0, then dmm
                                                  < 0); if it does not hold, then the welfare
"burden" as a proportion of one's income could still be greater for poorer households.
    Frequently the researcher does not observe the full utility function but is able to estimate
demand and thus consumer surplus. It is easiest to visualize the change in consumer surplus
by considering the demand for distance x from the point source. Figure 8 shows how to
evaluate this increase in consumer surplus. When believing that air quality relates to distance
via a parameter value of 0 , the low-income consumer (grey) demands x , the lowest demand
function pictured. If instead informed that air quality relates to distance via 1 , the low-
income consumer will demand x . The consumer surplus gain associated with full information
can thus be evaluated as the area under the full-information inverse demand curve over the
range (x , x ), minus the change in expenditure. The outer grey demand curve comes from
the true underlying utility function and thus is the appropriate demand curve to use for
evaluating consumer surplus.

                                       Figure 8: Consumer Surplus




              Note: This figure plots demand for information under full (thin lines) versus biased
              (thick lines) beliefs about  , for low-income (grey) versus high-income (black) individuals.
              Shaded areas show deadweight loss from limited information, given by the area under the
              full-information inverse demand curve over the range x to x , minus the change in
              expenditure.


    As we show in the Appendix (Section A2.4),  CS   m
                                                         is negative, so Metric 3 holds under
the assumptions we have made when evaluated using consumer surplus rather than the full
utility function. For intuition, recall that we have shown that the wedge between x and x


                                                          28
does not change with income. So in comparing the grey and black areas in Figure 8, what
matters is the height (and the curvature) of demand. We show in the Appendix (Section
                                                             
A2.5) that the height is decreasing with income; that is, p
                                                          m
                                                               < 0, where p is the price
that would have yielded x in the full information case. So it is intuitive that we show
that consumer surplus is also decreasing with income. Below, we discuss to what extent
this result generalizes when we relax assumptions about utility, pollution dissipation, and
housing prices.


2.3     Endogenous Prices
Our theoretical analysis thus far has held constant the marginal price of distance. It is
natural, however, to wonder what would happen in a general equilibrium framework in
which prices are allowed to vary with information. We note first that allowing prices to vary
endogenously in the model does not affect EJ Metrics 1 and 2. Recall that EJ Metric 1 holds
because air quality is a normal good: high-income individuals purchase relatively more air
quality, and that holds even when prices vary. EJ Metric 2 says that low-income households
are physically more affected by underestimation of pollution damages. This result of the
model relies on air quality being a normal good and on the physical pollution dissipation
process. Since EJ Metric 2 does not incorporate re-optimization, it is unaffected by how we
model prices.
    Turning to EJ Metric 3, we evaluate whether the low-income household experiences
greater deadweight loss from limited information than does the high-income households.
We explore this setting by modeling pure exchange, in which two individuals have initial
endowments of distance to a point source and a numeraire, and the total supply of each
good is fixed. The price of distance is therefore endogenous, responding to changes in
the perceived utility function.38 We derive equilibrium outcomes and environmental justice
metrics in the Appendix (Sections A2.6 and A2.7). Here, we describe the intuition for what
happens when prices change.
    The key point from this exercise is that the price of distance is higher when pollution
is known to be higher (specifically, when  is higher). This happens because the marginal
value of distance x is greater at every level of x, so both households have greater demand
for distance under full information. That is, under limited information, the price of distance
is artificially too low. Since high-income households purchase more distance, an artificially
low price helps the high-income household more than it helps the low-income household.
  38
     We note that our analysis holds income from housing fixed ­ the changing price of x only affects
the perceived utility function, not initial wealth. Mathematically, we show that the utility benefit of full
information decreases in the initial allocation of the numeraire good, i.e., y 0 .


                                                    29
Meanwhile, as before, low-income households also experience more hidden air pollution (EJ
Metric 2), and in a full-information counterfactual, increasing distance would have meant
larger marginal gains in utility for the low-income household (because of declining marginal
utility).
    Overall, then, we see that the intuition regarding a larger deadweight loss for low-income
households is not overturned by allowing prices to vary endogenously in this pure exchange
economy with Cobb-Douglas preferences. A formal proof for EJ Metric 3 can be found in the
Appendix (Section A2.6). The Appendix also shows similar intuition for a pure exchange
model in which there are two houses at fixed distances (Section A2.7).


3        Generalized Model
To summarize Section 2, we show three results under what we believe are fairly innocuous
assumptions: poorer households choose relatively less air quality than their richer counter-
parts; they experience relatively more hidden air pollution; and they experience relatively
more utility loss from limited information. Note that the only difference across households
is their income level; we do not make assumptions about heterogeneity in preferences or
access to information across households. The same mistake made by all households leads to
inequality ­ not just in pollution exposure, but in welfare itself. In Section 3, we examine the
same relationships in a more general model that nests both underestimation of air pollution
and co-located disamenities.
    Consider a household that, as before, derives utility from healthiness q (a function of
air quality) that is not directly observable by the consumer but is a function of distance
x to a source of pollution. We now posit that this household also gets utility from salient
neighborhood amenities s, which are similarly a function of distance x to a pollution source,
                                                    q           s
in addition to all other goods y . We assume that x   > 0 and x     > 0: both amenities increase
with distance, so that they are positively correlated.39 This is consistent with the empirical
evidence documented in Section 1 using air quality, noise, and land use data.
    In this version of our model, we do not assume any particular functional form. Neither do
we restrict the utility function, other than to assume that all goods provide positive utility at
a declining rate (Uq > 0, Uqq < 0, and the corresponding conditions for s and y ). Finally, we
relax our previous assumption of house prices rising linearly in distance to the point source:
now, we only require that house prices increase with distance according to some hedonic
    39
     In this generalized model, it would be straightforward to incorporate an interpretation of x other than
distance, since all we are assuming is that both salient and non-salient amenities are correlated with some
signal variable x.



                                                    30
price schedule, which need not be either strictly concave or strictly convex. We continue to
assume that the hedonic price schedule does not shift with changes in information, but we
note that the distributional effects of such a shift are ambiguous (Kuminoff and Pope, 2014).
    Suppose the consumer is completely uninformed about air pollution. Then she optimizes
according to the following:

                             max U (s(x), y ) s.t. p(x) + y = m                              (8)
                                 x,y


She fails to incorporate q (x) into her decision-making, since she is unaware of how it impacts
her utility. She does, however, incorporate distance to the point source into her decision,
since distance yields other, salient amenities (a lack of noise, or a nice view). An alternative
interpretation of this setup is that s(x) represents the health impacts of air pollution that
the consumer knows about, whereas q (x) represents the health impacts about which she
is unaware. This interpretation nests the narrower model of the last section, in which the
salient disamenity ­ known pollution ­ is captured in q (x) and the non-salient disamenity ­
hidden pollution ­ is positively correlated with the choice q  .
    We derive first-order and second-order conditions for this problem in the Appendix (Sec-
                                                          
tion A2.8). Using comparative statics, we show that x   m
                                                           > 0 (i.e., distance is a normal good)
    p               s
if x Uy y > Us y x . This is similar to the standard condition for a normal good, except
that it incorporates the potential for the hedonic price schedule to be non-linear as well as
the impact of distance x on salient amenities s at the misinformed optimum.
              s
    Because x    > 0 (the salient amenity is increasing in distance), we know that if distance
is a normal good, then the salient amenity is a normal good as well. Thus, the condition for
the first environmental justice metric holds: low-income households experience higher levels
of pollution. In general, salient environmental quality will be a normal good unless Usy is
                                          q
negative and large. Similarly, because x     > 0 ("hidden" environmental quality is increasing
in distance), we know that if distance is a normal good, hidden environmental quality is as
well. Thus, under very few assumptions, the condition for EJ Metric 2 holds too, and lower
income households are exposed to greater levels of hidden pollution.
    Turning to the third environmental justice metric, we ask whether the welfare impact
of misinformation is larger for low-income or high-income households. As before, we can
evaluate the difference in utility at the optimal bundle under full information (q  , s , y  )
versus the selected bundle under limited information (q  , s , y  ). The bundle (q  , s , y  ) is
determined by optimization under full information:

                          max U (q (x), s(x), y ) s.t. p(x) + y = m                          (9)
                           x,y



                                               31
    We evaluate the difference in the utility given by the two bundles:

                                     U = U (q  , s , y  ) - U (q  , s , y  )                                   (10)

Thus,
               dU           q         s          y          q        s          y 
                      = Uq      + Us       + Uy      - Uq       - Us     - Uy                 (11)
                dm          m         m          m          m        m          m
While this is unambiguously negative in the simplified model presented in Section 2, it cannot
in general be signed as is; it depends on additional assumptions about utility.
    Consider instead how utility changes for a small perturbation of the value of x around
                                                                                   q 
the uninformed equilibrium (q  , s , y  ). This utility change is given by Uq x       dx.
                                                                                           40
                                                                                               We
show above that q  is smaller for low-income consumers than for high-income consumers
(s is a normal good, so x is a normal good, so q is a normal good). As a result, Uq
is larger for low-income consumers (recall that Uqq < 0). Also, because of how pollution
                                               q                                                41
dissipates, it will typically be the case that x  is weakly larger for low-income consumers.
                     q 
Put together, Uq x      is larger for low-income consumers, which works in favor of Metric

3 holding. However, we don't know whether dx is larger for low-income or high-income
consumers. In the simplified Cobb-Douglas model we present in the previous section, dx
is invariant to income, but that need not be the case in general. If dx is much larger for
                                                 q                                      42
high-income consumers, outweighing the Uq x         effect, then Metric 3 will not hold.

    Overall, this more general model suggests that environmental justice metrics of the first
two types are likely to be widespread in practice: both visible and hidden pollution are likely
to be disproportionately experienced by low-income communities. Whether this translates
into larger welfare losses depends on additional modeling assumptions, but our initial model
with particular functional forms shows one set of circumstances under which the welfare loss
caused by limited information is largest for low-income households.
   40
     To see this, write the change in utility as a change in the marginal utilities from s and q and y , when
                                                                   s              q 
the consumer buys slightly more x and slightly less y : dU = Us x     dx + Uq  x dx + Uy  dy . Then recall

that the change in expenditure on x must be equal to the negative of the change in expenditure on y , from
                                    s                      p
the budget constraint, and that Us x   must be equal to x Uy  , from the first-order conditions. This leaves
                           
                          q
only the expression Uq x     dx.
   41                                            q 
      If pollution dissipation is linear, then   x
                                                      is invariant to income. More realistically, if the dissipation
                                  q 
follows exponential decay, then   x
                                      is larger for low-income consumers.
    42
       Similarly, in evaluating consumer surplus over distance, rather than the full utility function, whether
deadweight loss increases or decreases with income will depend on whether the change in distance is increasing
or decreasing, as well as whether the height of the inverse demand curve is increasing or decreasing. Both
of these could be evaluated in particular empirical contexts, for instance via stated preference analysis.




                                                          32
4    Discussion
We have shown that, under modest assumptions, a lack of a full information does more than
just cause overall efficiency (i.e., deadweight) loss; it also exacerbates the disparities that
emerge from environmental quality being a normal good. In the context of the causes of
disproportionate exposure, then, we can say that our model shows how missing information
works through the "moving to the nuisance" channel. However, it could also act through
other channels less directly dependent on income, such as racism or targeting based on
political power. For instance, if racism in the housing market leads communities of color to
be more exposed to salient pollution, missing information may cause such communities to be
more exposed to hidden pollution as well. In general, systematic underestimation of pollution
and its impacts has the potential to make existing inequality worse than previously thought.
In this regard, our findings are relevant to the discussion of climate justice across countries:
there is evidence that the damages of climate change are experienced disproportionately
by low-income countries (Dell, Jones and Olken, 2012; Heal and Park, 2016), and as-yet
undiscovered impacts of climate change may amplify the disparity.
    In both our simplified model and our generalized model, two generic conditions drive
our results: (1) a salient normal good; and (2) a positively correlated non-salient good.
Anywhere these conditions are satisfied, limited information may contribute to inequality.
We believe that information failures have the potential to create disparities in other envi-
ronmental and energy contexts. Consider water quality: willingness to pay for it has been
shown to rise with both income and information provision (Jalan and Somanathan, 2008;
Graff Zivin, Neidell and Schlenker, 2011). Moreover, it is plausible that in some contexts ­
for example, rural groundwater quality (Kremer et al., 2011) ­ less salient water quality may
be positively correlated with more salient attributes of a water source, such as the source's
visual appearance.
    Analogously, our model may fit the setting of household energy efficiency. Evidence sug-
gests that households are not fully informed about the value of energy efficiency (Graff Zivin
and Novan, 2016; Cassidy, 2018) and that wealthier households are more energy efficient
(Bednar, Reames and Keoleian, 2017). If the salient attributes of energy-using durables (for
instance, the newness of a refrigerator or other home appliance) are positively correlated
with the harder-to-measure energy efficiency, then income differences and information fail-
ures may interact to produce efficiency loss and inequality in energy-related outcomes. In
fact, such inequality is one the main premises behind the field of "energy justice" (Hernandez,
2015).
    There is a long-standing economics literature, spanning multiple settings, on the adverse


                                              33
impacts of limited information. Our model departs from this literature in its treatment of
the distribution of missing information. Whereas other papers are motivated by or focus
exclusively on the implications of heterogeneity in information or in the willingness to pay
for information, we assume that every individual is wrong about air quality in the same
way. In our simplified model, all individuals have the same mistaken belief about a key
parameter in the estimation of air quality or its health impacts (which we model through  ).
In our more general model, all individuals might even know nothing about air quality and
choose locations based on other salient home attributes and goods. We stress that cross-
sectional differences in knowledge of air quality and health would also affect the distribution
of pollution exposure, and they could either exacerbate or alleviate inequality.
    Our results have important implications for the revealed preference models that are fre-
quently used in environmental economics. Such models assume that agents have full infor-
mation, or at least that the economist is able to observe agents' beliefs about the goods over
which they are choosing. We argue here that many individuals are not fully informed about
their pollution exposure. The empirical researcher, then, must take a stand on what indi-
viduals' beliefs are regarding their exposure. As Hausman (2012) argues, when we observe
Romeo choosing poison over eloping with Juliet, we must remember that Romeo believes
that Juliet has died: "he does not prefer death to life with Juliet. His choice does not reveal
his preference, because he is mistaken about what the alternatives are among which he is
choosing" (p 28). Similarly, when we observe households sorting across neighborhoods, we
must acknowledge that they are frequently mistaken about the level of health risks across
neighborhoods, and temper our conclusions regarding their preferences accordingly.
    In fact, our results point to the possibility of either overestimation of marginal willingness
to pay or underestimation of marginal willingness to pay in empirical revealed preference
studies of, for instance, air quality and the housing market. Suppose a researcher observes
that a household is willing to pay $100 more for house A than for house B, where the two
houses are identical except for one unit less of ambient pollution at house A. From this, the
researcher concludes that the household has a marginal willingness to pay to avoid pollution
of $100 per unit. If it turns out that house A also has 1 unit less of a salient disamenity (such
as noise), about which the home-buyer is aware but the econometrician is not, then of course
the empirical estimate is biased, and the homeowner actually has a marginal willingness
to pay of less than $100 per unit of air quality (some of the $100 was spent to avoid the
other disamenity). In this case, the researcher has overestimated the willingness to pay.
However, suppose that households are not fully informed, and they and believe that house
A has only 0.5 units less of ambient pollution (because of imperfect monitoring, fraud on
the part of the polluting firm, etc.). In that case, the home-buyer that is willing to pay $100


                                               34
more actually has a marginal willingness to pay of $200 per unit of air quality. As such, we
argue that hedonic methods should account for limited information regarding amenities more
explicitly than has generally been done in the literature. Bishop et al. (2019) also argue for
incorporating information and subjective beliefs, pointing to the possibility of using survey
data.


5    Conclusion
There are several reasons to believe that individuals are lacking accurate information on local
air pollution and its health impacts. In this paper, we demonstrate how this misinformation
can theoretically lead not just to economic inefficiency but also to inequality in pollution
exposure and in well-being. We do this by deriving equilibrium comparative statics in two
different models of residential location choice under limited information, which we motivate
by pairing existing research with descriptive statistics on air quality and air quality stan-
dards. Our results suggest the potential for disparities under modest assumptions: relative
to their higher-income counterparts, lower-income individuals experience greater pollution
exposure, greater hidden pollution exposure, and ­ in some situations ­ greater welfare loss
(as compared to full-information outcomes). Depending on the source of income inequality
and the cause of information failures, some of these disparities may be considered injustices.
    We believe that our results inform several important pursuits. First, the economics
literature on the distribution of pollution exposure and the associated disutility focuses
primarily on the role of income, firm costs, and discrimination in a full-information world.
To this literature, we add evidence that information limitations play an integral role as
well, thus complicating the standard "moving to the nuisance" story. Second, there is a
gap between economists and non-economists in the definition and understanding of what
constitutes an environmental "injustice." We help bridge this gap by jointly investigating
the effects of income and information, and by considering not just pollution exposure but
also hidden pollution exposure and welfare loss. Third, the estimation of willingness to pay
for environmental quality has conventionally relied on revealed preference methods under an
assumption of full information. We argue that the tendency of individuals to misestimate
or underestimate air quality presents challenges to the interpretation of revealed-preference
estimates. All of this has policy implications: the Environmental Protection Agency is legally
required to consider environmental justice concerns, and distributional outcomes continue
to be of widespread political and social interest.
    We note several areas in which future research could advance our understanding of infor-
mation, environmental quality, and welfare. In our modeling exercise, we set aside a number

                                              35
of phenomena that may affect choices and utility under limited information, such as the
evolution of beliefs about pollution over time or other dynamic effects. In addition, we ab-
stract from the notions of costly information and uncertainty. One could consider modeling
information as sufficiently costly that no individual obtains it on their own, but as cheap to
disseminate ­ this would appear to match the community-based "bucket brigades" that have
emerged in some areas (O'Rourke and Macey, 2003). We have left our model deliberately
simple, to show the potential for environmental disparities under very few assumptions, but
future models could incorporate these additional considerations.




                                             36
References
Abdulla, A., P. Vaishnav, B. Sergi, and D. G. Victor. 2019. "Limits to Deployment
 of Nuclear Power for Decarbonization: Insights from Public Opinion." Energy Policy,
 129: 1339­1346.

Agyeman, Julian, Robert D. Bullard, and Bob Evans. 2002. "Exploring the Nexus:
 Bringing Together Sustainability, Environmental Justice and Equity, Space and Polity."
 Space and Polity, 6(1): 77­90.

Allcott, Hunt, Benjamin B. Lockwood, and Dmitry Taubinsky. 2019. "Regressive
 Sin Taxes, with an Application to the Optimal Soda Tax." Quarterly Journal of Eco-
 nomics, 134(3): 1557­1626.

Apte, Joshua S., Kyle P. Messier, Shahzad Gani, Michael Brauer, Thomas W.
 Kirchstetter, Melissa M. Lunden, Julian D. Marshall, Christopher J. Portier,
 Roel C. H. Vermeulen, and Steven P. Hamburg. 2017. "High-Resolution Air Pollu-
 tion Mapping with Google Street View Cars: Exploiting Big Data." Environmental Science
 and Technology, 51: 6999­7008.

Arnott, Richard. 2011. "What Planners Need to Know about the "New Urban Eco-
 nomics"." The Oxford Handbook of Urban Economics and Planning.

Auffhammer, Maximilian, and Ryan Kellogg. 2011. "Clearing the Air? The Effects of
 Gasoline Content Regulation on Air Quality." American Economic Review, 101: 26872722.

Bakkensen, Laura A., and Lala Ma. 2019. "Distributional Impacts of Public Flood
 Insurance Reform." Working Paper.

Bakkensen, Laura, and Lint Barrage. 2018. "Flood Risk Belief Heterogeneity and
 Coastal Home Price Dynamics: Going Under Water?" NBER Working Paper 23854.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2011. "Environmental Justice." Encyclopedia of Resource, Energy,
 and Environmental Economics.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer. 2012. The Political Economy of Environmental Justice. . 1 ed.,
 Stanford, CA:Stanford University Press.

Banzhaf, H. Spencer, and Randall P. Walsh. 2008. "Do People Vote with Their Feet?
 An Empirical Test of Tiebouts Mechanism." American Economic Review, 98(3): 843­863.

Banzhaf, Spencer, Lala Ma, and Christopher Timmins. 2019. "Environmental Jus-
 tice: The Economics of Race, Place, and Pollution." Journal of Economic Perspectives,
 33(1).

Barwick, Panle Jia, Shanjun Li, Liguo Lin, and Eric Zou. 2019. "From Fog to Smog:
 The Value of Pollution Information." Working Paper.



                                          37
Bednar, Dominic J., Tony Gerard Reames, and Gregory A. Keoleian. 2017. "The
 Intersection of Energy and Justice: Modeling the Spatial, Racial/Ethnic and Socioeco-
 nomic Patterns of Urban Residential Heating Consumption and Efficiency in Detroit,
 Michigan." Energy and Buildings, 143: 25­34.

Bickerstaff, Karen, and Gordon Walker. 2001. "Public Understandings of Air Pollution:
  the `Localisation' of Environmental Risk." Global Environmental Change, 133­145.

Bishop, Kelly C., Jonathan D. Ketcham, and Nicolai V. Kuminoff. 2018. "Hazed
  and Confused: The Effect of Air Pollution on Dementia." NBER Working Paper.

Bishop, Kelly C., Nicolai V. Kuminoff, H. Spencer Banzhaf, Kevin J. Boyle,
  Kathrine Von Graevenitz, Jaren C. Pope, V. Kerry Smith, and Christopher D.
  Timmins. 2019. "Best Practices in Using Hedonic Property Value Models for Welfare
  Measurement." Working Paper.

Brody, Samuel D., B. Mitchell Peck, and Wesley E. Highfield. 2004. "Examining
 Localized Patterns of Air Quality Perception in Texas: A Spatial and Statistical Analysis."
 Risk Analysis, 24(6): 1561­1574.

Brulle, Robert J., and David N. Pellow. 2018. "Environmental Justice: Human Health
 and Environmental Inequalities." Annual Review of Public Health, 27: 103­124.

Bullard, Robert D. 1983. "Solid Waste Sites and the Black Houston Community." Socio-
 logical Inquiry, 53(2): 273­288.

Bullard, Robert D., Paul Mohai, Robin Saha, and Beverly Wright. 2007.
 "Toxic Wastes and Race at Twenty 1987­2007: A Report Prepared for the United
 Church of Christ Justice & Witness Ministries." https://www.ucc.org/environmental-
 ministries toxic-waste-20.

Burtraw, Dallas, David A. Evans, Alan Krupnick, Karen Palmer, and Russell
 Toth. 2005. "Economics of Pollution Trading for SO2 and NOx." Annual Review of En-
 vironment and Resources, 30: 253­289.

Cassidy, Alecia. 2018. "How Does Mandatory Energy Efficiency Disclosure Affect Housing
 Prices?" Working Paper.

Chivers, James, and Nicholas E. Flores. 2002. "Market Failure in Information: The
 National Flood Insurance Program." Land Economics, 78(4): 515­521.

Christensen, Peter, and Christopher Timmins. 2018. "Sorting or Steering: Experi-
 mental Evidence on the Economic Effects of Housing Discrimination." NBER Working
 Paper No. 24826.

Currie, Janet, and Reed Walker. 2011. "Traffic Congestion and Infant Health: Evidence
 from E-ZPass." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 3: 65­90.



                                            38
Currie, Janet, Lucas Davis, Michael Greenstone, and Reed Walker. 2015. "Envi-
 ronmental Health Risks and Housing Values: Evidence from 1,600 Toxic Plant Openings
 and Closings." American Economic Review, 105(2): 678­709.

Deaton, Angus. 2013. "What Does the Empirical Evidence Tell Us About the Injustice of
 Health Inequalities?" In Inequalities in Health: Concepts, Measures, and Ethics. , ed. Nir
 Eyal, Samia Hurst, Ole F. Norheim and Daniel Wikler. New York, NY:Oxford University
 Press.

Dell, Melissa, Benjamin F. Jones, and Benjamin A. Olken. 2012. "Temperature
 Shocks and Economic Growth: Evidence from the Last Half Century." American Economic
 Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(3): 66­95.

Depro, Brooks, and Christopher Timmins. 2012. "Residential Mobility and Ozone
 Exposure: Challenges for Environmental Justice Policy." In The Political Economy of
 Environmental Justice. . 1 ed., , ed. H. Spencer Banzhaf, 115­136. Stanford, CA:Stanford
 University Press.

Depro, Brooks, Christopher Timmins, and Maggie O'Neil. 2015. "White Flight and
 Coming to the Nuisance: Can Residential Mobility Explain Environmental Injustice?"
 Journal of the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists.

Duflo, Esther, Michael Greenstone, Rohini Pande, and Nicholas Ryan. 2013.
 "Truth-Telling by Third-Party Auditors and the Response of Polluting Firms: Experi-
 mental Evidence from India." The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1499­1545.

Duranton, Gilles, and Diego Puga. 2015. "Urban Land Use." Handbook of Regional and
 Urban Economics, 5A: 468­560.

Ehrlich, Gabriel. 2014. "Price and Time to Sale Dynamics in the Housing Market: the
 Role of Incomplete Information." Mimeo.

Environmental Protection Agency. 1999. "Enforcement Alert: Proper Monitoring
 Essential to Reducing Fugitive Emissions Under Leak Detection and Repair Programs."
 https://19january2017snapshot.epa.gov/sites/production/files/documents/emissions.pdf,
 EPA 300-N-99-014.

Environmental Protection Agency. 2008. "National Ambient Air Quality Standards for
 Lead; Final Rule." Federal Register, 73(219): 66964­67062.

Environmental Protection Agency. 2011. "Technical Support Document EPAs 2011
 National-scale Air Toxics Assessment." https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2015-
 12/documents/2011-nata-tsd.pdf.

Environmental Protection Agency. 2017. "TRI Supplemental Documentation:
 Active/Inactive Dates." https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2018-01/active-
 inactive dates 0.xlsx.



                                            39
Environmental Protection Agency. 2018. "Pollutant Standards AQS Reference Table."
 https://aqs.epa.gov/aqsweb/documents/ codetables/pollutant standards.html.

Fleischman,     Lesley,    and Marcus Franklin. 2017. "Fumes Across the
  Fence-Line:     The Health Impacts of Air Pollution from Oil & Gas
  Facilities   on    African   American  Communities."     http://www.catf.us/wp-
  content/uploads/2017/11/CATF Pub FumesAcrossTheFenceLine.pdf.

Foster, William, and Richard E. Just. 1989. "Measuring Welfare Effects of Production
  Contamination with Consumer Uncertainty." Journal of Environmental Economics and
  Management, 17: 266­283.

Fowlie, Meredith, Edward Rubin, and Reed Walker. 2019. "Bringing Satellite-Based
  Air Quality Estimates Down to Earth." AEA Papers and Proceedings, 109: 283­288.

Gamper-Rabindran, Shanti, and Christopher Timmins. 2011. "Hazardous Waste
 Cleanup, Neighborhood Gentrification, and Environmental Justice: Evidence from Re-
 stricted Access Census Block Data." American Economic Review: Papers & Proceedings,
 101(3): 620­624.

Graff Zivin, Joshua, and Kevin Novan. 2016. "Upgrading Efficiency and Behavior: Elec-
 tricity Savings from Residential Weatherization Programs." The Energy Journal, 37(4).

Graff Zivin, Joshua, Matthew Neidell, and Wolfram Schlenker. 2011. "Water Qual-
 ity Violations and Avoidance Behavior: Evidence from Bottled Water Consumption."
 American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, 101(3): 448­453.

Grainger, Corbett, Andrew Schreiber, and Wonjun Chang. 2018. "Do Regulators
 Strategically Avoid Pollution Hotspots when Siting Monitors? Evidence from Remote
 Sensing of Air Pollution." Working Paper.

Greenstone, Michael. 2017. "The Continuing Impact of Sherwin Rosen's `Hedonic Prices
 and Implicit Markets: Product Differentiation in Pure Competition'." Journal of Political
 Economy, 125(6): 1891­1902.

Greenstone, Michael, and B. Kelsey Jack. 2015. "Envirodevonomics: A Research
 Agenda for an Emerging Field." Journal of Economic Literature, 53(1): 5­42.

Hamilton, James T. 1995. "Testing for Environmental Racism: Prejudice, Profits, Politi-
 cal Power?" Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 14(1): 107­132.

Hastings, Justine S., and Jeffrey M. Weinstein. 2008. "Information, School Choice,
 and Academic Achievement: Evidence from Two Experiments." The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, 1373­1414.

Hausman, Daniel. 2012. Preference, Value, Choice, and Welfare. Cambridge University
 Press.



                                           40
Heal, Geoffrey, and Jisung Park. 2016. "Temperature Stress and the Direct Impact of
 Climate Change: A Review of an Emerging Literature." Review of Environmental Eco-
 nomics and Policy, 10(2): 347­362.

Hernandez, Diana. 2015. "Sacrifice Along the Energy Continuum: A Call for Energy
 Justice." Environmental Justice, 8(4): 151­156.

Herrnstadt, Evan, Anthony Heyes, Erich Muehlegger, and Soodeh Saberian.
 2018. "Air Pollution as a Cause of Violent Crime: Evidence from Los Angeles and
 Chicago." Working Paper.

Holifield, Ryan. 2001. "Defining Environmental Justice and Environmental Racism." Ur-
 ban Geography, 22(1): 78­90.

Hsiang, Solomon, Paulina Oliva, and Reed Walker. 2019. "The Distribution of Envi-
 ronmental Damages." Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 13(1): 83­103.

Hunter, Paul R., Karen Bickerstaff, and Maria Davies. 2004. "Potential Sources
 of Bias in the Use of Individual's Recall of the Frequency of Exposure to Air Pollution
 for Use in Exposure Assessment in Epidemiological Studies: A Cross-Sectional Survey."
 Environmental Health: A Global Access Science Source, 3(3).

Hu, Shishan, Scott Fruin, Kathleen Kozawa, Steve Mara, Suzanne E. Paulson,
 and Arthur M. Winer. 1994. "A Wide Area of Air Pollutant Impact Downwind of a
 Freeway during Pre-Sunrise Hours." Atmos Environ, 43(16): 2541­2549.

Jalan, Jyotsna, and E. Somanathan. 2008. "The Importance of Being Informed: Ex-
  perimental Evidence on Demand for Environmental Quality." Journal of Development
  Economics, 87: 14­28.

Just, Richard E., Darrell L. Hueth, and Andrew Schmitz. 2004. The Welfare Eco-
  nomics of Public Policy. Edward Elgar.

Karner, Alex A., Douglas S. Eisinger, and Deb A. Niemeier. 2010. "Near-Roadway
 Air Quality: Synthesizing the Findings from Real-World Data." Environmental Science
 and Technology, 44: 5334­5344.

Kask, S. B., and S. A. Maani. 1992. "Uncertainty, Information, and Hedonic Pricing."
 Land Economics, 68(2): 170­184.

Kremer, Michael, Jessica Leino, Edward Miguel, and Alix Peterson Zwane. 2011.
 "Spring Cleaning: Rural Water Impacts, Valuation, and Property Rights Institutions."
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126: 145­205.

Kriesel, Warren, Terence J. Centner, and Andrew G. Keeler. 1996. "Neighborhood
 Exposure to Toxic Releases: Are There Racial Inequities?" Growth and Change, 27: 479­
 499.



                                          41
Kuminoff, Nicolai V., and Jaren Pope. 2014. "Do Capitalization Effects for Pub-
 lic Goods Reveal the Public Willingness to Pay?" International Economic Review,
 55(4): 1227­1250.

Kurlat, Pablo, and Johannes Stroebel. 2015. "Testing for Information Asymmetries in
 Real Estate Markets." The Review of Financial Studies, 28(8): 2429­2461.

Lee, Sul-Ki. 2017. "A Novel Explanation for Environmental Injustice: Household Sorting
  and Moving Costs." Mimeo.

Leggett, Christopher G. 2002. "Environmental Valuation with Imperfect Information."
  Environmental and Resource Economics, 23: 343­355.

Massetti, Emanuele, Marilyn A. Brown, Melissa Lapsa, Isha Sharma, James
 Bradbury, Colin Cunliff, and Yufei Li. 2017. "Environmental Quality and the U.S.
 Power Sector: Air Quality, Water Quality, Land Use and Environmental Justice." Oak
 Ridge National Laboratory.

Mastromonaco, Ralph. 2015. "Do Environmental Right-to-Know Laws Affect Markets?
 Capitalization of Information in the Toxic Release Inventory." Journal of Environmental
 Economics and Management, 71: 54­70.

McCluskey, Jill J., and Gordon C. Rausser. 2003a. "Hazardous Waste Sites and Hous-
 ing Appreciation Rates." Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 45: 166­
 176.

McCluskey, Jill J., and Gordon C. Rausser. 2003b. "Stigmatized Asset Value: Is It
 Temporary or Long-Term?" The Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(2): 276­285.

Mohai, Paul, and Robin Saha. 2006. "Reassessing Racial and Socioeconomic Disparities
 in Environmental Justice Research." Demography, 43(2): 383­399.

Mohai, Paul, and Robin Saha. 2015. "Which Came First, People or Pollution? A Review
 of Theory and Evidence from Longitudinal Environmental Justice Studies." Environmental
 Research Letters, 10(3).

Mohai, Paul, David Pellow, and J. Timmons Roberts. 2009. "Environmental Justice."
 Annual Review of Environment and Resources, 34: 405­430.

Mohai, Paul, Paula M. Lantz, Jeffrey Morenoff, James S. House, and Richard P.
 Mero. 2009. "Racial and Socioeconomic Disparities in Residential Proximity to Polluting
 Industrial Facilities: Evidence From the Americans Changing Lives Study." American
 Journal of Public Health, 99(S3): S649­S656.

Moulton, Jeremy G., Nicholas J. Sanders, and Scott A. Wentland. 2018. "Toxic As-
 sets: How the Housing Market Responds to Environmental Information Shocks." Working
 Paper.



                                          42
Nowka, Matthew R., Robert L. Bard, Melvyn Rubenfire, Elizabth A. Jackson,
 and Robert D. Brook. 2011. "Patient Awareness of the Risks for Heart Disease Posed
 by Air Pollution." Progress in Cardiovascular Diseases, 53: 379­384.

O'Rourke, Dara, and Gregg P. Macey. 2003. "Community Environmental Policing:
 Assessing New Strategies of Public Participation in Environmental Regulation." Journal
 of Policy Analysis and Management, 22(3): 383­414.

Pastor Jr., Manuel, Jim Sadd, and John Hipp. 2001. "Which Came First? Toxic Facili-
 ties, Minority Move-In, and Environmental Justice." Journal of Urban Affairs, 23(1): 1­21.

Pope, Jaren C. 2008a. "Buyer Information and the Hedonic: The Impact of a Seller
 Disclosure on the Implicit Price for Airport Noise." Journal of Urban Economics, 63: 498­
 516.

Pope, Jaren C. 2008b. "Do Seller Disclosures Affect Property Values? Buyer Information
 and the Hedonic Model." Land Economics, 84(4): 551­572.

Riveles, Karen, and Alyssa Nagai. 2019. "Analysis of Refinery Chemical Emissions and
 Health Effects." California Environmental Protection Agency.

Rooarda-Knape, Mirjam C., Nicole A. H. Janssen, Jeroen de Hartog, Patricia
 H. N. Van Vliet, Hendrik Harssema, and Bert Brunekreef. 1999. "Traffic Related
 Air Pollution in City Districts Near Motorways." The Science of the Total Environment,
 235: 339­341.

Schlenker, Wolfram, and W. Reed Walker. 2016. "Airports, Air Pollution, and Con-
  temporaneous Health." Review of Economic Studies, 83: 768­809.

Shertzer, Allison, Tate Twinam, and Randall P. Walsh. 2016. "Race, Ethnicity, and
  Discriminatory Zoning." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8(3): 217­246.

Sullivan, Daniel M., and Alan Krupnick. 2018. "Using Satellite Data to Fill the Gaps
  in the US Air Pollution Monitoring Network." RFF Working Paper 18-21.

Taylor, Dorceta E. 2000. "The Rise of the Environmental Justice Paradigm." American
  Behavioral Scientist, 43(4): 508­580.

Tessum, Christopher W., Joshua S. Apte, Andrew L. Goodkind, Nicholas Z.
  Muller, Kimberly A. Mullins, David A. Paolella, Stephen Polasky, Nathaniel P.
  Springer, Sumil K. Thakrar, Julian D. Marshall, and Jason D. Hill. 2019. "In-
  equity in Consumption of Goods and Services Adds to Racial/Ethnic Disparities in Air
  Pollution Exposure." Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(13): 6001­
  6006.

Timmins, Christopher, and Ashley Vissing. 2017. "Environmental Justice and Coasian
  Bargaining: The Role of Race and Income in Lease Negotiations for Shale Gas." Working
  Paper.


                                            43
United Church of Christ. 1987. "Toxic Wastes and Race in the United States."

United States General Accounting Office. 1983. "Siting of Hazardous Waste Landfills
 and Their Correlation with Racial and Economic Status of Surrounding Communities."

Von Graevenitz, Kathrine. 2018. "The Amenity Cost of Road Noise." Journal of Envi-
 ronmental Economics and Management, 90.

Von Graevenitz, Kathrine, Daniel Romer, and Alexander Rohlf. 2018. "The Effect
 of Emission Information on Housing Prices: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Euro-
 pean Pollutant Release and Transfer Register." Environmental and Resource Economics,
 69: 23­74.

Warner, Kenneth E., David Mendez, and Paul N. Courant. 1996. "Toward a More
 Realistic Appraisal of the Lung Cancer Risk from Radon: The Effects of Residential
 Mobility." American Journal of Public Health, 86(9): 1222­1227.

Wolverton, Ann. 2009. "Effects of Socio-Economic and Input-Related Factors on Polluting
 Plants Location Decisions." The B.E. Journal of Economic Analysis & Policy, 9(1).

World Health Organization. 2000. "Air Quality Guidelines for Europe: Second Edition."
 Copenhagen, Denmark.

World Health Organization. 2005. "Air Quality Guidelines: Global Update 2005."
 Copenhagen, Denmark.

World Health Organization. 2010. "WHO Guidelines for Indoor Air Quality: Selected
 Pollutants." Copenhagen, Denmark.

World Health Organization. 2017. "Evolution of WHO Air Quality Guidelines: Past,
 Present and Future." Copenhagen, Denmark.

Xu, Jianhua, Cheryl S.F. Chi, and Kejun Zhu. 2017. "Concern or Apathy: the Atti-
 tude of the Public Toward Urban Air Pollution." Journal of Risk Research, 20(4): 482­498.

Zahran, Sammy, Terrence Iverson, Shawn P. McElmurry, and Stephan Weiler.
  2017. "The Effect of Leaded Aviation Gasoline on Blood Lead in Children." Journal of
  the Association of Environmental and Resource Economists, 4(2): 575­610.

Zhu, Yifang, William C. Hinds, Seongheon Kim, and Constantinos Sioutas. 2002.
 "Concentration and Size Distribution of Ultrafine Particles Near a Major Highway." Jour-
 nal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 52(9): 1032­1042.

Zou, Eric. 2018. "Unwatched Pollution: The Effect of Intermittent Monitoring on Air
  Quality." Working Paper.




                                           44
Online Appendix
This Appendix provides additional summary statistics pertaining to the data we use in
Section 1.3. It also provides derivations and proofs for the models in Sections 2 and 3.


A1      Data Appendix
To match data sources to zip codes, we start with EPA's air quality data, which provide
latitude and longitude coordinates for each monitor. We then use GIS to match these to
ZCTA locations (shapefiles) from the U.S. Census Bureau. We drop non-conterminous US
observations (Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands).
    We conduct similar exercises for the noise and land use data. Land use data are provided
as dummy values at a 100 meter resolution. For computational purposes, we decrease the
resolution level of the land use data by a factor of 10 (taking the modal land use value)
before overlaying zip code shapefiles. Within a zip code, we take the mean of each land use
dummy value to approximate the portion of the zip code dedicated to each land use.
    Demographic characteristics are provided by ZCTA directly from the Census Bureau.
ZCTA-to-CBSA matches are also provided by the Census Bureau.




                                            A-1
A1.1   Descriptive Statistics and Robustness Checks

                   Table A1: Air Pollution Guidelines and Standards


               Year         Pollutant                        Standard                      Value


               1987         Carbon monoxide                  1 hour, mg/m3 , WHO              30
               2000         Carbon monoxide                  1 hour, mg/m3 , WHO              30
               2010         Carbon monoxide                  1 hour, mg/m3 , WHO*             35

               1987         Lead                             1 year, µg/m3 , WHO          0.5-1.0
               2000         Lead                             1 year, µg/m3 , WHO*             0.5

               1978         Lead                             3 month, µg/m3 , EPA             1.5
               2009         Lead                             3 month, µg/m3 , EPA*           0.15

               1987         Nitrogen    dioxide              1   hour,   µg/m3 ,   WHO       400
               2000         Nitrogen    dioxide              1   hour,   µg/m3 ,   WHO*      200
               2005         Nitrogen    dioxide              1   hour,   µg/m3 ,   WHO       200
               2010         Nitrogen    dioxide              1   hour,   µg/m3 ,   WHO       200

               1987         Ozone                            8 hours, µg/m3 , WHO         100-120
               2000         Ozone                            8 hours, µg/m3 , WHO*            120
               2005         Ozone                            8 hours, µg/m3 , WHO*            100

               1997         Ozone                            8 hours, ppm, EPA               0.08
               2008         Ozone                            8 hours, ppm, EPA*             0.075
               2015         Ozone                            8 hours, ppm, EPA*              0.07

               2006         PM2.5                            annual, µg/m3 , EPA              15
               2012         PM2.5                            annual, µg/m3 , EPA*             12

               1987         Sulfur dioxide                   24 hours, µg/m3 , WHO           125
               2000         Sulfur dioxide                   24 hours, µg/m3 , WHO           125
               2005         Sulfur dioxide                   24 hours, µg/m3 , WHO*           20

         Notes: This table shows changes in EPA standards and WHO guidelines for selected air pol-
         lutants. We show all EPA standards that changed. We show WHO guidelines only for those
         pollutants for which the EPA has a standard and for which the WHO guideline changed.
         Sources are the WHO (2000, 2005, 2005, 2010, 2017); EPA (2018). Guidelines for less com-
         monly monitored pollutants (e.g. cadmium, dichloromethane) are in the WHO reports.




                                                   A-2
                          Table A2: Summary Statistics


                                                        Mean        Std. Dev.               N


 Pollution levels:
  Lead in PM2.5, µg/m3                                  0.004           0.007             246
  NO2, ppb                                             28.490          12.354             425
  Ozone, ppm                                            0.046           0.007           1,116
  PM 2.5, µg/m3                                        12.571           3.631           1,053
  SO2, ppb                                             14.134          10.025             503
  Benzene, ppbc                                         3.344           2.999             224
  Toluene, ppbc                                         8.475           6.559             215
  Cancer risk, per billion                              0.024           0.015          31,126
 Refinery in zip code, NEI definition                   0.006           0.080          32,718
  Refinery in zip code, EIA match                       0.004           0.065          32,718
 Noise, LAeq                                           14.237          14.068          30,999
 Land use:
  Developed, high intensity                             0.018           0.099          30,905
  Developed, medium intensity                           0.047           0.157          30,905
  Developed, low intensity                              0.067           0.169          30,905
  Developed, open space                                 0.041           0.116          30,905
  Barren land                                           0.003           0.024          30,905
  Forest, shrubland, or grassland                       0.446           0.371          30,905
  Farmland                                              0.316           0.352          30,905
  Wetlands                                              0.043           0.114          30,905
  Water                                                 0.018           0.069          30,905
 Demographics:
  Median household income, '000s                       38.330          17.452          32,718
  Percent unemployed                                    3.450           3.199          31,712
  Percent of families below the poverty line            9.891           9.152          31,590
  Percent White                                        86.746          19.564          31,789
  Percent Black                                         7.806          16.300          31,789
  Percent Latino/a                                      6.375          13.500          31,789

Notes: A unit of observation is a Zip Code Tabulation Area. Air pollution data are annual aver-
ages for the year 2001. Each air pollutant is measured using whatever averaging time is used for
the primary standard (e.g. 1-hour vs 8-hour vs 24-hour) that was in effect in 2018. Noise data
are in a 24-hr equivalent sound level (LEQ, denoted by LAeq) noise metric. Data are from the
Environmental Protection Agency, the Energy Information Administration, the US Geological
Survey, the Department of Transportation, and the Census. See text for details.




                                               A-3
                        Figure A1: Data Coverage




Note: These figures plot a dot in each Zip Code Tabulation Area with both land use
data and the additional data (either noise or air quality).




                                      A-4
              Figure A2: Water and Wetlands Locations




Note: These figures plot a dot in each Zip Code Tabulation Area with a non-zero portion
of the ZCTA devoted to water or wetlands.




                                         A-5
Table A3: Robustness: Demographic Characteristics Were Correlated with Ambient Lead
Exposure


 Panel A. Using 2008 Ambient Lead Data

                                    Income, '000s   % Unempl.     % Below Poverty     % White      % Black     % Latino/a

 Log airborne lead concentration       -6.25**          1.26             2.83          -10.93**      2.97        5.28*
                                        (2.85)         (0.80)           (2.53)          (4.67)      (3.88)       (2.89)


 Observations                            290            290              288             290         290           290
 Within R2                              0.05            0.03            0.01             0.06       0.01          0.04
 Mean of dep. var.                      36.72           4.98            13.17           74.82       15.65         11.82


 Panel B. Using 2001 Ambient Lead Data, No CBSA Fixed Effects

                                    Income, '000s   % Unempl.     % Below Poverty     % White      % Black     % Latino/a

 Log airborne lead concentration       -1.67**        0.49**           2.89***        -11.39***    10.88***       0.88
                                        (0.85)        (0.23)            (0.64)          (1.46)      (1.34)       (1.15)


 Observations                            245            245              244             245         245           245
 R2                                     0.02            0.02            0.08             0.20       0.21          0.00
 Mean of dep. var.                      36.20           4.71            13.04           77.52       13.93         11.39


 Panel C. Using Modeled Ambient Lead Concentration Data from the 2002 NATA

                                    Income, '000s   % Unempl.     % Below Poverty     % White      % Black     % Latino/a

 Log lead concentration               -1.10***        0.59***          1.55***         -9.33***    6.24***       3.62***
                                       (0.17)          (0.03)           (0.09)          (0.19)      (0.16)        (0.11)


 Observations                          23,867         23,808           23,753           23,827      23,827       23,827
 Within R2                              0.00           0.01             0.01             0.10        0.06         0.04
 Mean of dep. var.                      42.28          3.41             8.98            85.69        8.53         7.15


Note: This table is identical to Table 1 in the main text, but with the changes noted in the panel titles. *** Statistically
significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                           A-6
Table A4: Robustness: Demographic Characteristics Were Correlated with Proximity to
Refineries


     Panel A. Using only refineries listed in the EIA's Petroleum Supply Annual

                            Income, '000s   % Unempl.      % Below Poverty     % White      % Black     % Latino/a

     Refinery in zip code     -3.75***         0.48*            2.29***         -4.07***       1.48       5.96***
                               (1.26)          (0.25)            (0.65)          (1.42)       (1.21)       (0.83)


     Observations              23,952          23,892           23,833           23,912      23,912        23,912
     Within R2                   0.00           0.00             0.00              0.00       0.00          0.00
     Mean of dep. var.          42.24           3.42             9.00             85.68       8.53          7.15


     Panel B. Using all NEI-listed facilities, No CBSA Fixed Effects

                            Income, '000s   % Unempl.      % Below Poverty     % White      % Black     % Latino/a

     Refinery in zip code       -0.17         0.83***           3.15***        -12.69***     5.46***      10.57***
                               (1.21)          (0.22)            (0.63)          (1.35)       (1.13)       (0.93)


     Observations              32,718          31,712           31,590           31,789      31,789        31,789
     R2                          0.00           0.00             0.00              0.00       0.00          0.00
     Mean of dep. var.          38.33           3.45             9.89             86.75       7.81          6.37


   Note: This table is identical to Table 2 in the main text, but with the changes noted in the panel titles. *** Sta-
   tistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level..




                                                         A-7
                              Table A5: Robustness: 2016 Air Quality Data


                                      NO2         Ozone       PM2.5         SO2        Benzene     Toluene     Cancer risk


 Noise                               0.23***       0.00       0.09***      -0.27**       -0.03       0.06        0.04***
                                      (0.06)      (0.00)       (0.02)       (0.13)      (0.09)      (0.14)        (0.00)
 Land use:
  Developed, high intensity          0.77***     -0.16***     0.19***        0.51      0.49***      0.79***      0.93***
                                      (0.17)      (0.02)       (0.06)      (0.32)       (0.17)       (0.27)       (0.01)
   Developed, medium intensity       0.42***     -0.08***     0.19***      0.52*       0.57***      0.96***      0.55***
                                      (0.15)      (0.02)       (0.05)      (0.28)       (0.17)       (0.27)       (0.01)
   Developed, low intensity          0.54***       -0.03        0.06         0.06        0.30        0.66*       0.53***
                                      (0.19)      (0.02)       (0.06)      (0.35)       (0.21)       (0.33)       (0.01)
   Developed, open space                0.36        0.01       0.14*         0.02        0.30         -0.12      0.51***
                                      (0.25)      (0.02)       (0.08)      (0.52)       (0.31)       (0.49)       (0.01)
   Water                              0.88**       -0.02        0.12        -0.17      1.08**       3.01***      0.27***
                                      (0.36)      (0.05)       (0.13)      (0.89)       (0.43)       (0.66)       (0.02)
   Wetlands                            -0.50       -0.05        0.14        -0.81        -0.67         0.86      0.16***
                                      (0.32)      (0.04)       (0.14)      (0.61)       (0.44)       (0.68)       (0.02)
   Farmland                             0.25     -0.06***     0.16***       0.07         0.18         0.03         0.00
                                      (0.17)      (0.01)       (0.05)      (0.34)       (0.23)       (0.37)       (0.01)
   Barren land                         -0.08       0.02         0.09         1.55         0.50        -1.78        0.02
                                      (0.69)      (0.09)       (0.43)      (1.83)       (1.68)       (2.60)       (0.06)


 Observations                         402         1,103         829         390          192         188          23,328
 Within R2                            0.43         0.12         0.22        0.06         0.28        0.43          0.48

Note: Regressions are identical to Table 3 in the main text, but with 2016 air quality data. *** Statistically significant at
the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                            A-8
                   Table A6: Robustness: Income is Correlated with Disamenities



                                        (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)         (8)


 NO2 (log)                            -0.46***     -0.30***
                                       (0.06)       (0.08)
 Ozone (log)                                                    0.94***      0.29***
                                                                 (0.11)       (0.11)
 PM 2.5 (log)                                                                           -0.65***     -0.19**
                                                                                         (0.09)       (0.09)
 SO2 (log)                                                                                                      -0.13**      -0.07
                                                                                                                 (0.05)     (0.04)
 Log noise                                         0.16***                   0.05***                   0.05                  0.05
                                                    (0.05)                    (0.02)                  (0.03)                (0.05)
 Land use:
  Developed, high intensity                        -0.89***                 -0.93***                -0.94***               -0.85***
                                                     (0.14)                   (0.09)                  (0.09)                (0.12)
   Developed, medium intensity                     -0.57***                 -0.55***                -0.65***               -0.63***
                                                     (0.12)                   (0.06)                  (0.08)                (0.11)
   Developed, low intensity                         -0.32**                 -0.28***                 -0.22**                 -0.17
                                                     (0.15)                   (0.07)                  (0.09)                (0.13)
   Developed, open space                               0.07                    0.15                     0.05                 0.27
                                                     (0.23)                   (0.11)                  (0.12)                (0.19)
   Water                                              -0.22                    -0.16                -0.94***                 -0.33
                                                     (0.27)                   (0.18)                  (0.22)                (0.30)
   Wetlands                                           -0.27                  -0.33**                   -0.18                 0.05
                                                     (0.27)                   (0.13)                  (0.18)                (0.24)
   Farmland                                           -0.08                    -0.02                   0.01                   0.10
                                                     (0.13)                   (0.06)                  (0.09)                (0.13)
   Barren land                                      -1.06**                    -0.16                -1.36***                 -0.58
                                                     (0.49)                   (0.29)                  (0.49)                (0.76)


 Observations                           408          408         1,049        1,049       980         980         465        465
 Within R2                              0.18         0.38         0.09        0.31        0.09        0.38        0.02       0.35

Note: This table is identical to Table 4 in the main text, but for additional pollutants. The dependent variable is the log of
median household income in a Zip Code Tabulation Area in 1999. The pollutants cannot all be combined into one regression
because there are insufficient zip codes with monitors for all pollutants. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level;
* 10% level.




                                                               A-9
        Table A7: Robustness: Income is Correlated with Disamenities


                                      (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)


 Benzene (log)                     -0.34***     -0.14**
                                    (0.06)       (0.06)
 Toluene (log)                                              -0.25***      -0.06
                                                             (0.06)      (0.06)
 Cancer risk, per million (log)                                                    -0.08***    0.19***
                                                                                    (0.01)      (0.01)
 Log noise                                        -0.04                   -0.07                0.02***
                                                 (0.09)                  (0.10)                 (0.00)
 Land use:
  Developed, high intensity                     -0.92***                -0.95***               -1.06***
                                                 (0.18)                  (0.19)                  (0.02)
   Developed, medium intensity                  -0.47***                -0.52***               -0.61***
                                                 (0.17)                  (0.18)                  (0.01)
   Developed, low intensity                       -0.16                   -0.13                -0.21***
                                                 (0.21)                  (0.23)                  (0.01)
   Developed, open space                          -0.10                   -0.14                 0.14***
                                                 (0.29)                  (0.30)                  (0.02)
   Water                                           0.19                    0.16                -0.07***
                                                 (0.31)                  (0.33)                  (0.03)
   Wetlands                                       -0.29                   -0.32                -0.09***
                                                 (0.28)                  (0.30)                  (0.02)
   Farmland                                       -0.01                   -0.01                   0.01
                                                 (0.18)                  (0.20)                  (0.01)
   Barren land                                    -0.58                   -0.65                 -0.18**
                                                 (1.56)                  (1.62)                  (0.08)


 Observations                         216         216         208         208       23,293      23,293
 Within R2                            0.19        0.49        0.13        0.47       0.01        0.22

Note: This table is identical to Table 4 in the main text, but for additional pollutants. The dependent
variable is the log of median household income in a Zip Code Tabulation Area in 1999. The pollutants
cannot all be combined into one regression because there are insufficient zip codes with monitors for all
pollutants. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                 A-10
                    Table A8: Race and Prices are Correlated with Disamenities



                                              % White                             Home value                          Rent
                                     (1)        (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)


 PM 2.5 (log)                     -32.47***                  -4.12     -0.30***                 -0.10     -0.16***                -0.07
                                    (5.60)                  (6.27)      (0.10)                 (0.12)      (0.05)                (0.06)
 Cancer risk, per million (log)               -26.72***   -16.06***                -0.22***     -0.07                -0.11***    -0.07*
                                                (2.67)      (3.55)                  (0.05)     (0.07)                 (0.03)     (0.03)
 Log noise                                                  4.91**                             0.10**                           0.08***
                                                            (2.24)                             (0.04)                            (0.02)
 Land use:
  Developed, high intensity                               -28.75***                            -0.46***                         -0.32***
                                                             (6.73)                              (0.13)                          (0.06)
   Developed, medium intensity                            -33.19***                            -0.61***                         -0.21***
                                                             (5.89)                              (0.11)                          (0.06)
   Developed, low intensity                                -15.36**                             -0.28**                           -0.04
                                                             (6.34)                              (0.12)                          (0.06)
   Developed, open space                                      -7.40                              0.26*                           0.20**
                                                             (8.15)                              (0.15)                          (0.08)
   Water                                                      -3.04                               -0.35                         -0.41***
                                                            (15.10)                              (0.28)                          (0.14)
   Wetlands                                                    6.31                               -0.16                           -0.17
                                                            (12.06)                              (0.22)                          (0.12)
   Farmland                                                   -4.08                               -0.05                           -0.03
                                                             (6.06)                              (0.11)                          (0.06)
   Barren land                                              -56.89*                            -2.29***                          -0.60*
                                                            (33.75)                              (0.62)                          (0.32)


 Observations                        980         980         980         974         974         974        978        978        978
 Within R2                           0.06        0.15        0.23        0.02        0.03        0.16       0.02       0.03       0.19

Note: This table matches Table 4 in the main text, but with alternative dependent variables: the percentage of ZCTA residents who are
White; median home values for owner-occupied homes; and median rent for renter-occupied homes. Data for all dependent variables are from
the 2000 Census. *** Statistically significant at the 1% level; ** 5% level; * 10% level.




                                                          A-11
A2      Theoretical Derivations
A2.1      Derivation of Demand Functions, Simplified Model
In the demand model in Section 2, we assume that utility is Cobb-Douglas in two goods,
q and y : U (q, y ) = q  y 1- . The first good, q , is unobserved healthiness. It is a function
of observable distance x to a point source: q = 0 - 1  + x. When households are
fully informed, they know the true 0 , 1 , and  parameters. Under limited information,
they misperceive the  parameter. The second good, y , is the other (i.e., numeraire) good,
unrelated to distance x to the point source.
    The individual has the following maximization problem, as stated in Section 2:

                              max U (q (x), y ) s.t. px + y = m
                               x,y


The first-order conditions that define the optimal bundle ( , x , y  ) are as follows:

                                               m - px - y = 0
                                                 q 
                                      q  -1 y 1-  - p = 0
                                                x
                                       (1 -  )q  y - -  = 0

Taking the second and third conditions above, we rearrange them so that the terms con-
taining  are on the right-hand side. We then divide the second condition by the third and
rearrange terms to obtain
                                   q    1          q 
                                      =   ·      ·
                                   y    p 1 -  x
                                                                   q
   Note that we can express q  as a function of x , and that x        =  . Substituting for y
                                                                                               

using the first first-order condition, we find the optimal, full-information choice of distance:

                                        m (1 -  )(0 - 1  )
                                x =       -
                                        p         

Subbing this back into q (x) yields

                                             m  ( - 1)(0 - 1  )
                        q  = 0 - 1  +          +
                                             p        

Substituting x into the budget constraint, we can also solve for y  :

                                                p(1 -  )(0 - 1  )
                            y  = (1 -  )m +
                                                         

                                               A-12
                              
To determine the sign of q
                         m
                            , we can differentiate the equation for x with respect to m and
the equation for q  with respect to x (alternatively, we could differentiate q  directly with
respect to m):
                                 q       q  x        
                                     =      
                                                  = >0
                                 m       x m         p
   To check that we are at an interior solution, we calculate the bordered Hessian:
                                                                        
                               0        -p                 -1
             D2 L(, x, y ) = -p  ( - 1)q  -2 y 1-  2  (1 -  )q  -1 y -  
                                                                        

                              -1 (1 -  )q  -1 y -  (1 -  )(- )q  y - -1

The determinant of this is:

    det D2 L(, x, y ) = p2 (1 -  )q  y - -1 + 2p (1 -  )q  -1 y -  +  (1 -  )q  -2 y 1-  2

Each is these three terms is positive, so the second order conditions are satisfied, and we are
at an interior solution.




                                             A-13
A2.2     Proof: Low-Income Households Experience A Greater Amount
         of Hidden Pollution, Simplified Model
The household chooses x(0 ) believing that air quality is a function of distance x and the
exogenous parameter 0 . However, true air quality is a function of the exogenous parameter
1 . As such, we have the following expression for the level of pollution the household believes
it experiences:
                            q (x(0 ), 0 ) = 0 - 1 0 + 0 (x(0 ))

In contrast, the level of pollution the household actually experiences is

                            q (x(0 ), 1 ) = 0 - 1 1 + 1 (x(0 ))

The difference between these is

   q (x(0 ), 1 ) - q (x(0 ), 0 ) = -1 (1 - 0 ) + (x(0 ))(1 - 0 ) = (x(0 ) - 1 )(1 - 0 )

The first term, (x(0 ) - 1 ), is negative (see footnote 35 in the main text). The second term,
(1 - 0 ), is positive. The full difference is therefore negative: the household experiences
worse air quality than it believes.
   The derivative of this difference with respect to income is:

                       d(q (x(0 ), 1 ) - q (x(0 ), 0 ))           
                                                        = (1 - 0 ) > 0
                                     dm                           p

Thus, every household experiences worse air quality than it believes, but the magnitude of
this experienced air quality deficit drops in income. In other words, low-income households
experience more "hidden pollution."




                                             A-14
A2.3         Proof: Low-Income Households Experience A Greater Util-
             ity Loss, Simplified Model
We wish to compare utility at the optimum ­ that is, when the household is fully informed
and therefore selects the bundle (q  , y  ) ­ with the utility experienced when the household
misperceives pollution exposure and selects the bundle (q  , y  ):

                                     U = (q  ) (y  )1- - (q  ) (y  )1-

First, we re-write this as:
                                                                         
                                                     q               q
                                              U =              y -           y
                                                     y               y
We then take the total derivative with respect to income:

                                      q                                       -1      q
        dU              q
                             -1       y             q
                                                         
                                                            y            q            y         q
                                                                                                    
                                                                                                       y 
            =                                 y +              -                          y -
         dm             y            m              y       m            y            m         y      m

                                                        q                
The first term in the ddm
                       U
                          expression drops out, because y  does not depend on income m (see

its expression in Appendix A2.1). Note, however, that the third term remains; the equation
     q                    q                         
for y  does not apply to y  because the bundle (q , y ) is away from the optimum.

    To make further progress in signing ddm
                                         U
                                            , the following partial derivatives are useful:43

                                                 y    y 
                                                    =    =1-
                                                 m    m

                                                      q    1 
                                                         =
                                                      m    p
                   q    
We differentiate ( y  ) with respect to m and find:



                                          q
                                          y               y            q 
                                               = -q  (y  )-2 + (y  )-1
                                      m                   m            m
                                                     
                                                   q  1             1 1 
                                               = -  ·  · (1 -  ) +  ·
                                                   y y              y    p
                                                          
                                                 1      q              1 
                                               =  -       
                                                            (1 -  ) +
                                                 y      y              p
                        q 
  43
       The derivative   m depends     on 1 because q  refers to experienced air quality, q (x (0 ), 1 ) = 0 -
             m       (1- )(0 -1 0 )
1 1 + 1      p   -         0          .




                                                         A-15
Substituting these in and re-arranging, we have:

                                                                        -1       q
     dU              
                     q
                          
                                 q      
                                                                  q              y
         =                   -              (1 -  ) -                                y
      dm             y           y                                y             m
                                                                        -1
                     q           q                                q          1          q                     1 
           =                 -              (1 -  ) -                            -               (1 -  ) +          y
                     y           y                                y          y          y                     p
                                                                                                               -1
                             q                        q                          q            2 1        q
           = (1 -  )                  - (1 -  )                 +  (1 -  )               -
                             y                        y                          y            p          y
                                                                                  -1
                             q                    2   q              2 1     q
           = (1 -  )                  - (1 -  )                   -
                             y                        y              p       y

                                1                     q
From the FOCs, we have that 1 1-p
                                  =                   y
                                                        ,   so:

                                                                                                              -1
           dU                          q                    2     q                          q       q
               = (1 -  )                       - (1 -  )                  -  (1 -  )
            dm                         y                          y                          y       y
                                                                                                    -1
                                        q                          q             q           q
                     = (1 -  )                    - (1 -  )                  -
                                        y                          y             y           y
                                                               
                                        q             q
                     = (1 -  )                    -               (1 -  ) R + R -1
                                        y             y
               
           (q /y )
where R = ( q  /y  )
                     < 1, since q  < q  and y  > y  .
   Our remaining task is to evaluate whether ((1 -  ) R + R -1 ) is greater than or less
than 1. To do so, first consider the situation in which R = 1. Then

                                  (1 -  ) R + R -1 = 1 -  +  = 1

In our setting, 0 < R < 1. To find whether ((1 -  ) R + R -1 ) is greater than or less than
1, we calculate its derivate with respect to R:

                     d [(1 -  ) R + R -1 ]
                                           =  (1 -  ) R -1 +  ( - 1) R -2
                                dR
                                           =  (1 -  ) R -1 -  (1 -  ) R -2
                                                      =  (1 -  ) R -1 - R -2

This derivative is negative: both  and 1- are positive, but the third term is negative. Thus,
                                                               
                                                  q         q
((1 -  ) R + R -1 ) > 1 when R < 1. In turn,      y
                                                        -   y
                                                                 ((1 -  ) R + R -1 ) < 0,
                         dU
which ensures that        dm
                               < 0.



                                                          A-16
A2.4     Proof: Low-Income Households Experience A Greater Change
         in Consumer Surplus, Simplified Model
We argue in the main text that one could evaluate whether the change in consumer surplus
from having full information is increasing or decreasing in income. Frequently the researcher
does not observe the full utility function, but is able to estimate demand and thus consumer
surplus. It is easiest to evaluate consumer surplus in our simplified Cobb-Douglas model
by considering the demand for distance x from the point source. The consumer surplus
gain associated with full information can be evaluated as the area under the full-information
inverse demand curve over the range (x (p), x (p)), minus the change in expenditure, as in
Figure 8. The outer grey demand curve comes from the true underlying utility function and
thus is the appropriate demand curve to use for evaluating consumer surplus.
   To derive an analytic expression for this change in consumer surplus using the model
we present in the main text, we take the integral under the inverse demand expression and
subtract off the change in expenditure, as follows:

                      p  ( x )
                                 m (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 )
          CS =                     -                 dp      - p (x ) - p (x ) · x ,
                     p (x )      p         1

where p (x ) denotes the actual market price of distance x and p (x ) denotes the implicit
price that would have yielded x in the full information case. This is equal to:

                                             (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 )
                  CS =m ln (p (x )) -                          · (p (x ))
                                                     1
                                                (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 )
                              - m ln (p (x )) +                    · (p (x ))
                                                        1
                              - p (x ) - p (x ) · x

    We are interested in how the change in consumer surplus that would result from full
information varies with income, so we take the derivative of CS with respect to income:

                     CS   m p              (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 ) p
                        =        +  ln p -
                     m    p m                      1         m
                               
                          m p              (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 ) p
                        -       -  ln p +
                          p m                      1         m
                                                    
                          x                p      p
                        -   ( p - p  ) - x     -
                          m                m m




                                               A-17
Noting that the true price p does not change with income, this simplifies to:

                              CS   m p              (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 ) p
                                 =        +  ln p -
                              m    p m                      1         m
                                                              
                                           x                p
                                 -  ln p -    (p - p ) - x
                                           m                m

Re-arrange to:
                                                                  
                                 CS                            x
                                    =  (ln p - ln p ) + (p - p )
                                 m                               m
                                       m (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 )                        p
                                    +       -                    - x
                                        p              1                          m

                       x
    Recall that        m
                            =p
                               , so:

                                 CS                             
                                    =  (ln p - ln p ) + (p - p ) 
                                 m                              p
                                       m (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 )                        p
                                    +       -                     - x
                                        p              1                          m

Next, note that p is the price that yields x along the true demand curve, i.e., x = ( m
                                                                                      p
                                                                                        -
(1- )(0 -1 1 )                                     CS
      1
               ). Therefore the last term in the m expression drops out, and we are left
with:
                             CS                                 
                                    =  (ln p - ln p ) + (p - p ) 
                              m                                 p
                                                              -p           
Recall that p > p , so (ln p - ln p ) is positive whereas p p      is negative. However, (ln p -
ln p ) is smaller in absolute value,44 leaving the entire expression  (ln p - ln p ) + (p - p ) p
negative.
    Then  CSm
                 is negative, so EJ Metric 3 holds for Cobb-Douglas preferences with linear
dissipation and linear pricing.




   44                 p
        Denote r =    p .   Then we are evaluating simply r - 1 compared to ln r. Since r - 1 > ln r, we have
        (p -p )
that      p       > ln p - ln p . Note it is easy to see graphically that r - 1 > ln r. More formally, note that
                       

                                                     -1)
ln r = r - 1 for r = 1. Then note that d(ln
                                         dr
                                            r)
                                               < d(r
                                                   dr    for all r > 1, implying that ln r < r - 1 for all r > 1.
      d(ln r )  d(r -1)
Also, dr > dr for all r < 1, implying that ln r < r - 1 for all r < 1. Therefore ln r  r - 1 for all r.
In the case we are considering, p = p , so the inequality is strict.


                                                       A-18
A2.5     Proof: Implicit Counterfactual Price is Decreasing in In-
         come
In the main text, we discuss how low-income households experience a greater change in con-
sumer surplus in the simplified model (Cobb-Douglas preferences, linear dissipation, fixed
prices). Appendix Section A2.4 gives a formal proof. The main text simply gives intu-
ition, and that intuition relies on the height of the consumer surplus triangle in Figure 8.
Specifically, we rely on the fact that p (the price that would have yielded the uninformed
quantity x in the full information case) decreases with income m. In this Appendix, we
                               
prove mathematically that p  m
                                 < 0.
    First, define p to be the price that would yield x along the full information demand
curve:
                                      m (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 )
                                x =  -
                                      p             1
And recall that the uniformed demand curve for x as a function of the true price p is given
by:
                                  m (1 -  )(0 - 1 0 )
                             x =     -
                                   p            0
Therefore by substitution:

                    m (1 -  )(0 - 1 0 )  m (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 )
                      -                 =  -
                    p         0           p        1

Rearranging:
                     1   1 (1 -  )(0 - 1 0 ) (1 -  )(0 - 1 1 )
                       
                        = -                 +
                     p   p       0 m               1 m
Simplifying:
                              1   1 (1 -  )0 (0 - 1 ) 1
                                
                                 = +
                              p   p       0 1         m
Re-write this as:
                       1      B   Am + B         m
                         
                          =A+   =        = p =
                       p      m     m          Am + B
          1
where A = p > 0 and B = (1- )  0 (0 -1 )
                               0 1 
                                         . Recall that 0 < 1 , so B =   (1- )0 (0 -1 )
                                                                            0 1 
                                                                                         < 0.
  Taking the partial derivative:

                                  p      B
                                    =            <0
                                  m   (Am + B )2

The derivative of p with respect to income is negative.



                                           A-19
A2.6      Equilibrium under Pure Exchange with Continuous Choice
          of Distance
Here we maintain the modeling assumptions from Section 2 in the main text but allow
the price of distance to vary endogenously. Specifically, we now consider a pure exchange
economy with two individuals. We assume a fixed total supply of distance X to be divided up
between the two individuals in a continuous manner. While this clearly does not map directly
into a real-world housing scenario, it can help ground intuition about how prices might behave
in general equilibrium and what that might imply for the Cobb-Douglas scenario given above.
    The numeraire good also has fixed total supply (Y ). We continue to assume that the
two individuals have identical preferences and access to information and differ only in their
initial endowments. We also continue to assume that pollution decay can be approximated
with a linear functional form. Finally, we maintain our assumption that preferences are
Cobb-Douglas.
    Recall that this implies that individual i's demand for distance is given by:

                                        mi (1 -  )(0 - 1  )
                                 xi =     -
                                        p          

where m is income (i.e., the value of the initial allocation), p is the price of good x, the
numeraire good y has a price of 1,  is the Cobb-Douglas parameter, and the exogenous
parameters (0 , 1 ,  ) relate distance x to air quality q .
    As such, EJ Metric 1 again holds: distance is increasing in m, and since air quality
increases with distance, whoever has the greater value of the initial allocation obtains better
air quality in equilibrium. Thus EJ Metric 1 holds simply because air quality is a normal
good. Furthermore, since the wedge between true and perceved air quality is decreasing in
distance (because of the pollution dissipation process), EJ Metric 2 again holds.
    To check whether EJ Metric 3 holds, we must evaluate utility for each individual in
the limited-information equilibrium versus in the full-information equilibrium. Suppose that
individual 1 begins with initial allocation (x0     0
                                               1 , y1 ) and individual 2 begins with initial alloca-
                                                                                                  
tion (x0     0
        2 , y2 ). Denote the equilibrium bundles under limited information (x1 , y1 ) and (x2 , y2 ).
Under limited information, the  parameter is believed by all agents to be at level 0 (in
reality, it is at level 1 > 0 ). In equilibrium, p is such that total demand across the two
consumers is equal to total supply:

                                        x           0     0
                                         1 + x 2 = x1 + x 2


                                                    0    0
                                         y1 + y2 = y1 + y2

                                               A-20
Substituting in the expressions for xi and mi , we have:
                                             
     ( x0      0
        1 p + y1 )   (1 -  )(0 - 1 0 )  (x0      0
                                          2 p + y2 )   (1 -  )(0 - 1 0 )
             
                   -                  +        
                                                     -                   = x0    0
                                                                            1 + x2
           p                 0               p                 0

Re-arranging to solve for the equilibrium price p under limited information:
                                                   0    0
                                                 (y1 + y2 )
                            p =
                                                            (1- )(0 -1 0 )
                                  (1 -  )(x0    0
                                           1 + x2 ) + 2           0


Denote equilibrium price in the full information scenario as p , given by:
                                                   0    0
                                                 (y1 + y2 )
                            p =
                                                            (1- )(0 -1 1 )
                                  (1 -  )(x0    0
                                           1 + x2 ) + 2           1


We wish to compare utility at the optimum ­ that is, when the household is fully informed
and therefore selects the bundle (q  , y  ) ­ with the utility experienced when household
misperceives pollution exposure and selects the bundle (q  , y  ):

                               U = (q  ) (y  )1- - (q  ) (y  )1-

This expression is identical to the one in Appendix A2.3, but note that now the two bundles
(q  , y  ) and (q  , y  ) are at different equilibrium prices p and p . We re-write this as:
                                                                   
                                            q               q
                                     U =              y -             y
                                            y               y

We want to evaluate whether this is change in utility is larger for low-income or high-income
individuals. To do so, we take the derivative with respect to the initial endowment of
                                                                                  0     0
the numeraire good y , holding constant the total supply of that good, Y = y1       + y2  . We
define "low-income" and "high-income" this way so as to separate out effects of the initial
endowment as opposed to the impact of information on total wealth (which would include
the price effects of the initial endowment). Taking the total derivative with respect to y 0 :

                                q                                      -1       q
     dU           q
                       -1       y          q
                                                
                                                   y            q               y          q
                                                                                               
                                                                                                  y 
           =                         y +               -                             y -
      dy 0        y            y 0         y       y 0          y              y 0         y      y 0

                                                          q     
The first term in the ddy
                       U
                          0 expression drops out, because y  does not depend on the individual's

initial endowment y 0 (see its expression in Appendix A2.1). Note, however, that the third
                                   q                     q                         
term remains; the equation for y     does not apply to y  because the bundle (q , y ) is away




                                                A-21
from the optimum.45
                                                      dU
   To make further progress in signing                 dy 0
                                                            ,   the following partial derivatives are useful:46

                                                 y     y 
                                                     =     =1-
                                                 y 0   y 0

                                                      q    1 
                                                        0
                                                          = 
                                                      y     p
                   q    
                                          0
We differentiate ( y  ) with respect to y   and find:

                                          q
                                                        y               
                                          y                        -1 q
                                              = -q  (y  )-2 + ( y )
                                      y 0               y 0           y 0
                                                  q 1               1 1 
                                              = -  ·  · (1 -  ) +  · 
                                                  y y               y   p
                                                        
                                                1     q               1 
                                              =  -      
                                                           (1 -  ) + 
                                                y     y               p

This expression is identical to the one in Appendix A2.3, but where the equilibrium price is
equal to p . Substituting these in and re-arranging, we have:

                                                                        -1       q
       dU             q
                           
                                  q
                                          
                                                                   q             y
             =                -               (1 -  ) -                          0
                                                                                     y
        dy 0          y           y                                y            yi
                                                                        -1
                      q           q                                q         1          q               1 
            =                 -               (1 -  ) -                          -          (1 -  ) +         y
                      y           y                                y         y          y               p
                                                                                                         -1
                              q                       q                          q         2 1   q
            = (1 -  )                 - (1 -  )                 +  (1 -  )               - 
                              y                       y                          y         p     y
                                                                                  -1
                              q                   2    q             2 1     q
            = (1 -  )                 - (1 -  )                    - 
                              y                        y             p       y

                                   q        1                          p q                       
                                                                                 2 1
    From the FOCs, we have that y     = 1 1- p . Rearranging,  (1 -  ) p y  = 1  p (this is

different from the expression in Appendix A2.3, for which p was constant and the expression
  45
     Recall that here q  refers to experienced rather than perceived q .
                     q                             
  46
     The derivative y   0 depends on 1 because q     refers to experienced air quality, q (x (0 ), 1 ) = 0 -
           y 0       (1- )(0 -1 0 )
1 1 + 1    p     -         0          .




                                                           A-22
simplified). Substituting it in, we have:

                                                                                                                              -1
            dU                                  q                      2    q                       p        q        q
                  = (1 -  )                                - (1 -  )                 -  (1 -  )
             dy 0                               y                           y                       p        y        y
                                                                                                                   -1
                                                 q                          q                 p     q        q
                      = (1 -  )                               - (1 -  )                 -
                                                 y                          y                 p     y        y
                                                                       
                                                 q                q                                p
                      = (1 -  )                               -             (1 -  ) R +                  R  -1
                                                 y                y                                p

                   (q  /y  )
where R =          (q  /y  )
                             .       This is similar to the expression in Appendix A2.3, but with the new
        p
term    p
               .
                                                                                                              p
   Our task is to evaluate whether the expression                                          (1 -  ) R +        p
                                                                                                                     R  -1    is greater
than or less than one, because this will tell us the sign of ddy
                                                              U
                                                                 0 . The proof that follows is

similar to the one in Appendix A2.3, but with a few extra details that were not necessary in
the simplified case where the price is exogenous.
                                                                               
   Consider the case where R = p  p
                                     . Then the expression (1 -  ) R +  p     p
                                                                                  R -1 sim-
                                            p
plifies to R . Note that                    p
                                                > 1. Mathematically,
                                                                                                                  (1- )(0 -1 0 )
                                                                                                                                       
  p                                       0
                                        (y1    0
                                            + y2 )                                      (1 -  )(x0    0
                                                                                                 1 + x2 ) + 2           0
    =                                                                        
                                                                                                          0    0
                                                                                                                                       
  p   (1 -  )(x0 +                     x0        (1- )(0 -1 1 )                                         (y1 + y2 )
                                 1      2) + 2         1


Simplifying,
                                                                           (1- )(0 -1 0 )
                                                p    (1 -  )(x0    0
                                                              1 + x2 ) + 2         0
                                                  
                                                   =                       (1-  )( 0 - 1 1 )
                                                p             0    0
                                                     (1 -  )(x1 + x2 ) + 2         1

                        (1- )(0 -1 0 )                                                        
Since 0 < 1 ,                 0
                                       > (1- )(1
                                                0 -1 1 )
                                                         . Therefore p
                                                                     p
                                                                        > 1. Therefore R = p
                                                                                           p
                                                                                               >
                      d U
1. Therefore           dy 0
                            < 0, so EJ Metric 3 holds: low-income households experience greater
deadweight loss from limited information.
                                      
   Next consider the case where R > pp
                                       . Take the derivative with respect to R of the entire
                                                    p                                                                              p
expression (1 -  ) R +                              p
                                                           R -1 . This derivative is equal to:  (1- ) R -1 -                       p
                                                                                                                                       R -2 .
        p                              p                                                                              p
Since   p
            > 1 and R >                p
                                         ,      the derivative is positive. Thus (1 -  ) R +                          p
                                                                                                                             R -1 > 1.
Therefore, ddy
            U
               0 < 0 and EJ Metric 3 holds.
                                       
  Next consider the case where R < p  p
                                        . Take the derivative with respect to R of the entire
                                                    p                                                                              p
expression (1 -  ) R +                              p
                                                           R -1 . This derivative is equal to:  (1- ) R -1 -                       p
                                                                                                                                       R -2 .
        p                             p                                                                                                p
Since   p
            > 1 and R <               p
                                        ,   the derivative is negative. Thus the expression (1 -  ) R +                                p
                                                                                                                                           R  -1 >


                                                                           A-23
                dU
1. Therefore,    dy 0
                        < 0 and EJ Metric 3 holds.




                                               A-24
A2.7     Equilibrium under Pure Exchange with Houses at Fixed Dis-
         tance
Rather than modeling the choice of two houses at fixed distances from a point source of
pollution, we can instead consider a setting with two houses at fixed locations: one house
HH with high air quality, and one house HL with low air quality. As before, we assume there
are no other differences between the two houses. There are also two consumers, individual 1
and individual 2. As before, we assume the two individuals are identical in their preferences
and their access to information. All non-housing goods are aggregated into a numeraire good
y with price 1 and with total supply Y . Trade can occur via a transfer of size p from one
individual to another.
    Whether or not a mutually beneficial trade exists depends, in part, on the initial allo-
cation. We first assume that the same individual holds the higher quality house HH and
a larger quantity of good y . In that case, this "high-income" individual will only accept a
trade if:
                                 U (HL , yH + p) > U (HH , yH )

Subtract U (HL , yH ) from both sides:

                  U (HL , yH + p) - U (HL , yH ) > U (HH , yH ) - U (HL , yH )          (A1)

   The "low-income" individual will only accept a trade if:

                                 U (HH , yL - p) > U (HL , yL )

Subtract U (HL , yL - p) from both sides:

               U (HH , yL - p) - U (HL , yL - p) > U (HL , yL ) - U (HL , yL - p)       (A2)

Both Equation A1 and Equation A2 must hold in order for a trade to occur.
    If UHy (the cross partial) is non-negative ­ such as with Cobb-Douglas or additively
separable utility ­ then the right-hand side of Equation A1 is larger than the left-hand side
of Equation A2:

                 U (HH , yH ) - U (HL , yH ) > U (HH , yL - p) - U (HL , yL - p)

However, the right-hand side of Equation A2 is larger than the left-hand side of Equation A1
because of declining marginal utility (conditional on HL , p is worth more if you only have


                                             A-25
yL than when you have yH ):

                 U (HL , yL ) - U (HL , yL - p) > U (HL , yH + p) - U (HL , yH )

Therefore, under these conditions, there is no value of p for which Equations A1 and A2
both hold. In general, we expect this to be true if air quality is a normal good.
    Given no trade, suppose that it is revealed that a polluter has been hiding emissions.
The typical pollution dissipation process described above implies that air quality is worse
everywhere than had been believed, and especially worse for the house with lower air qual-
ity HL . Thus, trade will still not occur, by the same logic as before. Furthermore, both
households experience lower utility, and the individual owning home HL experiences an even
bigger difference in utility. This is both because the wedge between true and believed air
quality is higher for that individual (because of the way pollution dissipates), and because
the marginal utility of air quality is higher for that individual (assuming, as is typical, that
marginal utility is declining). There is no feasible re-optimization that improves total wel-
fare. But it is the case that the low-income individual experiences greater hidden pollution
(i.e., Metric 2 holds), and that the welfare impact of that hidden pollution is larger for the
low-income individual (related to Metric 3, albeit without deadweight loss per se, since in
equilibrium the allocations do not change).
    Now suppose that in the initial allocation, the individual with the larger initial allocation
of good y has the lower quality house HL . We will assume that housing is a small part of
the total budget for each individual and accordingly refer to the individual with a higher
initial allocation of y as the "high-income" individual. In this case, trade is possible, and we
consider the transfer required to induce such a trade. Utility for each individual, with and
without trade, is as follows:

   · Low-income individual, no trade: U (HH , yL )

   · High-income individual, no trade: U (HL , yH )

   · Low-income individual, with trade: U (HL , yL + p)

   · High-income individual, with trade: U (HH , yH - p)

    Trade will occur if there is a transfer p such that both parties can be made weakly better
off: U (HL , yL + p)  U (HH , yL ) and U (HH , yH - p)  U (HL , yH ). Suppose again that it
is revealed that a polluter has been hiding emissions. To simplify the logic, consider the
case of additively separable utility. In this case, the transfer p needed to induce trade is
larger: the low-income individual requires a greater payment to accept the drop in utility

                                             A-26
from moving from HH to HL . Furthermore, the high-income individual is willing to make
a larger payment to obtain the increase in utility from moving from HL to HH . By not
knowing about the true level of emissions, the low-income individual has missed out on the
full value of the transfer payment p that she would actually require to be weakly better off
with trade.
    To evaluate welfare, we can consider both the change in utility coming from the housing
stock and the change in utility coming from the numeraire good. Both households expe-
rience lower utility from housing, and the individual owning home HL in equilibrium (in
this case, the low-income individual) experiences an even bigger difference in utility. This is
both because the wedge between true and believed air quality is higher for that individual
(due to pollution dissipation), and because the marginal utility of air quality is higher for
that individual (due to declining marginal utility). Moreover, the low-income individual is
additionally worse off from a too-small transfer payment, while the high-income individual
is conversely better off for the same reason. Overall then, in this scenario, Metrics 2 and
3 both hold: the low-income individual experiences greater hidden pollution, and a greater
utility loss as a result of the information failure.




                                             A-27
A2.8     Optimization in the General Model
In the demand model in Section 3, we assume that households gain utility from three goods:
salient amenities s(x) that increase with distance to a point source, hidden amenities q (x),
and other goods y . Distance to the point source is priced according to some positive hedonic
pricing function p(x). The household's optimization problem when unaware of q (x) is:

                              max U (s(x), y ) s.t. p(x) + y = m
                               x,y


                   q            s                                                     p
We assume that x      > 0 and x   > 0 (both amenities increase with distance) and x       > 0
(house prices increase with distance). We also assume that all goods provide positive utility
at a declining rate: Uq > 0, Uqq < 0, etc.
    The first-order conditions that define the chosen bundle ( , x , y  ) under limited infor-
mation are as follows:

                                        m - p(x) - y = 0
                                           s     p
                                        Us   -       =0
                                           x     x
                                             Uy -  = 0

To check that we are at an interior solution, we calculate the bordered Hessian:

                                                         p
                                                                           
                                 0                    - x             -1
                  2              p             s    2      2s     2p     s 
                 D L(, x, y ) = - x Uss        x
                                                      + Us x 2 -  x2 Usy x 
                                                          s
                                -1                    Usy x           Uyy

The determinant of this is:
                          2                             2
                     p               p    s         s                2s   2p
                 -            Uyy + 2 Usy   -               Uss - Us 2 +  2
                     x               x    x         x               x    x

                                                                                p   2
For this to be positive, it must be the case that the two positive terms - x        Uyy and
   s  2
- x     Uss are not swamped by any negative terms in the rest of the expression (the re-
                                                                          2s         2p
maining three terms have ambiguous signs, depending on the signs of Usy , x  2 , and x2 ).

   Assuming we are not at a corner solution, we can use comparative statics to find the sign




                                             A-28
of the derivative of distance with respect to income, at the optimum:
                                              p
                                                               -1  
               m
                     0                     - x            -1      -1
               x   p                 s   2      2s    2p     s 
               m  = - x Uss                + Us x2 -  x2 Usy x  ·  0 
                                                                   
                                     x
               y                               s
               m
                    -1                     Usy x          Uyy      0

By Cramer's Rule, we have:

                                          0 -1 -1
                                           p       s
                                         - x 0 Usy x
                      x                  -1 0   Uyy
                        =
                      m        0               - xp
                                                              -1
                                p        s   2      2s    2p     s
                              - x Uss    x
                                               + Us x2 -  x2 Usy x
                                                   s
                              -1               Usy x          Uyy

                                                  s       p
The numerator will be positive provided that Usy x  > Uyy x . This is similar to the standard
condition under which a good is normal, with additional accounting for the shape of the
hedonic price function and the impact that distance x has on the good of interest s. Thus
            
we expect xm
              > 0, i.e., x will be a normal good.




                                             A-29
