                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




A UNIFIED PERSPECTIVE ON EFFICIENCY, REDISTRIBUTION, AND PUBLIC POLICY

                                         Louis Kaplow

                                      Working Paper 26683
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26683


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




This article originated in my Holland Medal address delivered at the 2019 annual meeting of the
National Tax Association. I am grateful to the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and
Business at Harvard University for financial support. Disclaimer: I occasionally consult on
antitrust cases, and my spouse is in the legal department of a financial services firm. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Louis Kaplow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
A Unified Perspective on Efficiency, Redistribution, and Public Policy
Louis Kaplow
NBER Working Paper No. 26683
January 2020
JEL No. D61,D62,D63,H20,H21,H23,H24,H26,H41,H43,H53,H55

                                           ABSTRACT

Specialized theoretical and empirical research should in principle be embedded in a unified
framework that identifies the relevant interactions among different phenomena, enables an
appropriate matching of policy instruments to objectives, and grounds normative analysis in
individuals' utilities and a social welfare function. This article advances an approach that both
provides integration across many dimensions and contexts and also identifies which tasks may be
undertaken separately and how such analysis should be conducted so as to be consistent with the
underlying framework. It employs the distribution-neutral methodology and welfare analysis
developed in Kaplow (2008a) and related work, offering applications to income taxation,
commodity taxation, tax expenditures, externalities, public goods, capital income and wealth
taxation, social security and retirement savings, estate and gift taxation, and transfer programs. It
also explores welfare criteria and examines how their consideration enables the normative
analysis of the taxation of families, heterogeneous preferences, and tax administration and
enforcement.

Louis Kaplow
Harvard University
Hauser 322
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
meskridge@law.harvard.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

         A unified view of a field is complementary to specialized theoretical and empirical work
that abstracts from even basic matters. Most research inevitably must be specialized, but it is
useful at times to consider how various strands connect to the whole. Unless the relevant
linkages are periodically identified and assessed, there is the risk that efforts may be misdirected
and that results may provide misleading guidance to policymakers. Moreover, in setting research
agendas, it is important to appreciate what, in principle, needs to be known to provide
prescriptions.
         This article, drawing primarily on my own writing, offers a unified conceptual
perspective on efficiency, redistribution, and public policy. In doing so, it seeks to identify
connections within and across a number of dimensions:
     Policy instruments: the effects and optimal design of the income tax and transfer system,
         differential commodity taxes, Pigouvian corrections (taxation and regulation), public
         goods, capital and wealth taxation, wealth transfer taxation, and social security.
     Policy objectives: in particular, the relationship between efficiency and redistribution.
     Utility and welfare functions: the need to trace effects to individuals' utility, implications
         of notions of social welfare that do not depend entirely on individuals' utility, the choice
         of social welfare function, and implications for thinking about equality, mobility,
         poverty, horizontal equity, taxation of the family, heterogeneous preferences, and tax
         administration and enforcement.
Accomplishing this mission is a tall order. This investigation elaborates key concepts and
connections that provide a rough framework that is useful for a variety of more concrete tasks.
         To further motivate the inquiry, consider empirical research that estimates the magnitude
of the elasticity of charitable giving with respect to the net-of-tax cost. A common benchmark
for the "efficiency" of the deduction for charitable contributions is whether the magnitude of this
elasticity exceeds 1.0, for then the deduction (at the margin) induces more than a dollar of giving
for each dollar of revenue cost. See, for example, Boskin and Feldstein (1977).1 When seeing
subsequent papers on the subject, I asked myself whether I could think of a plausible model in
which this policy prescription made sense. (In today's phraseology, this is akin to asking
whether this elasticity is a sufficient statistic for welfare analysis, with a further particular claim
regarding the implications of various magnitudes.) I could not.
         In my subsequent research (largely not on this particular subject), the core normative
question--how society should determine the optimal level of the charitable deduction (or other
such instrument)--is analyzed by breaking it down in the following way:
     Charitable giving, the target of the subsidy, is a species of giving. It differs from the
         other main category of giving (between individuals, primarily from parents to children) in
         involving the support of various public goods.
     Giving of the ordinary sort, in turn, is a species of consumption. It differs in three
         principal respects from ordinary consumption: (1) there is a positive externality to the
         donee that even an altruistic donor does not fully credit; (2) there is a negative
         externality on the fisc (in today's parlance, a fiscal externality) to the extent that the
         income or wealth effect induces the donee to work less and thus pay less in taxes;

1
 Boskin and Feldstein (1977, p. 351) refers to whether the deduction is "fully efficient in this sense," without later
elaboration. Although not explicitly advanced as a sufficient statistic for welfare analysis, a motivation for this line
of research seems to be that this elasticity is a central determinant of optimal policy.

                                                           1
        (3) gifts involve voluntary income redistribution that changes the marginal utilities of the
        donor and donee and thus interacts with the optimal redistributive income tax problem.
     Various types of ordinary consumption themselves are objects of policy, ordinarily
        analyzed under the subject of differential commodity taxation.
     Consumption as a whole is the use of labor income that is subject to income taxation;
        commodity taxation and income taxation interact, so income taxation must be addressed
        as part of the analysis.
     Optimal income taxation, in turn, depends on a number of empirical parameters and on
        the social welfare function.
Perhaps the reader is wondering: What about the elasticity of charitable giving? In a simple
setting in which a charitable deduction is modeled as a corrective subsidy designed to internalize
a positive externality, this elasticity not only fails to be a sufficient statistic, but in basic cases
does not even appear in the formula--which calls for the standard Pigouvian correction, that is, a
subsidy equal to the marginal external benefit. Relaxing one of the assumptions (weak
separability of labor effort in the utility function), this elasticity becomes relevant in light of a
fiscal externality correction. Even then, the elasticity can enter with either sign (depending on
the direction of the interaction)--so that a higher elasticity could favor a smaller subsidy rather
than a larger one--and there is no particular significance to the magnitude 1.0.
        The point of this exercise is not that researchers should avoid specialization and, in
particular, the bracketing of some phenomena in order to illuminate others. Nor should empirical
research limit itself to the estimation of sufficient statistics for welfare analysis, eschewing all
manner of study that illuminates behavior and various effects of policies. Rather, the central
claim is that we cannot understand relevant behavior or properly inform policy without an
appreciation of how various pieces fit together. Moreover, we cannot readily leverage what is
learned about some subjects to enhance our understanding of others and of the system as a
whole.
        This article sketches key features of a unified perspective that follows my book, Kaplow
(2008a), and related work. Section II develops the core distribution-neutral framework that
enables a modularized treatment of the efficiency and distributive effects of reforms.2
Specifically, it is explained how, generically, various policy reforms (whether of commodity
taxes, public goods, regulation, or much more) can be decomposed into two components. First is
a distribution-neutral module that consists of the core reform (say, an increase in a public good)
combined with an adjustment to the income tax and transfer schedule that renders the combined
package distribution neutral. This package can be analyzed using standard efficiency tests (such
as the Samuelson Rule for public goods). Second is a purely redistributive module that converts
the aforementioned tax adjustment into whatever actual income tax modification was imagined
to accompany the core reform. This component, constituting a purely redistributive change to
the income tax system, can be analyzed as such.
        As section II explains, there are a number of benefits of employing this two-step
decomposition. To begin, analysis is clarified and results are more readily communicated.
When core effects and redistribution are entangled--and in different ways in different
investigations of the same policy instrument--it is difficult to compare results, and both

2
  Modularity here takes the meaning common in computer programming and complexity theory: analysis within
each module can be undertaken independently even if an output of one is an input to the other or a higher level
module combines the output of separate, lower-level modules. For an interesting essay on aspects of modularity by
the Nobel-Prize-winning economist and polymath Herbert Simon, see Simon (1962).

                                                        2
researchers and policymakers can readily misinterpret the conclusions. The two-step
decomposition avoids these problems. Moreover, the decomposition facilitates specialization,
something most researchers appropriately do in any event, but enabling it to proceed in a
legitimately grounded and more reliable manner. Analysts, say, of environmental policy need
not simultaneously model and simulate income tax policy, which requires additional effort as
well taking a stand on empirical matters like elasticities and the distribution of abilities and on
the social welfare function. Third and related, difficult political economy assumptions are often
embedded (at least implicitly) in analyses that eschew this decomposition--assumptions that
differ across studies, are not empirically grounded, and may well be implausible.
        Last, section II illustrates the analysis with the familiar differential commodity tax
problem. It is explained how a variety of reforms can be assessed without assuming either that
the income tax is optimal or confining attention to reforms in the neighborhood of the
commodity tax optimum. In a basis case with weak separability of labor effort in the utility
function, the optimality of uniformity obtains; moreover, proportional reforms in the direction of
uniformity can be implemented so as to generate a strict Pareto improvement, as can other
conventionally efficiency-enhancing reforms. The role of separability is examined, emphasizing
that relaxing the assumption does adjust the efficiency test, on account of a fiscal externality, but
does not undermine the proposed modularity and thus the benefits of the two-step decomposition
that begins with distribution-neutral analysis. It is also explained how, despite Atkinson and
Stiglitz's (1976) article, other, inconsistent methods largely dominated public economics through
the 1990s and to an extent beyond, practices that are now increasingly being displaced by work
that builds on or often is inspired by a newer view that is reflected in the distribution-neutral
approach.
        Section III examines a wide range of applications. It begins with the familiar subject of
tax expenditures, which remarkably had not been analyzed as an application of differential
commodity taxation; when it is, important corrections to conventional wisdom become apparent.
Next examined are externality-correcting taxes and public goods, two areas that have received
substantial attention in the second-best public economics literature but that, until more recently,
had failed to disentangle core efficiency effects from (often implicit) redistribution. Additional
applications include capital income and wealth taxation, social security and retirement savings,
estate and gift taxation (reprising the above illustration involving gifts), and the rather different
but quite important problem of the optimal design of transfer programs. As will be seen, the core
framework illuminates how best to identify the distinctive effects of different policy instruments
and sharpens our understanding of the targeting principle regarding how they should optimally
be used--in many cases, by following the dictates of domain-specific efficiency tests, leaving
distribution to the income tax and transfer system.
        Section IV extends the analysis to consider individuals' utility functions and the social
welfare function, which underlie the welfare economic approach to policy analysis. Following
Kaplow and Shavell (2001, 2002), it is explained how the Pareto principle substantially restricts
normative analysis to a much greater degree than is widely appreciated. These lessons (and
some of my own prior work) are then used to clarify the appropriate (and more limited) role of
notions and measures of horizontal equity, mobility, equality, and poverty. This framing is then
used to illuminate difficult normative issues regarding taxation of the family, heterogeneous
preferences, and problems of tax administration, compliance, and enforcement--all realms in
which it is challenging but critical to trace policies' effects to individuals' utilities and thus
ultimately to measures of social welfare. One cannot identify sufficient statistics for welfare
analysis without articulating and analyzing the underlying determinants of welfare.

                                                 3
         This article addresses a wide range of topics and maps many of their interrelationships.
Although the framing is largely normative, much of the analysis--and the core virtues of the
two-step decomposition used throughout sections II and III--is positive. It enhances clarity and
rigor, and it aids in setting empirical research agendas and interpreting estimates of the effects of
policy experiments. The exposition throughout is cursory in a number of ways, with many
qualifications and omissions left unstated.3 The presentation is also largely informal (with hints
throughout of the formal arguments) and, in light of the article's origins, highly self-referential
(see Kaplow 2007c, 2008a for fairly comprehensive references to those dates). The purpose here
is not to give a comprehensive account but rather to articulate a framework that is useful in a
range of settings and that, due to its elemental character, makes it easier to criticize, qualify, and
improve as research progresses.


II. EFFICIENCY AND REDISTRIBUTION: A FRAMEWORK FOR ANALYSIS
         This section presents a framework for analyzing a wide variety of policy instruments and
relating them to social objectives. Section II.A articulates a two-step decomposition that
separates the core features of (non-purely-redistributive) policies, which can be assessed using
efficiency tests, from the redistributive dimension, which is subject to analysis following
Mirrlees (1971). Some readers may recognize this proposed modularity of the two types of
analysis from Musgrave's (1959) suggestive distinction between what he termed the Allocation
and Distribution Branches of government.
         Section II.B elaborates the advantages of employing this decomposition: conceptual
clarity, specialization, and detaching considerations of political economy. The framework
developed here also helps to formalize the idea that instruments should be properly matched to
objectives and to indicate how specialized research can more effectively be conducted. Section
III.C illustrates the methodology by analyzing commodity tax reforms and relating the method
advanced here to that of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) and also to prior literatures that adopt
neither the present approach nor that of Atkinson and Stiglitz.

A. Two-Step Decomposition
        Suppose that we wish to evaluate some change in policy--perhaps in the level of a public
good, a commodity tax, or a regulation--which we will denote as  . Assume further that this
is imagined to be accompanied by some change to the income tax and transfer schedule,  .
The only restriction on  is that the package as a whole,              , is budget neutral. (Note,
for example, that if  is a regulatory reform that has no effect on the government's budget, 
could be the null policy, but it need not be.) Our task is to assess the aggregate policy, 
 .
        The analysis will be conducted in a standard Mirrlees (1971) setting. Individuals differ in
their (unobservable) earning ability and choose labor effort (and make any other domain-relevant
choices, depending on the policy being considered) so as to maximize their (common) utility
functions, taking policies and the nonlinear income tax schedule as given.4 There is some

3
  The article sets to the aside (in some cases entirely) behavioral economic considerations, problems of
administration and enforcement, empirical work and related practicalities of matching evidence to the theory,
political economy concerns, and macroeconomic considerations.
4
  Extensions for heterogeneous utility functions and different family types are considered in section IV.

                                                         4
individualistic social welfare function (SWF)--that is a welfare function that depends (only) on
individuals' utilities--which, as we will see, does not need to be specified further for much of
the analysis because the methodology developed here enables Pareto comparisons. Moreover,
the analysis is largely independent of the initial income tax and transfer schedule , including
whether it is set optimally according to some SWF. Indeed, will not appear in our analysis.
         The fairly general methodology elaborated here requires that we introduce only one
further element. Define          to be the adjustment to the income tax and transfer schedule such
that the aggregate policy,              , is distribution neutral. Specifically,       is set at every
level of income such that                provides individuals who initially earned that income the
same level of utility as before. That is,         is the compensating variation for policy change 
at every level of income. Note that, for a marginal change one can determine this compensation
in a straightforward way because any adjustments to an individual's behavior have no effect on
the individual's utility by the envelope theorem. (For example, for the increase in a public good
examined in section III.C, the income tax adjustment would be an increase equal to the marginal
rate of substitution at each income level.)
         Note that this package as a whole is actually more than just distribution neutral. It keeps
each individual at the same utility level, which also means that we need not choose some
definition of "distribution neutral" that allows comparisons across distributions with different
levels of income or of utility. As a further note on terminology, when we consider a tax schedule
adjustment that creates a package that is, as a whole, distribution neutral, it is helpful to describe
this tax adjustment in isolation as distributively offsetting, or an offsetting income tax
adjustment.
         The main lesson of this section can now be stated immediately using the above notation
and definitions:

                                                                           .

That is, we can rewrite (decompose) the policy we seek to evaluate,       , into two
components,               and             . These components, in turn, can be viewed as steps,
wherein we first imagine implementing the policy comprising the first parenthetical term,
instantaneously followed by implementing the policy comprising the second:

                                                                           .
                                                                    


It is also useful to restate this expression verbally:

            Step 1.     Combine the policy in question (sans finance) with a distributively
                        offsetting adjustment to the income tax and transfer schedule.
                                       Efficiency test.
            Step 2.     Transform the foregoing (hypothetical) income tax schedule into the
                        actually proposed income tax schedule.
                                       Redistribution assessment.

        This simple two-step decomposition has remarkably useful properties. Step 1 can be
assessed entirely on efficiency grounds. No matter what the SWF, because Step 1 as a package is
distribution-neutral, there is no redistribution to account for. Relatedly, there is no change in

                                                      5
labor supply distortion associated with any change in redistribution to account for either. The
basic tradeoff embodied in the Mirrlees problem is entirely absent. By contrast, Step 2 is a
purely redistributive adjustment to the income tax and transfer system. It is the Mirrlees problem
and should be assessed accordingly. Let us now elaborate each of these features.
        Step 1: As mentioned, Step 1 is a pure efficiency test. In particular, it yields a simple
way of assessing policies (within Step 1): Focus on whether there is a budget surplus or deficit.5
If there is a surplus, one could rebate it, say, pro rata and generate a strict Pareto improvement.
If there is a deficit, the same exercise would make everyone worse off, but in that case reversing
the policy (implementing  and likewise reversing the sign of the distribution-neutral income
tax adjustment, creating            ) would, for marginal policies, enable a Pareto improvement--
and, for nonmarginal policies, a reversal, or some partial version, would enable a Pareto
improvement.
        Moreover, it is often possible to understand fairly directly whether Step 1 involves a
budget surplus or deficit. Recall that the income tax adjustment,            , is the compensating
variation at each level of income. Integrating over the population, the net change in income tax
and transfer revenue is the total compensating variation in the population. As will be explained
below, this yields fairly simple (Economics 101, or perhaps 201) policy rules in basic settings.
For a public good, if the sum of individuals' willingness to pay exceeds the cost of providing the
good, there will be a surplus. For a commodity tax reform, if the move is in the direction of
efficiency (in basic cases, toward uniformity), the net of changes in commodity tax revenue and
in the revenue from           will be positive. And so forth. (Qualifications are discussed in
section II.C.)
        Step 2: To see that Step 2 is, indeed, a purely redistributive adjustment to the income tax
and transfer system, simply examine the term                    . It consists of the difference between
the actually imagined income tax adjustment,  , and our hypothetical distribution-neutral
income tax adjustment,           . Obviously, this is purely a change in the income tax schedule.
Moreover, the particular change is indicated by the manner in which the imagined tax
adjustment,  , itself departs from distribution neutrality (viewing the policy package as a
whole). If there is, say, a simple increase in the overall degree of redistribution, we would have
whatever social welfare gain is associated with that and a concomitant distortionary cost, and
conversely for a simple decrease in overall redistribution. More broadly, whatever is the
deviation from distribution neutrality, evaluation of Step 2 is a pure version of the Mirrlees
exercise. And when the policy under examination and its imagined means of finance involve
marginal changes, Step 2 is a simple perturbation of the income tax schedule.
        As a final note on Step 2, recall the point that the initial income tax and transfer schedule,
  , need not be specified (only  's are in our expression). Relatedly, it was not assumed that
that the initial was optimal. Of course, if was optimal and, moreover, if the perturbation in
Step 2 was marginal, then Step 2 would have no effect on the overall welfare evaluation of the
policy package,            . In all other cases, as with the pure Mirrlees problem, we would need
to choose an SWF and determine how much change in distortion was associated with the change
in redistribution entailed by                 in order to assess Step 2.
        Finally, let us reflect on this two-step decomposition. The most important thing to note is
that the claimed modularity is a tautology (although the term is often understood as derogatory, it

5
  Put another way, the change in the government's budget is a sufficient statistic for welfare analysis. To be sure, no
simple observable tells us what this change will be, but in many applications elaborated below this may be easier to
predict than might have been thought because the underlying determinants are fairly straightforward.

                                                          6
is better to be in the position of defending a tautology's validity than to be attacking it). To be
sure, the construction in which this decomposition is embedded does entail certain assumptions,
notably, common utility functions.6 But it is still quite general, particularly regarding the
policies it encompasses. Also, this decomposition does not assume that individuals' utility
functions are weakly separable in the disutility of labor: as will be elaborated in section II.C, that
assumption can be useful for tractability and clarity but relaxing it calls for a simple adjustment
to the efficiency analysis in Step 1 rather than any qualification to the modularity embodied in
the two-step decomposition.

B. Advantages of the Framework

         Conceptual clarity: Use of the two-step decomposition is advantageous to researchers
and policymakers in a number of ways. First and foremost, conceptual clarity is enhanced by the
two-step decomposition and its concomitant separation of the distinctive efficiency features of a
variety of policies from their (in many respects generic) redistributive effects. Economists
frequently decompose complex formulas into more elemental components to ease
communication and understanding. The distinction between efficiency and distribution has a
long history, rooted in the fundamental theorems of welfare economics and featured in
Musgrave's proposed taxonomy of government functions.
         The flipside is equally important to consider: when different types of effects are
entangled, it can be difficult to understand any of them, and our impressions of the whole may
readily be confused, often without our realizing it. This point can be illustrated by the challenge
of comparing studies of a common instrument, say, an increase in a tax on fuel.
         Suppose that study A finds that an increase in the fuel tax reduces distortion while study
B finds that it raises distortion. If the two studies use different ways of balancing the
government's budget, with different distributive incidences, it can be very difficult to determine
what we have learned. Perhaps study A's reduction in distortion arose despite its findings of
adverse efficiency effects from higher fuel taxes as such because the policy package under
examination used the higher fuel tax revenue to reduce the progressivity of income taxes,
causing distortion from the latter to fall by an even greater amount. Perhaps study B found that
higher fuel taxes themselves improved efficiency, but the revenue was used in a highly
redistributive way that raised total distortion by even more. Furthermore, if both studies, in the
main text, emphasized modeling and data relating to the fuel tax, rendering details on the income
tax, labor supply, and so forth to an appendix, and presented complex simulations of policies
with only bottom-line results, it would be challenging even for an expert reader to untangle these
differences, and most of them would be missed by other consumers of the research. Over time,
as more studies of fuel tax policies accumulated, there may be ever increasing latent knowledge,
but little of it may be absorbed or reconciled by anyone. And policymakers might easily be led
astray by what seems to have been learned from the research.
         By contrast, if each study used distribution-neutral finance--focusing on Step 1 in the
two-step decomposition--all differences would be due to the modeling of and data relating to
fuel tax policies themselves. Significant complexity and disagreement may remain, but the far
greater comparability of methods and conclusions would enhance understanding and facilitate
6
 Specifically, the construction requires that         exists, and for the precise Pareto statements in particular, this
assumes either commonality of utility functions (so that, at each observed level of income, the compensating
variation is the same for all individuals) or that any differences can be observed (for example, they may be a
function of age, family composition, or an observable disability). Heterogeneity is explored further in section IV.D.

                                                           7
progress. This conclusion holds even if particular researchers' beliefs or specific contemporary
proposals in the political sphere do not envision distribution-neutral implementation. That is,
focusing on Step 1 does not in any way reflect a belief in the reality of distribution neutrality;
rather, the virtue is in the method of analysis and the conceptual clarity it brings.
         Comparability yields huge advantages, and in order for a wide range of researchers to
generate comparable results it is necessary for there to be a benchmark, or focal point, for
adjustments to the tax and transfer system. Moreover, as the foregoing discussion indicates--
and the next segment on specialization reinforces--there are substantial, distinctive advantages
to choosing distribution neutrality (       ) as the benchmark from among the infinity of ways
that the income tax could be adjusted to achieve budget neutrality. Indeed, this choice uniquely
enables the separation of efficiency and redistribution. As will be seen in section II.C and the
applications in section III, the method greatly facilitates the analysis of a broad range of policies.
         Specialization: Use of the two-step decomposition also greatly facilitates specialization.
Some economists can focus on fuel taxation or other energy and environmental issues, others on
education, others on health care, others on the taxation of capital, ..., and others on redistribution
through the tax and transfer system. This is a somewhat paradoxical lesson of the view advanced
here and in much of my prior work. On one hand, it emphasizes relating everything to
foundations, and to everything else, but on the other hand, it enables specialization. The
reconciliation is that we can better know how to specialize when we appreciate how different
system components interact and, in particular, when we can determine what sorts of
modularization are appropriate. Specialization is often useful even when different domains are
not fully modular, or even close to it, but specialization is especially effective when there is
substantial modularity, as exists here when the two-step decomposition is employed.
         From the perspective of researchers who do not primarily study redistribution through the
income tax and transfer system, the benefits are clear. In addition to achieving a sharper
understanding through comparability, there is also much less work to do. If one eschews
distribution-neutral analysis, then one must undertake all that is involved in the redistributive
income tax problem every time: taking a stand on labor supply elasticities, the distribution of
abilities, and the choice of a social welfare function. Moreover, as will be elaborated
momentarily, there is a third, even more challenging field that the researcher must engage when
departing from an analytical benchmark like distribution neutrality: choosing the particular tax
adjustment,  , to pair with the policy under analysis,  , which entails an exercise in political
economy. That is, alternative approaches require more work to produce results that, as per the
prior point, are more difficult to interpret both for subsequent researchers and for policymakers.
         Those who study optimal income taxation and transfer programs already tend to
specialize, on Step 2. At that point, an analyst or policymaker, in the true spirit of modularity,
can take the outputs from different, specialized research modules and combine the results to
assess a particular policy,        , when                    , by summing the results from Step 1
and Step 2.
         Political economy: We can see that there are significant sacrifices to conceptual clarity,
specialization, and resulting progress in research and communication to policymakers when
investigators eschew the two-step decomposition and analyze policy packages in which 
       . The most plausible justification for ever doing so is political reality: if it is believed that
in fact the reform to be implemented, if any, will be           , then it may seem appealing to
analyze that package as a whole.
         Actually, not so: with the two-step decomposition, one does fully analyze just that
package, and more easily, with the added benefit of providing a clearer picture to policymakers.

                                                   8
Indeed, perhaps the policymaker who is inclined to like the package as a whole will realize that
the               component is undesirable, causing a shift to just the redistributive portion,
               . Or it may learn that              is highly desirable, so it may be superior to
implement it alone, foregoing the unfavorable or unpopular redistributive component of 
       (or otherwise modifying  to better meet distributive objectives).
        Furthermore, just how is it that the researcher knows what  should be associated with
a particular  ? Many policies considered are entirely hypothetical, variations on those policies
are often examined as well, and even policies under active consideration by the government are
often obscure regarding  . And when they are explicit, that choice may change as the debate
proceeds, the tax change may be one that would have been implemented regardless, and the
income tax and transfer schedule may well be reformed more broadly in short order, sweeping
away the interim effects of the particular  associated with a particular  . These reasons
relate to the preceding comment that a third specialty, political economy, is required if one is to
analyze particular  's because they are real. In practice, of course, this work is not generally
done. The many studies that do not employ the two-step decomposition and instead analyze only
a combined package,             , do not purport to defend their choice of  using empirical
evidence on prevailing redistributive politics. Relatedly, the fact that different researchers
embed different  's in their analyses of common  's suggests that at least some of these
predictions, if they are taken as such, are mistaken.
        If one did have to advance a generic political economy perspective in this domain,
perhaps                  is as good a conjecture as any, particularly in the long run. At any given
time, a political system gravitates toward some sort of equilibrium regarding redistribution
policy, and the system's view of redistribution tends to respond to aggregates. Hence, over time,
as various reforms are enacted, there will be a tendency to maintain some such equilibrium. Of
course, that equilibrium is likely to evolve over time, but a similar point about balances of
redistributive forces can be made about this trajectory.
        Note further that there is another appeal to         in this realm: implementation of only
Step 1's               entails a Pareto improvement when the reform is an efficient one, so it is a
package with potential political appeal. Consider, for example, the 1986 U.S. tax reform that
purported to be distribution as well as revenue neutral, aiming to achieve efficiency gains
through myriad changes in particular provisions that broadened the income tax base and lowered
marginal rates.7 And when Step 1 is inefficient, this means that there is not enough gain to buy
off losers, which makes implementation more difficult.
        The foregoing is simplistic and in some respects Panglossian. It is well known that
politics is highly imperfect even in the best of times and that there are systematic illusions about
policies' effects, distorting influences of special interest groups, and other factors that muck up
the works.8 Moreover, heeding my own lesson, I am entirely inexpert in political economy.
Hence, readers should take these conjectures not as good approximations of reality but rather as
spurs to thinking. The main takeaway here is that, for researchers who are not experts in
political prognostication, there is yet another reason to employ the two-step decomposition with


7
  As will be discussed in section III.A, however, analyses of broad-based reforms that reduce tax expenditures are
often misleading in ways that are illuminated by the two-step decomposition.
8
  In this regard, the discussion earlier in this section about how the failure to employ the two-step decomposition is
confusing and can readily mislead policymakers is apt. Perhaps policy illusions, particularly regarding matters
involving distribution, would not be as severe if analysis was more digestible.

                                                           9
Step 1's distribution-neutral approach. As noted, this also means that those not engaged in
optimal income taxation or the politics of redistribution can skip these subjects altogether.

C. Illustration: Commodity Tax Reforms

       To make the two-step decomposition more concrete, this section considers its application
to commodity tax reforms. The focus will be on Step 1 because, as already explained, Step 2 is
simply the familiar Mirrlees problem (which, although challenging, presents nothing new). The
discussion first outlines how the literature evolved and then sketches the application itself.

1. History of Thought

         The analysis of differential commodity taxation was long associated with Ramsey (1927)
and, in the simplest case, the inverse-elasticity rule. The standard formulation used a
representative individual and hence entailed no concern for distribution. Relatedly, income
taxation was not one of the admissible instruments.9 Analysis of this model and various
extensions are still featured in textbooks and surveys. See Myles (1995), Auerbach and Hines
(2002), and Salanié (2011).
         In parallel with the increase in theoretical study of optimal taxation in the 1970s
following Mirrlees (1971), it is notable that much work outside the income tax as such--even by
Mirrlees and other prominent scholars associated with the development of optimal income
taxation--stuck mostly to variations of the representative-individual framework that did not
allow an income tax. See, for example, Diamond and Mirrlees (1971), Stiglitz and Dasgupta
(1971), and Atkinson and Stern (1974).
         This changed--but not really--with Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976), who showed that if
there was an income tax and it was set optimally, then optimal commodity taxes entailed no
differentiation if labor was weakly separable in the utility function.10 Their proof made use of
the first-order conditions for the two related problems.
         Interestingly, it took decades for Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) to begin to have a
substantial influence on work in public economics. For example, at the start of the 1990s,
substantial literatures on the second-best analysis of the optimal provision of public goods and of
optimal environmental taxation and regulation stuck with the representative-individual
framework. Many papers departed from classic Ramsey models in allowing an income tax

9
  Standard formulations do not allow for a nonzero intercept--which, in a representative-individual model, would
have rendered further analysis moot because a lump-sum tax would be optimal. (Statements such as that in Salanié
(2011) that introduce treatments of the Ramsey approach by observing that a wage or income tax is allowed but
must be linear are misleading because of omission of the further restriction that there be a zero intercept. Actually,
that restriction, not linearity, is necessary to generate the core results in that literature.) Note that a uniform
commodity tax (or an extracted average level of commodity taxes) is equivalent to a linear income tax with a zero
intercept. For elaboration, see the discussion of literature on environmental taxation in section III.B and, more
broadly on the relationship of Ramsey models to current literature that admits an income tax, see Atkinson and
Stiglitz (1976), Stiglitz (1987), Mirrlees (1994), and Kaplow (2008a, ch. 6D).
10
   They also remarked on the implications of nonseparability, discussed in subsection 2, and surprisingly stated the
implications backwards (that leisure complements should be subsidized rather than taxed), an error variously
replicated in subsequent texts (Myles 1995 and Salanié 2003) but that (fortunately) did not seem to influence most
economists' understanding of the problem. For a formal treatment, tracing the misunderstanding to a
misinterpretation of the sign of the costate variable in the Hamiltonian for the optimal income tax problem, see
Kaplow (2010b).

                                                          10
(often a linear one) that was adjusted in various ways to balance the budget. But these tax
adjustments differed within and across papers and produced myriad results that were not
generally in the spirit of what might have been extrapolated from Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976).
That article usually was not cited and its methods were not employed. It does not appear that the
fundamental shift in analysis and implications from the Ramsey framework was appreciated at
least through the 1990s.11 Perhaps one reason for this widespread omission was the commonly
held belief expressed in Boadway and Pestieau's (2003, p. 400) essay--specifically on the
Atkinson and Stiglitz article, in a festschrift for Stiglitz--which closed with the statement:
"without optimal income taxation there is no A­S theorem."12 That is, the result was thought to
depend on the optimality of the income tax, and since few believed that this assumption held in
reality, all bets were off.
         This implication, however, was fundamentally mistaken. After all, the intuition for the
optimality of no differentiation (elaborated below) is fairly robust. Moreover, it is not generally
sound to suppose that relaxing an assumption throws out all that one has learned from a
foundational model. Instead, we understand that the results may change but usually suppose that
the manner in which they do can be traced to the role of the assumption and how it is relaxed.
         Meanwhile, there emerged another line of work (in what was initially a parallel universe)
that began with an underappreciated paper by Hylland and Zeckhauser (1979) that argued against
using distributive weights in cost-benefit analysis. Their article, which did not cite Atkinson and
Stiglitz, employed the sort of distributively offsetting income tax adjustment presented above.
With some exceptions, this alternative approach lay largely dormant into the 1990s, particularly
in public economics.13
         Starting in the 1990s, I extended this approach and applied it directly to a range of
questions in the field: my 1993 NBER working paper (published as Kaplow 1996c) examined
public goods (and briefly externalities); Kaplow (1998b, 2001a) investigated the taxation of gifts
and bequests relating the problem to differential commodity taxation; my 2004 NBER working
paper (published as Kaplow 2006a) and my Journal of Economic Perspectives paper (Kaplow
2004) presented and discussed the generalizations of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) sketched in the
next subsection. Since then, much of my work on public economics (including my book,
Kaplow 2008a) and a growing portion of the literature by many researchers directly embeds
analysis in a framework that combines Mirrlees (1971) and Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976),
sometimes making explicit use of the distribution-neutral approach (Step 1) that does not require
the income tax to be optimal. In addition, complementary work, such as Slemrod and Yitzhaki




11
   For example, the text by Myles (1995, p. 100) opens its extensive treatment of commodity taxation, which
employs the Ramsey framework, by stating that relaxing the restriction disallowing a uniform lump-sum tax (which
"is assumed [to be unavailable] for simplicity" would "not significantly modify the conclusions," and the discussion
of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) in a later chapter is brief and does not mention any implications for the results on
commodity taxation. For references discussing the implications, see note 9.
12
   In addition, a number of leading scholars reacted to some of my papers in the 1990s and 2000s by questioning
whether they could be right or even insisting that they were wrong, purporting to offer counterexamples. It would
seem that these economists were either unaware of or failed to appreciate Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976), a further
reflection of the lack of penetration of their approach during this period.
13
   The method was applied to legal rules by Shavell (1981), who drew on Hylland and Zeckhauser and likewise did
not cite Atkinson and Stiglitz. As best I can tell, for some time no one was aware of both lines of work, at least not
sufficiently to identify and exploit the synergy.

                                                         11
(2001) and Hendren (2014, 2016), employs integrated approaches that do not use the two-step
decomposition.14

2. Analysis

        The exposition here is an abbreviated form of Kaplow (2006a) and Kaplow (2008a, ch.
6). To make the setting explicit (even though no formal derivations will be offered), suppose
that individuals differ in their ability (wage rate) , and that they choose their labor effort l and
levels of commodities , ... , to maximize the utility function

                                                       ,...,   ,

subject to the budget constraint


                                                                           ,


where is the price and is the tax (or, if negative, subsidy) on commodity , wl is the income
earned by an individual of type who exerts labor effort , and  is the initially given (and
not necessarily optimal) nonlinear income tax and transfer schedule.
         Let us now examine a policy reform. We will start with arbitrary but nonuniform
commodity taxes. For concreteness, it might be helpful to suppose that there are higher tax rates
on some luxury goods and lower rates on some necessities. Our reform,  , will be to eliminate
all commodity tax differentials, and to ease the exposition suppose that this is implemented by
eliminating all commodity taxation.
         The offsetting income tax adjustments, the schedule         , that we need to construct will
involve higher taxes at every income level. This income tax increase has two components. First,
imagine that individuals continued to earn the same (before-tax) income and consume the same
consumption bundles as before. Because they no longer pay commodity taxes, they can afford to
buy more of everything, so our income tax adjustment will need to tax away all of this savings.
Second, even when that is done, all individuals will in fact be better off, so their income taxes
will have to be raised on this account as well since our overall tax adjustment is designed to hold
them to the same utility level. Why is everyone indeed better off before this second income tax
adjustment? The reason is that we now have different price ratios from those prevailing before
because differential commodity taxation has been eliminated. Hence, starting at the initial
consumption bundle (which, after the first component of our income tax adjustment, individuals
can still just afford), all will choose different bundles. By revealed preference, this raises their
utility, so indeed they must pay more income tax to be held to the same utility level.
         Let us take stock of where we are so far. Individuals are all at the same utility level.
From the first component of the income tax adjustment, the government breaks even (it raises
more in income tax revenue precisely the amount that it no longer collects from commodity
taxes), and from the second component of the income tax adjustment, the government generates

14
  Most alternative approaches that seek to address both efficiency and distribution combine in some fashion
measures of the marginal cost of public funds (MCPF) and the marginal value of public funds (MVPF), which
requires explicit use of distributive weights. For a recent application, see Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2019).

                                                        12
a surplus.15 This surplus can now be rebated (say, pro rata) so as to make everyone better off, a
strict Pareto improvement.
           Note further that section II.A's characterization of this analysis in Step 1 as an
Economics 101 "efficiency test" is entirely apt. Consider that the magnitude of this surplus is
precisely equal to the second component of the income tax adjustment, which in turn is just the
amount necessary to tax away individuals' utility increases due to the restoration of the
economy's price ratios to their undistorted levels. That is, individuals, but for this part of the
income tax adjustment, would all have had a utility gain just equal to the efficiency gain. The
total utility gain thus equals the total efficiency gain in the economy, and this is what (translated
into dollars) constitutes the budget surplus available for the rebate.
           The careful reader may have noticed an important gap in the foregoing argument:
specifically, what if individuals, as a consequence of the policy experiment,                   , are
induced to change their labor effort? In that case, there would be another, third source of change
in income tax revenue that must be accounted for. To analyze this potential fiscal externality, it
is helpful to proceed in two steps: first, with weak separability, and second, with that assumption
relaxed.
           First, assume for simplicity that the utility function is weakly separable in the disutility of
labor effort. That is, the utility function can be written as           ,...,   , : individuals have a
common subutility function  that indicates the utility they derive from consumption. The
core implication of this separability assumption is that the disutility of labor may depend on the
overall level of (sub)utility from consumption but not on the particular combination of
commodities that generates that level of (sub)utility. Conversely, the level of labor effort
required to generate the disposable income necessary to fund consumption does not affect the
(sub)utility derived from any given consumption bundle.
           With weak separability, it can be demonstrated that there is no change in any individual's
labor effort, in which event the above analysis is the complete story. To see why labor effort
does not change, note that, if labor effort is indeed constant, then the tax adjustment            that
keeps an individual of any type, and thus any level of income earned, at the same utility level is
one that generates the same level of subutility,  , as prevailed before the reform. (Indeed,
when the argument is developed formally, the tax adjustment is defined such that this is so.)
Now, consider the labor effort choice of any individual: to each and hence each level of
disposable (after-income-tax) income--the right side of the above budget constraint--there is
associated the same subutility  , as before. Therefore, the same will continue to maximize
that individual's utility.
           Second, consider how this very simple (Economics 101) efficiency test needs to be
modified if we relax the weak separability assumption, returning to our original utility function
      , ... , , . Now, labor effort may rise or fall. Note, however, that the same Step 1 income
tax adjustment,           , would be correct for a marginal reform, by the envelope theorem.16 In
any case, the change in labor effort itself will generate a fiscal externality to the extent that the
marginal tax rate on labor income is positive, as is generally the case. If labor effort rises,
therefore, there will be more income tax revenue than otherwise, suggesting that the reform is


15
   Note that individuals' consumption reallocations do not affect commodity tax revenue because our experiment
sets all such taxes to zero. It can be shown that if taxes were made uniform at some nonzero level, the same bottom-
line results would obtain.
16
   For nonmarginal reforms, a revealed preference argument like that employed above would be applicable,
suggesting that         would raise more revenue on that account.

                                                        13
more efficient than otherwise, whereas if labor effort falls, there will be less revenue and lower
efficiency.
        Which will be the case depends on the familiar intuition associated with Corlett and
Hague (1953). Suppose, for example, that the reform raises the relative tax rate on basic foods,
like rice or flour. Assume further that home-prepared meals are, as suggested by the evidence in
Ab Iorwerth and Whalley (2002), leisure complements. Then eliminating this preference for
these necessities would make leisure less attractive, which increases labor effort. That effect
further boosts income tax revenue, making the hypothesized reform more efficient than
otherwise. Indeed, under this assumption, it would be optimal to tax basic foods at a higher, not
lower rate than that applied to other commodities.
        Relaxing weak separability thus adds another component to the efficiency test, but the
analysis thereof also reinforces basic intuitions and is wholly consistent with the modularity
suggested by the two-step decomposition. Specifically, this analysis can be conducted entirely
as part of Step 1 using a pure efficiency test, with potential Pareto improvements indicated by the
change in the government's budget as a consequence of undertaking the policy experiment
              . This is true regardless of the distributive incidence of  or of         standing
alone. If one wishes instead to consider a policy experiment consisting of            , one can,
as argued previously, employ the two-step decomposition, confining the (pure) analysis of
redistribution to Step 2, which examines                   . To emphasize this point: nothing in the
two-step decomposition itself depends on weak separability. That simplifying assumption
matters only for how Step 1 is conducted: whether the efficiency test includes a supplemental
fiscal externality term.
        Second, separability clarifies the intuition behind the determination of optimal
commodity taxes in the presence of a distorting labor income tax. A loose but misleading
statement of the general theorem of the second best is that, once there are other distortions in the
economy, no policy prescriptions can be offered. A more moderate and more accurate, but not
always very helpful, version is that once there are other distortions, we must simply analyze
everything, turn the crank, and see what pops out.
        It is best to focus directly on the underlying logic of the welfare-analytic challenge
generated by the existence of multiple distortions. A second distortion might be optimal when
there is another distortion, but this will be so only when it helps to offset it. Accordingly,
additional distortions will be optimal in the presence of a distorting income tax and transfer
system when they act so as to reduce the labor-leisure distortion. Because the weak separability
assumption breaks the connection between consumption choices and the labor-leisure choice,
there is no room for improving (or worsening) the labor-leisure distortion through differential
commodity taxation. Therefore, we are back to basics, that is, our first-best, Economics 101
efficiency prescription that it is not optimal to distort consumption choices.17
        Relatedly, when the weak separability assumption is relaxed, both the direction and
magnitude of the optimal secondary distortion will depend on the interaction with the labor-
leisure distortion. Notably, it has nothing to do with the distributive incidence of the  one is
considering. This is well illustrated by the foregoing case of commodity tax preferences for
basic foods: no preference is optimal with weak separability, and when separability is relaxed in
the manner suggested by the evidence in Ab Iorwerth and Whalley (2002), it becomes optimal to
17
  There are, of course, other qualifications. See Mirrlees (1976) and Kaplow (2008a, ch. 6C). Many reinforce the
core ideas in the text. For example, just as nonseparability allows the possibility that expenditures on a commodity
may be correlated with unobserved labor effort, so it is that preferences that depend on ability allow expenditures on
a commodity to be correlated with unobserved ability.

                                                         14
(relatively) tax rather than subsidize basic foods--keeping in mind that, either way, distribution
is being held constant because          is defined by the  under consideration.18
         More broadly, as will become clear in Section III's broader set of applications, the
direction and magnitude of the nonseparability adjustment relates entirely to the fiscal externality
determined by the interaction with the labor-leisure choice and has nothing to do with anything
that may be regarded as special about the target of the adjustment. Here, it does not matter for
the direction or magnitude of the optimal correction whether the good is a luxury or a necessity,
and this point about the irrelevance of the distributive incidence of the contemplated  standing
alone is entirely general. It likewise does not matter whether the commodity under consideration
is a so-called dirty good or one that generates positive externalities. As discussed in section
III.B, relative to the otherwise-optimal first-best Pigouvian tax or subsidy, the correction
depends, again, only on the nature of the nonseparability. Qualitatively (and in respects
quantitatively), the nonseparability correction is the same as what would be optimal if the good
involves no externality, as implicitly assumed here.
         Finally, before concluding this illustration of the two-step decomposition, it is worth
noting that the method can be used to analyze all manner of commodity tax reforms, not just the
complete elimination of any differentiation. Conventionally, analysts following Atkinson and
Stiglitz (1976) focus on local reforms, using first-order conditions, so they are examining the
neighborhood of uniformity. But the two-step approach outlined here is not nearly so limited:
indeed, no first-order conditions characterizing the optimum--whether of the nonlinear income
tax problem or of the commodity tax problem--are needed. The above discussion considered a
nonlocal reform that removed all commodity taxes and subsidies. One can (reverting for ease of
exposition to the case of weak separability) likewise show that any partial reform that moves
proportionally in the direction of uniformity enables a Pareto improvement. For example,
cutting all commodity taxes and subsidies by half, or by any other factor, has this property.
         More broadly, it can be demonstrated that any change in commodity taxes generates a
Pareto improvement in the Step 1 experiment, consisting of                 , if and only if that
commodity tax reform passes a pure efficiency test. See Kaplow (2006a; 2008a, ch. 6B).
Moreover, my other work shows that this sort of encompassing result has analogues in a range of
settings, from externality correction (Kaplow 2012) to competition policy (Kaplow 2019).19
Therefore, the sense in which the analysis of Step 1 can be regarded as a pure efficiency test is
quite general. There is indeed substantial traction to the modularity advanced throughout this
section, wherein we can decompose a range of policy problems into two steps, one concerned
solely with efficiency and one solely with redistribution.




18
   The magnitude of the optimal second-best adjustment will depend on the elasticity of food expenditures and on
the strength of the interaction with the disutility of labor effort. Contrary to the Ramsey prescription, however, the
magnitude of the elasticity does not bear on the sign of the optimal relative tax rate; a higher elasticity favors less of
a deviation from neutrality, in whichever direction the optimal deviation may be.
19
   The key insight was previously stated: the ability to give a rebate that generates a Pareto improvement depends on
whether the change in the government's net revenue is positive, and the change in income tax revenue (with weak
separability) is given by the integral of individuals' compensating variations, which capture the efficiency effects of
the policy. For example, in Kaplow (2019), an intermediate step in the proof shows that the change in the
government's budget is given by the sum of the changes in consumer and producer surplus (the firms being owned
by individuals, perhaps mostly by those with high incomes). See also the discussion of public goods in section
III.C.

                                                           15
III. APPLICATIONS

        This section further illustrates the power of the two-step decomposition by sketching a
wide array of applications. Most of these reside in Step 1. Myriad policy instruments can be
understood more clearly--regarding both their distinctive effects and their optimal design--
when distribution-neutral implementation is contemplated. Consistent with section II's analysis,
efficiency tests and the targeting principle hold over a broad domain. A final application, to
income transfer policies, elaborates Step 2 of the framework.

A. Tax Expenditures

         The subject of tax expenditures is one of many that had long been treated as a subject
unto itself. Yet it should be apparent that tax expenditures can readily be analyzed using the
two-step decomposition. See Kaplow (2017). Indeed, tax expenditures are a form of differential
commodity taxes and subsidies--typically the latter--wherein a tax credit is a subsidy at the
credit rate and a tax deduction is a subsidy at the taxpayer's marginal income tax rate. Hence, in
our benchmark case with weak separability of labor, it is optimal to eliminate tax expenditures.
         Exceptions would be for the usual reasons, such as when a positive externality is
associated with the expenditure (see section III.B), an often advanced justification for the
charitable contribution deduction, energy conservation provisions, and some others. Another
broad class of exceptions concerns the tax expenditure concept itself. Deductions that are part of
defining income are not regarded as tax expenditures. For example, a sole proprietor whose
store generates $1,000,000 in gross receipts but incurs costs (of goods sold, rent, salaries,
utilities, etc.) of $950,000 is (and should be) permitted to deduct these expenditures, yielding
taxable income of $50,000. Tax expenditures are taken to be defined as deviations from this
benchmark.
         Even though many of these ideas are well understood, it is important to embed tax
expenditure analysis in the comprehensive framework that employs the two-step decomposition,
something not usually done. For example, recurring proposals to substantially reduce tax
expenditures are often advanced and analyzed because they are regarded to reduce labor supply
distortion (by lowering marginal tax rates as part of the package), enhance redistribution without
the usually associated efficiency trade-off, and more. See Feldstein (2015) and Burman et al.
(2017). Yet such is an illusion. To illustrate some of the problems, suppose that there was a flat-
rate income tax of 40% and that everyone undertook deductible tax expenditures equal to 5% of
their income. These deductions could be eliminated, enabling a reduction of the tax rate to 38%.
But labor supply distortion would not drop in any direct manner because the previous marginal
effective tax rate was only 38% to begin with. And if rates were reduced, say, only to 39%, using
the revenue from the other 1% to fund a larger lump-sum grant, redistribution would increase but
so would the concomitant labor supply distortion ordinarily associated with greater
redistribution. The only direct gain, distinctive to the elimination of otherwise unwarranted tax
expenditures, would be the efficiency enhancement from avoiding the distortion of expenditure
choices--that is, precisely the efficiency benefit in Step 1 that is associated with the elimination
of differential commodity taxation.




                                                16
B. Externalities

         The core intuition for why differential commodity taxation is inefficient in basic settings
is that the price ratios faced by consumers should equal the ratios of the marginal resource costs
of producing the commodities. In the presence of externalities, the logic is that the price ratios
should equal the ratios of the marginal social (not private) resource costs. This favors first-best
Pigouvian taxes and subsidies equal to the marginal external cost or benefit associated with the
commodity. One might also adduce associated principles for the correction of "internalities"
(Gruber and Koszegi 2001).
         As outlined in Kaplow (1996c, 2004) and demonstrated formally in Kaplow (2012), this
simple logic extends to second-best settings with a redistributive income tax, which may be
demonstrated using the two-step decomposition. Because the logic should now be familiar, the
exercise will not be repeated.
         Nevertheless, much second-best environmental economics literature, starting in the
1990s, focuses on the question whether there might be a "double dividend" from corrective
environmental taxation, wherein the government could collect extra revenue while correcting
rather than causing further distortion.20 Subsequent work explored various special cases, often
finding that the interaction with the income tax was adverse, calling for optimal corrections
below the first-best prescription. For a collection and a survey, see respectively Goulder (2002)
and Bovenberg and Goulder (2002).
         As the present framework suggests, however, this literature almost had to be misleading
in some fashion. In fact, it often employed representative-individual models, so that there could
be no social welfare gains or losses associated with changes in redistribution itself, yet the
analysis also featured an income tax that was adjusted in various ways in connection with
different reforms. Hence, in basic cases in which further distortion was identified, we might
expect that the posited change in the income tax made the system as a whole (the environmental
policy reform combined with the income tax adjustment,               ) implicitly more
redistributive ( was more redistributive than            ).
         Indeed, the literature often examined precisely such packages, as discussed in Kaplow
(2012). A key lesson is that, if one is using a representative-individual model and embedding an
income tax to more realistically account for society's (unmodeled) concerns for distribution, it is
essential to conduct a Step 1 distribution-neutral analysis (i.e., as if there were individuals of
different earnings abilities). And if a non-distribution-neutral analysis (in this sense) is
undertaken instead, one really does have to append Step 2, associating any change in the
distortion of labor supply with the implicit change in redistribution and then accounting for the
latter with an SWF. It is misleading to report a finding that "welfare" falls due to an increase in
labor supply distortion from a more redistributive system and, moreover, to regard aggregate
changes in distortion as measuring "social" welfare, without even identifying the implicit
increase in redistribution. (This example well illustrates many of the points in section II.B about
the advantages of employing the two-step decomposition.)
         As a final way to drive this point home, consider the following example (which is similar
to that underlying some of the environmental taxation literature as well as, mutatis mutandis, that
on public goods, considered in the next section). The utility function is additively separable in
utility from the consumption of commodities (which include a clean and a dirty good), harm

20
  Note the similarities to the aforementioned free lunches often thought to be associated with the elimination of tax
expenditures.

                                                         17
from an atmospheric externality, and the disutility of labor effort. For curvature parameters
associated with an upward-sloping labor supply curve, raising the tax on the dirty good while
lowering a linear labor income tax rate so as to maintain budget balance has the following
properties: labor supply falls, the benefit of controlling the externality (although identical for
everyone in utils) rises less than proportionately with disposable income when the benefit is
measured in dollars, and the magnitude of the utility cost from altered consumption is rising with
disposable income. That is, the posited policy experiment of further controlling the externality
reduces labor supply but also unambiguously increases redistribution. Not surprisingly, in Step 2
reduced labor supply and increased redistribution go hand in hand. When using the two-step
decomposition, wherein this coupling is isolated in Step 2 and thus made explicit, it is hard to
lose sight of this core principle in the manner that some of the otherwise-sophisticated second-
best literature over the past half century sometimes has.

C. Public Goods

         Public goods are subject to a similar analysis that, again, the two-step decomposition
makes simple. See Kaplow (1996c, 2004, 2006b). As explained in section II.A, the distribution-
neutral income tax adjustment,          , is the compensating variation for the underlying policy
change,  . Hence, if utility is weakly separable in labor, the tax revenue raised from 
when a public good is marginally increased is the sum (integral) of individuals' marginal rates of
substitution. Therefore, there will be a Step 1 budget surplus if and only if the Samuelson Rule
(1954) is satisfied. Adjustments for nonseparability and redistributive income tax adjustments in
Step 2 (for               ) are as before. As with the analysis of externalities, prior work--often
employing Ramsey models or supplementing them with income tax adjustments that implicitly
changed the extent of redistribution--neither confined itself to Step 1's distribution-neutral
approach nor used the two-step decomposition to disentangle redistribution and hence (at least
appeared) to produce different conclusions that were, in these respects, misleading. See, for
example, Atkinson and Stern (1974), Diamond and Mirrlees (1971), and Stiglitz and Dasgupta
(1971), and the subsequent elaboration and survey in Ballard and Fullerton (1992).
         The juxtaposition of public goods and externalities is itself instructive. Subtle second-
best literatures developed independently--without cross-citations--on each through the 1990s
and beyond, without recognizing that in most relevant respects they are the same problem.
Application of the two-step decomposition, however, clarifies the overlap: obviously, the purely
redistributive Step 2's are the same. And the Step 1 rules are not merely both simple, Economics
101 efficiency tests (in basic cases), but in a sense they are the same tests. After all, most of the
environmental economics literature models atmospheric externalities, and clean air (etc.) is a
public good, the value of which is the sum of individuals' marginal rates of substitution.
Relatedly, if one thinks of the Samuelson Rule (1954) in terms of Lindahl (1919) pricing, then
deviations can be viewed as employing (implicit) price ratios that do not reflect the proper social
valuations, just as with corrective taxes and subsidies that deviate from the first-best Pigouvian
prescription.21 Moreover, both public goods' and externalities' interactions with labor supply,
once separability is relaxed, are much the same. For example, nature preserves are public goods
that may be leisure complements, and these preserves, in turn, may be polluted by emissions.


21
  Hence, it is no surprise that the example in section III.B with additive separability is precisely the same whether
the (separable) benefit is regarded as a public good or an externality (often taken to be negative).

                                                          18
Therefore, policies that improve the value of these resources--whether by improving access or
by reducing pollution--should be analyzed along all dimensions using the same methods.

D. Capital Income and Wealth Taxation

        The optimal taxation of savings also has a long lineage. Interestingly, Atkinson and
Stiglitz's (1976) original paper on commodity taxation in the presence of an income tax
explained the direct implication for the optimal taxation of savings: with weak separability, the
optimal rate is zero. This follows immediately from applying their model to a world with two
commodities, and , where the subscripts refer to two time periods: period 1 is the present
(one's working life), in which labor is also supplied, and period 2 is the future (retirement), in
which the individual only consumes. The optimality of no differentiation implies that
individuals should face no wedge on their allocation of after-labor-income-tax income between
present and future consumption.
        Remarkably, it was decades before this important lesson substantially penetrated. For
example, the models of optimal capital income taxation associated with Chamley (1986) and
Judd (1985) are not embedded in a Mirrlees model and do not incorporate the differential
commodity taxation insight.22 See Golosov, Tsyvinski, and Werning (2007) and Kaplow (2008a,
ch. 9). In parallel with the increasing invocations of Mirrlees (1971), Atkinson and Stiglitz
(1976), and work on the two-step decomposition, this situation had changed substantially by the
2000s. There is now a dynamic Mirrlees literature (Golosov, Tsyvinski, and Werning 2007) that
examines labor supply over multiple periods in the presence of earnings uncertainty (which may
generate precautionary savings that is excessive in light of the negative fiscal externality in later
periods) and some other extensions as well--all in models of capital income taxation that admit
the income tax as an instrument.23 As always, the core point is not whether the simple
benchmark (here, an optimal tax rate of zero) is correct or even approximately so, but rather the
use of a framework that makes analysis of the problem both more transparent and ultimately
more rigorous at the same time.
        Another value of this depiction of the problem is that it facilitates the analysis of a wide
range of related policy instruments. Most obvious is a wealth tax, which is understood to be
equivalent to a capital income tax in simple settings. For example, if the real return on capital is
4%, a 50% capital income tax and a 2% annual wealth tax are equivalent. In basic cases, this
equivalence also holds in models extending Domar and Musgrave's (1944) treatment of
systematic risk that allows for portfolio adjustments. See, for example, Bulow and Summers
(1984) and Gordon (1985). Kaplow (1994) shows how, in a simple general equilibrium model, a
proportional capital income tax with full loss offsets is equivalent to an ex ante wealth tax or to
an ex post wealth tax, with these in turn equivalent to a tax on only the riskless return to capital.

22
   At a presentation of one of these papers, I raised a question to the effect "What about Atkinson-Stiglitz?" The
query did not register with the author or, as best I could tell, with others in the audience.
23
   For example, some attention has been devoted to the qualification mentioned in note 17 regarding correlations
between expenditures on particular commodities and ability; here, the idea is that higher capital income may signal a
higher labor-income-earning ability. See, for example, Saez (2002). It is worth reflecting, however, on the
empirical predicate. All but the highest income and ability taxpayers tend to confine investments to mutual funds,
whereas the highest income individuals (and perhaps, as the argument goes, the highest ability types within an
income level) actively manage their investments, with the aid of expensive advisors, producing net (fee- and risk-
adjusted) returns that may well underperform the market, which suggests a negative correlation. Also important is
that what is sometimes classified as capital income of top earners--the business income of founders--may better be
understood as labor income, a point discussed later in this section.

                                                         19
Moreover, this equivalence is not merely ex ante but also entails equal after-tax income for
taxpayers and equal government tax receipts in every state of the world.24
         The actual taxation of capital income is highly complex and differs substantially across
jurisdictions and over time.25 Different types of entities may be subject to different tax regimes,
an entity's debt and equity may be taxed asymmetrically, rules regarding depreciation and
expensing may differentially tax different types of investments, capital gains may be taxed at
different rates from other capital income and subject to realization requirements, and more. A
helpful way to address these and other issues is to employ a modest extension of Step 1's
protocol: in addition to considering distribution-neutral income tax adjustments,         , it is also
helpful to consider reforms of various elements of capital taxation that also keep the wedge on
savings constant. See Kaplow (2008a, ch. 9). In that way, one can set aside questions of the
optimal level of capital income taxation and of redistribution, focusing on the most efficient way
to tax capital income at any particular overall (effective) rate.26
         To further illustrate the power of the two-step decomposition in this realm, consider
incomes (disproportionately at the top of the income distribution) that may derive from
investments in firms that earn large markups due to imperfect competition. To the extent that
such prospective profits are capitalized and accounted for in ex ante investment decisions, it is
not evident that the analysis changes. In any event, Kaplow (2019) examines a model in which
there may be rents due to markups in various sectors and determines the implications for both
competition policy and redistributive income taxation. The conclusion in a basic model (with
weak separability of labor) is that competition policy should maximize total surplus--the sum of
consumer and producer surplus--regardless of how skewed the ownership shares of the latter
may be: again, a standard efficiency test. Moreover, the optimal income tax problem is
qualitatively similar (it can be mapped directly into the standard Mirrlees problem), although the
optimal schedule itself differs (perhaps substantially) depending on features of the rent-
generating process and the distribution of ownership shares.
         As a final note, it seems that one important impetus for higher capital income or wealth
taxation is that much that appears in these categories (on income tax returns or Forbes measures)
is in essence labor income that may never have been taxed. This can arise from income
generated in the underground economy, but in developed countries this is most associated with
entrepreneurial income, particularly of highly successful founders. Smith et al. (2019) find that
much of the income of the top 1% and a large portion of the increase in their share since 2000 is
in the form of business income of pass-through entities that flows through to active owners.
Until the 2017 U.S. tax reform, such income was taxed at the (here, top) labor income tax rate,
but there are many settings (often involving different legal structures) in which this may not in
fact be the case. This problem requires further research given the inevitable entanglement of
what might conventionally be viewed as labor and capital income. For example, what is the
optimal taxation of the rise or fall in the value of ownership shares that are retained by active
managers as incentive pay and because their sale is deterred by asymmetric information?27

24
   It also extends to the schemes of retrospective capital gains taxation developed by Auerbach and Bradford (2004).
25
   Significant issues involved with international taxation are omitted here.
26
   On another dimension, it is also important to distinguish optimal long-run or steady-state capital income taxation
from the capital levies or windfalls that may be associated with transitions from one regime to another, which some
important work in the field does not fully disentangle. For elaboration, see Kaplow (2008a, ch. 9) and Kaplow
(2009).
27
   Accounting for the many losses (which receive far less publicity than the spectacular gains of a few) and making
appropriate risk adjustments are first-order considerations. Hall and Woodward (2010) find that, in their preferred

                                                         20
E. Social Security (and Retirement Savings Policies)

        Many aspects of social insurance schemes--here, the focus is on provisions for
retirement funded by payroll taxes--can be analyzed using a similar approach. See Kaplow
(2008a, ch. 11). First, consider the two-step decomposition itself, which strips out, placing in
Step 2, any redistributive aspects that are present. This dimension can be assessed in the usual
way, to a first approximation.28
        This leaves, in Step 1, what we will take to be an actuarially fair program that is
tantamount to forced savings. Looking at any given level of income (and keeping in mind our
distribution-neutral framing, so that each income level may be considered separately), the
minimum savings constraint may or may not be binding. If it is not, the policy and marginal
adjustments thereto have no effect. If it is binding, then we can analyze the constraint as
equivalent to a capital income subsidy, set at a level that is just sufficient to produce the forced
level of savings. Tightening the constraint is, therefore, equivalent to raising the subsidy. As
discussed in the preceding section, in a simple benchmark case this policy would be inefficient,
and moving toward uniform taxation (a zero wedge on capital, and thus no binding forced
savings constraint) would improve individuals' welfare. Note also that, by linking the analysis to
that of savings subsidies, the optimal design of various retirement savings policies is illuminated
as well.29
        Other benchmarks would, of course, be appropriate under other assumptions pertaining to
optimal capital income taxation. It is interesting in particular to incorporate the primary
justifications for mandatory social insurance schemes and to consider their implications within
this framework (Kaplow 2011, 2015a, 2015b). One is the existence of the Samaritan's dilemma
(Buchanan 1975), wherein other individuals (relatives in particular) or the government will be
unable to resist aiding those who have provided inadequately for their retirement, the anticipation
of which induces rational individuals to save too little ex ante. This is a form of externality that
is subject to standard corrective analysis, as developed in section III.B.
        Another justification involves self-control problems, such as individuals' myopia leading
to savings that are suboptimal from the perspective of their "true" utility function (Bernheim and
Rangel 2007). Here, we have an internality, the analysis of which (again) is similar to that of an
externality, in which case promoting savings may raise welfare. If everyone is homogeneous, a
capital subsidy and forced savings would have the same effect. If, instead, only some are subject
to myopia (or the degree of myopia varies), then it may be optimal to force some savings rather
than employ a savings subsidy, the latter of which distorts those who would already have saved
adequately.
        Once one departs from the neoclassical framework in this manner, it is also necessary to
account for how forced savings or capital subsidies may influence individuals' labor supply


scenarios, founders of Silicon Valley firms supported by leading venture capitalists approximately break even on an
ex ante, risk-adjusted basis.
28
   One qualification relates to the arguments that follow: once one introduces, say, behavioral considerations, it is
possible that they will amend the redistribution problem as well. Another relates to intergenerational redistribution
and risk sharing.
29
   Retirement savings subsidies are both often a form of differential capital income taxation and also a form of tax
expenditure (if one takes as a baseline a Haig-Simons income tax rather than a cash flow consumption tax, a point of
controversy in stating tax expenditure budgets). Making such connections helps to provide an integrated analysis
and to leverage what is already understood about closely related subjects.

                                                         21
differently from in the standard treatment. If individuals' savings decisions are guided by a
behavioral utility function different from their normative ("true") utility function, it may not be
obvious what utility function governs their labor supply decisions. This question could be of
great consequence. After all, payroll taxes that fund social insurance are of a similar order of
magnitude (for all but wealthy taxpayers) to income taxes. Moreover, myopia's implied
underweighting of the future might be imagined to lead individuals to treat currently incurred
social insurance taxes as taxes but to heavily discount the distant future benefits, which might be
imagined to produce a much larger labor wedge than otherwise. This and other possibilities are
modeled in the aforementioned literature, where it is shown that, depending on the assumptions
(on which there is little empirical evidence), this is indeed possible, but other seemingly
plausible cases cover a wide range of outcomes, including no labor supply effect and even a
boost in labor supply (a positive fiscal externality from stronger forced savings).

F. Estate and Gift (Wealth Transfer) Taxation

        Estate and gift taxation--wealth transfer taxation as distinguished from wealth taxation--
also had a tradition of being treated as a subject unto itself. As indicated in the Introduction,
however, it is best to view gifts of all sorts as a species of consumption and thereby integrate
their analysis into the broader framework. Although estate and gift taxation is typically confined
to high-wealth taxpayers and hence is strongly associated with redistribution, when we employ
the two-step decomposition we can see the taxation of estates and gifts as a distinct policy
instrument that, at a given level of (donor) income, differentially taxes own-consumption and
transfers that fund the consumption of others. Accordingly, the optimal setting of the instrument
depends on the differences between these two forms of consumption. This perspective on the
subject was initiated by Kaplow (1998b, 2001a) and has been followed in many of the leading
treatments since then. See Fahri and Werning (2010) and Kopczuk (2013).
        As the Introduction mentioned briefly, gifts (typically to donors' children) are distinctive
from own-consumption in three respects. First, there is a positive externality on donees; in
informal terms, two individuals benefit from a single round of consumption of the same real
resources. Even an altruistic donor does not place the weight on the donee that would an SWF
that registers the utility of both the donor (which includes any altruistic or warm glow utility) and
the donee. Some have regarded this as double counting (Diamond 2006), but in that event it
must be either that we do not have an individualistic SWF (elaborated in section IV)--here,
ignoring the utility parents obtain from their children (on reflection, a remarkable departure from
respecting preferences)--or that children (even adult children) are not in the SWF, also a radical
view and one at odds with many social policies that aim to help children.
        Second, gifts ordinarily have an income (wealth) effect on donees that suppresses their
labor effort. (Note that a marginal adjustment in donees' labor effort has no effect on their utility
due to the envelope theorem.) Annual gifts could have this feature, as could a trust fund received
early in life or the anticipation of a later inheritance. It is also possible in some cases that
liquidity constraints would be relaxed, enabling entrepreneurship that generates higher incomes
(Cox 1990, Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen 1994a, 1994b), but presumably that is not the
dominant effect across the population. In a world with an income tax, this effect generates a
negative fiscal externality.
        Third, Step 1 of our two-stage decomposition can be thought of here as designed to be
distribution neutral in the parent (donor) generation, but the transfers, a form of voluntary
redistribution, affect the marginal utility and utility levels of donees, which will be relevant

                                                 22
under typical SWFs to how they should be treated when examining optimal redistribution. In
this instance, we have a spillover from our Step 1 analysis to that in Step 2. To some extent,
gifts and bequests are probably equalizing among the children of given parents. But across
society as a whole, greater amounts are typically received by individuals who are already better
off or who are made so by the transfers themselves.
         Combining these three considerations is not an easy task, in part because it can be
important to disentangle different donor transfer motives, but the two-step decomposition makes
it fairly clear in principle how to proceed in the standard welfare economic framework.30
Moreover, we can see that this roadmap differs widely from how estate and gift taxes are
discussed in society at large, although there are some loose analogues. For example, those
concerned about equal starting points might be seen as advancing a version of the third point
about the distributive impact in the donees' generation.31 And some advance arguments for
estate and gift taxation (as well as for wealth taxation, examined in section III.D) on the grounds
of a negative externality on the political process.32

G. Income Transfers

        Most of the foregoing analysis has focused on Step 1: determining the effects of policies
in a distribution-neutral setting that focuses attention on any given policies' distinctive features,
which usually pertain only to efficiency. This section takes up a particular and important aspect
of Step 2, regarding redistribution, examining transfer policies aimed at the lower end of the
income distribution. As emphasized in Kaplow (2007a; 2008a, ch. 7), viewing them in this
manner is helpful, and Step 1 analysis is also valuable for analyzing some key issues.
        The first and most important point is that, to a surprising degree, analyses of transfer
programs are not integrated into the standard optimal income tax framework. Yet Mirrlees
(1971) specifically commented on this application. If one wants to know how transfers should
be designed--notably, their optimal levels and phaseouts--one can simply look to the left of a
diagram of an optimal income tax and transfer schedule and take note of the intercept and slope.
In Mirrlees (1971) and much subsequent work, the optimal grant was substantial and optimal
marginal tax rates were high in the lower range of incomes. There are two primary explanations
for the latter. First, marginal tax rates are inframarginal for all individuals with higher incomes.
For marginal income tax rates near the bottom of the distribution, a large portion of the
population is inframarginal, so substantial revenue is raised that can fund a more generous grant

30
   As noted in Kaplow (1998b; 2001a; 2008a, ch. 10), different transfer motives can be relevant to determining the
effects of wealth transfer taxation on giving behavior and on donors' and donees' utilities.
31
   However, as a practical matter most inheritances are received when children are in their 50s, and most estate,
inheritance, and gift tax regimes exempt all support of children early in life, including parents' expenditures on good
neighborhoods and on education, so the empirical connection between the notion of equal starting points and these
policies is quite attenuated.
32
   However, taxing high levels of wealth or wealth transfers encourages more own-consumption, here by the rich, so
the result may be greater expenditures by the wealthy on politics. Also, it is familiar that autocratic regimes may
have the most to fear from concentrations of wealth that can provide independent bases of power, which explains
why some of them either attack or bring under state control potential sources of countervailing economic power. A
proper assessment of such externalities, as well as optimal deployment of other instruments (such as campaign
finance limitations and media deconcentration), is an important subject outside the scope of this article. The point is
that, from this perspective, estate and wealth taxes are corrective taxes and hence, as a first cut (and ignoring the
other factors identified in the text), they should be set equal to the otherwise uncorrected marginal harms associated
with wealth transfers or wealth, whatever they may be.

                                                          23
without causing distortion (and the income effect generates a further positive fiscal externality).
Second, the lost productivity from low-ability individuals whose work effort is distorted
downward by high marginal rates is relatively small, by definition.33
         Some literature on the design of transfer programs, following Diamond (1980), has
suggested the optimality of lower (or even negative) marginal tax rates at the bottom in models
in which behavioral responses are only at the extensive margin. However, it does not seem
realistic to rule out part time work, especially at the lower end of the income distribution. And
such literature further assumes that individuals are unable to mimic lower types (for example, a
doctor may not be a good construction worker), but it seems unlikely that most low-skilled
individuals, who have negligible occupation-specific human capital, are incapable of performing
jobs at a slightly lower level of skill. Yet other (empirical) research assesses a qualitatively
different type of program wherein transfers are limited to those working, say, at least 30 hours
per week (for example, Michalopoulos, Robins, and Card 2005), but the presumed observability
of hours (and thus, implicitly, the wage as well) eliminates the information constraint on the
Mirrlees problem altogether. Hence, if such an assumption held and one considered the
unconstrained optimal design of transfer programs, even higher social welfare could be achieved
through other means.
         Taking a simple, integrated view of the design of optimal transfer policy yields some
additional insights. One is that transfers may optimally be targeted (tagged; see Akerlof 1978),
for example, by providing more generous support for the disabled or for single parents with
young children. If one oversimplifies by taking these traits to be exogenous, the optimal income
tax problem can be restated as determining a separate tax and transfer schedule--with its own
grant and marginal rate structure--for each group, with the schedules implicitly linked by a
common shadow price of government revenue.34 One important implication is that thinking in
terms of "phaseouts"--wherein any grant increase must be phased out via higher marginal tax
rates--is inapt, among other reasons because more generous grants for some groups may be
financed by higher tax rates on other groups.
         Another important feature of the Mirrlees (1971) formulation is that the income tax and
transfer schedule is understood to be comprehensive: it should be taken to include all taxes
(income taxes, payroll taxes, a VAT) and all transfers (social insurance, welfare, EITC-like
provisions in the income tax code, child credits). For any group, what matters for behavior and
utility is the aggregate grant and the combined marginal tax rate at any income level, inclusive of
both explicit taxes and phaseouts. In this setting, it is incoherent to think in a vacuum in terms of
the optimal design of, say, the EITC or some particular transfer program. (Likewise, viewing the
familiar "EITC trapezoid" in isolation is misleading.) For example, taking an existing transfer
program (say, food stamps, now SNAP, and supposing that the food expenditure requirement is
nonbinding), imagine that we decrease the phaseout rate at very low incomes, which extends the

33
   In a standard Mirrlees framework, optimal marginal income tax rates are always under 100%. Simulations
suggest the optimality of rates as high as, say, 60%. This naturally involves significant work disincentives, and
many favor provisions such as the EITC (see just below) for this reason. Consider, however, the cost of reducing
the marginal tax rate by 10% (that is, 10 percentage points) between $0 and $10,000. Focusing just on the
inframarginal effect, $1000 in revenue would be forgone from each person who earns above $10,000. Suppose that
there are 100 million such individuals; then, the annual cost of this improved incentive is $100 billion. There may
be positive externalities from the enhanced work effort of those in the $0 to $10,000 income range (perhaps the
positive role model effects significantly outweigh any losses from reduced parental supervision), but they would
have to be quite large in light of this revenue cost to justify substantially lower marginal rates than typical
simulations suggest to be optimal.
34
   This construction will be discussed further below, in section IV.C on taxation of the family.

                                                        24
eligibility range, calling for an additional phaseout at somewhat higher incomes. This reform is
identical to an analogous expansion of the EITC. Likewise, enacting such a reform along with a
corresponding reduction of the EITC would entail no change whatsoever for the pertinent
eligible groups.35
         There are reasons for varied, specialized transfer programs, but it is helpful to analyze
differences among them, in light of the foregoing, in a distribution-neutral fashion, that is, using
Step 1. We can ask, for a particular group of individuals, whether it is better to provide a given
level of transfer at a given level of income via cash or in kind. For example, should food stamps
that are binding be offered in lieu of cash of the same amount? Should some assistance be in the
form of housing or medical care? Should there be free or subsidized pre-school programs?
         Arguments in favor (other than optics and politics) usually involve paternalism
(behavioral concerns) and externalities (including, as in the discussion of gifts, that even parents
who care strongly about their children care less than society does). In addition to direct, current
benefits to children (the beneficiaries of many in-kind provisions), there are also future benefits
to them, which parents may not adequately perceive, and spillovers, such as through reduced
crime and positive fiscal externalities generated by greater earnings (Heckman 2006, Hendren
and Sprung-Keyser 2019). Some of these benefits might be generated, as well or better, by
unrestricted cash transfers, but others may not.


IV. UTILITY AND SOCIAL WELFARE

        The analysis to this point, despite its normative focus on the optimal setting of various
policy instruments, is for the most part positive as well. The two-step decomposition is simply a
way of analyzing all manner of policy experiments in a way that brings clarity and facilitates
specialization. Utility functions were important among other reasons because they determine
individuals' behavior, which must be understood to predict the effects of policies. Explicit
normative analysis, however, must take a stand on additional issues in order to reach a bottom
line.
        This section presents a perspective on these subjects and the core rationales behind them,
drawing on Kaplow (2008a, chs. 3, 13-15) and my prior work. Naturally, normative analysis is
pertinent to the choice of the SWF, examined first, but it is also relevant to such notions as
horizontal equity, mobility, and equality. Furthermore, it is necessary to attend explicitly to the
normative framework in order to address a range of important subjects, from the treatment of
different family groupings to the analysis of tax administration and enforcement. It is impossible
to identify sufficient statistics for welfare analysis when the underlying basis for evaluation is
unspecified--and worse, when implied specifications cannot be grounded in any plausible SWF.

A. Welfarism and the Pareto Principle

       It is conventional in welfare economics to employ an SWF of the following form
(expressed here for a finite population):

                                                               ,...,        ,

35
 The optics, however, are different: expanding phaseouts is regarded as an increase in the generosity of welfare
whereas the corresponding expansion of the EITC is viewed as a tax cut.

                                                        25
where is the utility of individual in a society of individuals and is a complete description
of the state of the world. This is called an individualistic SWF because it depends on, and only
on, each individual's utility. Put another way, no aspect of affects the level of social welfare
other than through its effects on individuals' utilities.
         This type of SWF is often employed in the analysis of optimal income taxation and more
broadly, usually without explicit justification. It seems normatively plausible that a social
evaluation of any state should indeed depend on how the state affects each individual's utility,
and moreover it is not clear why aspects of the state should matter to social welfare without
regard to such effects. Indeed, it can be demonstrated that any SWF that is not an individualistic
SWF--in particular, one that depends on anything other than individuals' utilities--violates the
Pareto principle. See Kaplow and Shavell (2001, 2002). The logic is related to the foregoing
intuition. More precisely, if an SWF did regard welfare to be higher in one state than another for
a nonutility reason, and if the SWF was continuous, we could imagine a state in which that
nonutility reason was inoperative but each individual's utility was higher by . For sufficiently
small, the hypothesized nonindividualistic SWF would regard social welfare to be lower in this
modified state even though every individual's utility was higher.36
         This restriction on the range of normatively relevant SWFs has many implications, some
of which will be elaborated below.37 For general distributive purposes, Kaplow (2007b) shows
that proposed substitutes for utility--famously, Rawls's (1971, 1982) primary goods and Sen's
(1985a, 1985b, 1997) capabilities and functionings--entail violations of the Pareto principle and
related conundrums. Similar analysis can be applied to Musgrave's (1959) notion of "merit"
goods, unless their in-kind provision is fully justified by the sorts of efficiency considerations
elucidated in section III.G.
         More subtly, analysts sometimes use social welfare weights as a shortcut, where what is
weighted is income rather than utility. This practice can likewise prescribe policies that violate
the Pareto principle although it often would not in the domains in which these constructs are
employed. Another problem with welfare weights is that income (really, after-tax disposable
income, i.e., consumption) is endogenous, and what really matters (marginal utilities and utility
levels) is endogenous as well. However, for analysis in the neighborhood of an optimum or that
seeks to map a Pareto frontier, this endogeneity may not cause problems. In any case, the deeper
lesson is to exercise caution: unless one literally means that income or consumption rather than
utility is what matters socially--and one is willing to violate the Pareto principle--one should
keep in mind the underlying SWF from which any shortcuts are derived.38




36
   Perhaps surprisingly, the Pareto principle also has implications for the form of the SWF within the individualistic
class. Specifically, any SWF that is not utilitarian violates the Pareto principle. See Kaplow (1995; 2008a, ch. 14)
for analysis, related ideas, and comments on the literature. Some economists will already be familiar with Harsanyi
(1953, 1955), who offers two demonstrations that the SWF should be utilitarian, one using a veil of ignorance (first
stated to imply utilitarianism in Vickrey 1945) and another extending the rationality axioms from expected utility
theory to the SWF as well.
37
   For a survey emphasizing contrasting views, see Fleurbaey and Maniquet (2018).
38
   There has also been confusion about the welfare gains from redistribution associated with the concavity of utility
functions and of the SWF (on which, see also the preceding footnote). These forces are disentangled in Kaplow
(2008a, ch. 3; 2010a).

                                                          26
B. Horizontal Equity, Mobility, Equality, and Poverty

         Beginning at least with Musgrave's (1959) discussion of horizontal equity, economists
examining income taxation and other distributive policies have considered an array of desiderata,
including various indices for mobility, equality, and poverty. It is evident that, if any of these
measures are to be interpreted not merely as proxies for welfare-related factors but as social ends
in themselves, they would be inconsistent with an individualistic SWF and thus in conflict with
the Pareto principle.39 It seems that such confusion often arises, and that economists advancing
these sorts of criteria have been largely unaware of these and other difficulties. See Kaplow
(1989, 1995, 2005).40
         The problem is probably most familiar with concerns about inequality, wherein it is
understood that one way to improve equality scores is to tax the rich beyond the top of the Laffer
curve (and by more than can be justified by externalities). Likewise, many concerned with
reducing poverty appreciate the imperfections of poverty measures and that they only capture
part of the population (ignoring, for example, the near-poor). But perhaps there would be less--
or at least better directed--fuss with measures of equality and poverty if there was a greater
recognition that these notions are indeed proxies. Moreover, because one often needs much of
the directly welfare-relevant information to construct the better proxies (and because one often is
discarding some of that information in the process), it usually makes little sense to take such
indices as policy targets.
         Notions of horizontal equity and mobility have generated greater confusion when they
have been employed. For example, King's (1983) formal indexes of each of the two are actually
identical except for a minus sign: that is, two purportedly desirable objectives have been defined
such that they are opposites (Kaplow 1989). Stepping back, both of these criteria do seem best
understood as loose proxies of varying application. Horizontal equity--usually defined in a
question-begging fashion as calling for the equal treatment of equals, without any independent
normative criterion for who are "equals" (see Westen 1990)--is a principle that is ordinarily
satisfied by maximizing an objective function: if the inputs are identical, so (typically) should be
the outputs. Moreover, unequal treatment is historically associated with invidious discrimination
and corruption. Similarly, obstacles that inhibit mobility have often been imposed for similar
reasons and tend to be inefficient. Hence it makes sense to be aware of seeming violations of
horizontal equity and impediments to mobility, but this important point does not transform them
into welfare-relevant policy objectives in and of themselves.41




39
   To take a subtle example related to the discussion of income-based welfare weights in section IV.A, Auerbach and
Hassett's (2002) proposed measure of horizontal equity depends only on incomes, but because incomes are not
utility and, moreover, incomes in an identified status quo are given independent weight, their measure violates the
Pareto principle. See Kaplow (2001b).
40
   The titles of two of these articles suggest some of the issues: "Horizontal Equity: Measures in Search of a
Principle" and "Why Measure Inequality?" For an overview and also for applications to sacrifice theories, the
benefit principle, notions of ability to pay, and the use of notions such as the Haig-Simons definition of income as
norms, see Kaplow (2008a, ch. 15).
41
   Treating them as such can readily lead policy astray. For example, random inspections and related enforcement
policies directly violate horizontal equity, but banning them would eliminate most law enforcement. And forcing
random assignment of jobs and all rewards would maximize mobility by many measures but eviscerate incentives.

                                                        27
C. Taxation of the Family

         Income tax systems and many transfer programs, as well as social insurance, often
impose differential treatment that reflects family composition, depending possibly on whether an
adult is single or married and often on the number of children. There are two frequent
deficiencies in the analysis of policies along these dimensions, corresponding to the central
thrusts in this article. The analysis here follows Kaplow (1996b; 2008a, ch. 12).
         First, by failing to employ something akin to the two-step decomposition, and in
particular to engage in Step 1's distribution-neutral analysis, researchers often conflate
distributive issues (which are sometimes termed "vertical") with the question of how, if at all,
different family configurations at a given standard of living should be distinguished. For
example, it is often suggested that some forms of support for children should be phased out as
income rises because needs are falling with income, or that preferential status, say, for
households with a single adult along with children, are regressive because they deliver greater
dollar benefits to higher-income households. But in the spirit of Step 1, it is helpful to compare
households of similar income and ask, essentially at each level of income, what differentiation is
optimal. For some of the reasons elaborated below, it often will be optimal to make larger dollar
transfers on account of children at higher levels of income. Note that, in the framework of the
two-step decomposition, we can think of these larger transfers as being funded by similarly high-
income households with fewer dependents. In this sense, one can maintain distribution
neutrality.
         The foregoing comments, however, are suggestive and incomplete because of our second
issue, relating to utility functions and the SWF. Specifically, it is not obvious just which
households (say, that differ only in the number of children) are to be compared to which--that is,
which income levels for different family configurations should be regarded as comparable. This
problem has often been dealt with using so-called family equivalence scales, but that formulation
uses proxies that are not directly grounded in the pertinent utility functions, so the discussion in
section IV.A warns us that we are likely to go astray.
         To launch the proper analysis, it is useful to have in mind another piece of apparatus that
was introduced in section III.G on transfer programs. We can extend the Mirrlees framework to
contemplate different income tax schedules--each with its own intercept and schedule of
marginal tax rates--for each group. (In the analysis that follows, we will continue to set aside
the important point that family composition is endogenous, so the schedules will affect such
choices as marriage and divorce and decisions to have children.) For each of these schedules,
there will be two sets of concerns. One (which has received significant attention in the literature)
is the resulting distortion of labor effort. For example, if second earners in married couples have
more elastic labor supply, optimal marginal tax rates on them may be lower (Boskin and
Sheshinski 1983).
         Less attention has been devoted to the focus here, which involves determination of the
appropriate utility and welfare effects for those subject to each of these schedules. Echoing a
point in section III.F on estate and gift taxation, both parents and children are individuals, and
each of their utilities should ordinarily be taken to enter into the SWF. (If one is to use a
"family" or "household" utility function for purposes of assessing social welfare, rather than for
predicting behavior, it ought to be something like the sum of family members' utilities, which
would be precisely correct under a utilitarian SWF.) When the problem is broken down to its
fundamentals, a number of implications can be derived.



                                                28
         First, for a given level of resources, larger families tend to have a higher marginal utility
of disposable income--which is to say, for a given allocation mechanism within the household,
the marginal dollar will variously flow to individuals whose consumption is lower and hence
whose marginal utility is higher when the household is larger.42 This point favors more generous
provision to larger families. Moreover, brief reflection suggests that, ceteris paribus, the dollar
transfers that would equalize marginal utilities across different-sized households would be larger
at the upper end of the income distribution.
         Second, there are often regarded to be economies of scale in household size, due to the
(partially) public good nature of some forms of expenditure, such as on housing. It is widely
believed that this factor unambiguously favors less generous treatment of larger households, but
this point overlooks the fact that disposable income is for that very reason a more efficient utility
generator in larger households, which cuts the other way. It can be shown that the curvatures of
the scale economies function, utility functions, and the SWF determine which force dominates
and to what extent.
         Third, there is a further question of distribution within the household, say between two
adults. It is commonly thought that unequal sharing--say, because in traditional households, the
husband controls the allocation of resources and takes a disproportionate share of the marginal
dollar--favors less generous treatment. (This argument is also advanced to favor individual
taxation rather than treating married couples as a single unit, as is done in the United States.)
This view, however, is at best misleading, also because of a failure to derive conclusions from
first principles. Consider that, on one hand, a marginal dollar will mostly go to the favored
spouse (who has a lower marginal utility of income), but, on the other hand, the portion going to
the disfavored spouse delivers higher marginal utility because the baseline is so much lower.
Again, depending on the curvatures of utility functions and of the SWF, either force could
dominate.
         The optimal design of the tax and transfer system with regard to the treatment of different
family configurations is a complex issue. This is true because the foregoing utility- and welfare-
related factors are many and subtle and because incentives to supply labor and to form, dissolve,
and augment family units are endogenous to the tax and transfer system. Nevertheless, this
highly challenging and contentious problem is brought into sharper focus both by use of the two-
step decomposition and by tracing effects directly to individuals' utility functions rather than
relying on loose and potentially misleading notions.

D. Heterogeneous Preferences

       Much policy analysis assumes that all individuals have the same utility function.43 If
sources of heterogeneity can be observed, different tax schedules may be employed. When it is



42
   It might also be the case that utility levels per person are lower, which is relevant under an SWF that is concave in
utilities but not, for example, under a utilitarian SWF. It is sometimes said that the larger "family's" (total) utility is
lower, but this suggestion is misleading. For example, if in one family, two adults voluntarily and successfully give
birth to or adopt a child, and moreover the child is healthy and well treated, it is hard to see in what sense that
"family" is worse off than another with two otherwise identical adults who were unsuccessful in adding a child.
43
   Of particular relevance here, Step 1, in constructing       , assumes that individuals' utility functions are the same
(or differ in ways that are observable). When this is not so, the resulting distribution neutrality can only be
approximate, say, within income levels, and precise Pareto comparisons are impossible. Ng (1984) discusses
"quasi-Pareto" comparisons in this regard.

                                                            29
only possible to observe signals of underlying differences or if no pertinent traits are observable,
the problem is more challenging.44
         Exploration of heterogeneity is difficult for another, qualitatively distinct reason: it is
necessary to engage in interpersonal comparisons of utility, and, moreover, ones that cannot (as
is usually done) be rendered tractable by assuming that everyone's preferences are the same. See
Boadway et al. (2002) and Sandmo (1993). Another key point is that some literature introduces
heterogeneity in one of many possible ways and derives characterizations that are attributed to
heterogeneity as such. Yet, as developed in Kaplow (2008b), heterogeneity is itself a
heterogeneous phenomenon. Even with simple functional forms, one individual can derive more
utility from consumption than another in qualitatively different ways that, among other things,
can have opposite implications for the direction of the difference in marginal utilities and hence
in the direction of optimal (utilitarian) redistribution.
         In some settings, policy moderation may be optimal when heterogeneity cannot be
observed and hence directly compensated for. For example, Stern (1982) showed that error in
income measurement favors less redistributive income taxation. The idea is that when, say, an
observed signal of income may over- or understate true income, the welfare loss from taxing the
former too much exceeds the welfare loss from taxing the latter too little. On the other hand,
similar considerations may favor a more generous grant or provisions for those who are probably
(but not certainly) disabled because errors of underprovision have a higher welfare cost than
errors of overprovision, ceteris paribus.45

E. Administration, Compliance, and Enforcement

        Tax administration, compliance, and enforcement are extremely important features of tax
system design, yet they have not received nearly the attention they deserve. Under one common
approach, these concerns are simply included in a list of objectives--along with, say, efficiency,
equality, and perhaps some other notions of fairness--that taxation aims to advance. The lack of
either a common denominator or a link to individuals' utility and thus to a proper measure of
social welfare renders this approach obscure.
        A more determinate but also unsatisfying method is to ask how to set tax administration
and enforcement instruments so as to maximize tax revenue. Whatever may be the virtue of such
a command as part of the solution to a second-best delegation problem, net revenue is an
unsatisfying core objective. Instead, administrative, compliance, and enforcement concerns need
to be embedded in the sort of social welfare framework presented here.
        Slemrod and Yitzhaki (1987), Kaplow (1990), and Mayshar (1991) emphasized the need
to focus on welfare rather than revenue maximization. And some of the earliest work that builds
on Allingham and Sandmo (1972) embeds optimal tax enforcement in a welfare-based
framework. A more recent line of work that analyzes the elasticity of taxable income likewise
takes this tack (Feldstein 1999, Slemrod and Kopczuk 2002). Kaplow (1996a, 1998a) analyzes
accuracy, complexity, and enforcement, and the book by Slemrod and Gillitzer (2014) covers
many of the modern developments. Nevertheless, much work remains to be done that traces the


44
   One of the arguments for in-kind provision of welfare is that it may help with screening when relevant differences
are unobservable. See Blackorby and Donaldson (1988).
45
   All may not be equal, however, because increasing generosity causes more individuals to feign disability, so
overprovision may be provided to a greater number of individuals (and to ones for whom the social welfare gain is
not as high as, say, for those truly disabled but not by quite enough to properly qualify).

                                                         30
effects of both government actions and taxpayers' responses to individuals' utility and embeds
the analysis in the broader optimal tax framework.


V. CONCLUSION
         Most work in public economics is inevitably and appropriately specialized, focusing on
particular policy instruments and analyzing one or a few margins of behavior. But it is essential
to occasionally step back and consider how all the pieces fit together in order to synthesize what
we know, to identify what we need to understand but do not, and to better guide policymakers.
This article offers a unifying framework that aims to advance this integrative mission and enable
greater progress through specialization that is grounded in fundamentals.
         The primary tool of analysis is a two-step decomposition of policy reforms into a
distribution-neutral component that can be analyzed entirely on efficiency grounds and a purely
redistributive component that embodies the familiar tradeoff of redistribution and labor supply
distortion. This decomposition greatly enhances conceptual clarity and the comparability of
different research findings, indicates the appropriate contours of specialized research by
identifying respects in which analysis is modular, and allows for separate analyses of both the
optimality and political economy of redistribution.
         These lessons sharpen positive analysis and provide simple benchmarks for a wide range
of policies, including commodity taxation, tax expenditures, externality correction, public goods,
capital income and wealth taxation, social security and retirement savings, and estate and gift
taxation. Simple Economics 101 efficiency tests (supplemented by an additional term for any
fiscal externality due to interactions with labor supply) support the general targeting principle
relating instruments and objectives that are often associated with particular margins of behavior.
The framework also illuminates the optimal design of transfer policies, which constitute an
important aspect of the second, redistributive component of the decomposition.
         Finally, normative analysis--including the identification of sufficient statistics for
welfare analysis--requires the explicit tracing of policies' effects to individuals' utilities and the
aggregation of utilities through a social welfare function. Although not widely appreciated,
adherence to the Pareto principle requires that social welfare be a function of only of individuals'
utilities, without any deviations such as by giving independent weight to horizontal equity,
mobility, equality, and poverty (even though these concepts may in respects serve as proxies for
underlying welfare-relevant considerations). Tracing effects directly to individuals' utilities is
also essential for the assessment of policies involving the taxation of families, heterogeneous
preferences, and tax administration and enforcement.
         The simple yet encompassing framework advanced here takes up the daunting task of
relating everything to everything else, and in particular to fundamentals, but delivers the good
news that a great deal of specialized research may be conducted in ways that are both easier than
often imagined and more rigorously grounded at the same time. These encouraging messages, to
be sure, are overly simple and optimistic. Many subtleties were noted, and other qualifications
should be easier to identify and explore due to the transparency of the analysis. Although the
gap between what we in principle need to know and what we do know or can plausibly learn
anytime soon will sometimes be large, such limitations need to be acknowledged and addressed
forthrightly.




                                                 31
REFERENCES

Ab Iorwerth, Aled, and John Whalley, 2002. "Efficiency Considerations and the Exemption of
    Food from Sales and Value Added Taxes." Canadian Journal of Economics 35, 166­182.
Akerlof, George A., 1978. "The Economics of `Tagging' as Applied to the Optimal Income Tax,
    Welfare Programs, and Manpower Planning." American Economic Review 68, 8­19.
Allingham, Michael G., and Agnar Sandmo, 1972. "Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical
    Analysis." Journal of Public Economics 1, 323­338.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Nicholas H. Stern, 1974. "Pigou, Taxation and Public Goods."
    Review of Economic Studies 41, 119­128.
Atkinson, Anthony B., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1976. "The Design of Tax Structure: Direct versus
    Indirect Taxation." Journal of Public Economics 6, 55­75.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Bradford, David F., 2004. "Generalized Cash-Flow Taxation." Journal of
    Public Economics 88, 957­980.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Kevin A. Hassett, 2002. "A New Measure of Horizontal Equity."
    American Economic Review 92, 1116­1125.
Auerbach, Alan J., and James R. Hines, Jr., 2002. "Taxation and Economic Efficiency." In
    Auerbach, Alan J., and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public Economics, vol. 3,
    1347­1421. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Ballard, Charles L., and Don Fullerton, 1992. "Distortionary Taxes and the Provision of Public
    Goods." Journal of Economic Perspectives 6 (3), 117­131.
Bernheim, B. Douglas, and Antonio Rangel, 2007. "Behavioral Public Economics: Welfare and
    Policy Analysis with Nonstandard Decision-Makers." In Diamond, Peter, and Hannu
    Vartiainen (eds.), Behavioral Economics and Its Applications, 7­77. Princeton University
    Press, Princeton.
Blackorby, Charles, and David Donaldson, 1988. "Cash versus Kind, Self-Selection, and
    Efficient Transfers." American Economic Review 78, 691­700.
Boadway, Robin, Maurice Marchand, Pierre Pestieau, and Maria del Mar Racionero, 2002.
    "Optimal Redistribution with Heterogeneous Preferences for Leisure." Journal of Public
    Economic Theory 4, 475­498.
Boadway, Robin, and Pierre Pestieau, 2003. "Indirect Taxation and Redistribution: The Scope of
    the Atkinson­Stiglitz Theorem." In Arnott, Richard, Bruce Greenwald, Ravi Kanbur, and
    Barry Nalebuff (eds.), Economics for an Imperfect World: Essays in Honor of Joseph E.
    Stiglitz, 387­ 403. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Boskin, Michael J., and Martin Feldstein, 1977. "Effects of the Charitable Deduction on
    Contributions by Low Income and Middle Income Households: Evidence From the National
    Survey of Philanthropy." Review of Economics and Statistics 59 (3), 351­354.
Boskin, Michael J., and Eytan Sheshinski, 1983. "Optimal Tax Treatment of the Family: Married
    Couples." Journal of Public Economics 20, 281­297.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 2002. "Environmental Taxation and
    Regulation." In Auerbach, Alan J., and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public
    Economics, vol. 3, 1471­1545. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Buchanan, James M., 1975. "The Samaritan's Dilemma." In Phelps, Edmund S. (eds.), Altruism,
    Morality, and Economic Theory, 71­85. Russell Sage Foundation, New York.
Bulow, Jeremy I., and Lawrence H. Summers, 1984. "The Taxation of Risky Assets." Journal of
    Political Economy 92, 20­39.



                                              32
Burman, Leonard E., Eric J. Toder, Daniel Berger, and Jeffrey Rohaly, 2017. "Economic and
    Distributional Effects of Tax Expenditure Limits." In Auerbach, Alan J., and Kent Smetters
    (eds.), The Economics of Tax Policy, 109­144. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Chamley, Christophe, 1986. "Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with
    Infinite Lives." Econometrica 54, 607­622.
Corlett, W. J., and D. C. Hague, 1953. "Complementarity and the Excess Burden of Taxation."
    Review of Economic Studies 21, 21­30.
Cox, Donald, 1990. "Intergenerational Transfers and Liquidity Constraints." Quarterly Journal
    of Economics 105, 187­217.
Diamond, Peter A., 1980. "Income Taxation with Fixed Hours of Work." Journal of Public
    Economics 13, 101­110.
Diamond, Peter A., 2006. "Optimal Tax Treatment of Private Contributions for Public Goods
    with and without Warm Glow Preferences." Journal of Public Economics 90, 897­919.
Diamond, Peter A., and James A. Mirrlees, 1971. "Optimal Taxation and Public Production II:
    Tax Rules." American Economic Review 61, 261­278.
Domar, Evsey D., and Richard A. Musgrave, 1944. "Proportional Income Taxation and Risk-
    Taking." Quarterly Journal of Economics 58, 388­423.
Farhi, Emmanuel, and Ivan Werning, 2010. "Progressive Estate Taxation." Quarterly Journal of
    Economics 125 (2), 635­673.
Feldstein, Martin S., 1999. "Tax Avoidance and the Deadweight Loss of the Income Tax."
    Review of Economics and Statistics 81, 674­680.
Feldstein, Martin S., 2015. "Raising Revenue by Limiting Tax Expenditures." In Brown, Jeffrey
    R. (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 29, 1­11. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Fleurbaey, Marc, and François Maniquet, 2018. "Optimal Income Taxation Theory and
    Principles of Fairness." Journal of Economic Literature 56 (3), 1029­1079.
Golosov, Mikhail, Aleh Tsyvinski, and Iván Werning, 2007. "New Dynamic Public Finance: A
    User's Guide." In Acemoglu, Daron, Kenneth Rogoff, and Michael Woodford (eds.), NBER
    Macroeconomics Annual 2006, vol. 21, 317­388. MIT Press. Cambridge, MA.
Gordon, Roger H., 1985. "Taxation of Corporate Capital Income: Tax Revenues versus Tax
    Distortions." Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 1­27.
Goulder, Lawrence H. (ed.), 2002. Environmental Policy Making in Economies with Prior Tax
    Distortions. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK.
Gruber, Jonathan, and Botond Koszegi, 2001. "Is Addiction `Rational?' Theory and Evidence."
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (4), 1261­1305.
Hall, Robert E., and Susan E. Woodward, 2010. "The Burden of the Nondiversifiable Risk of
    Entrepreneurship." American Economic Review 100, 1163­1194.
Harsanyi, John C., 1953. "Cardinal Utility in Welfare Economics and in the Theory of Risk-
    Taking." Journal of Political Economy 61, 434­435.
Harsanyi, John C., 1955. "Cardinal Welfare, Individualistic Ethics, and Interpersonal
    Comparisons of Utility." Journal of Political Economy 63, 309­321.
Heckman, James J., 2006. "Skill Formation and the Economics of Investing in Disadvantaged
    Children." Science 312 (5782), 1900­1902.
Hendren, Nathaniel, 2014. "Efficient Welfare Weights." NBER Working Paper No. 20351.
    National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Hendren, Nathaniel, 2016. "The Policy Elasticity." In Brown, Jeffrey R. (ed.), Tax Policy and the
    Economy, vol. 30, 51­89. NBER and University of Chicago Press, Chicago.



                                               33
Hendren, Nathaniel, and Ben Sprung-Keyser, 2019. "A Unified Welfare Analysis of Government
    Policies." NBER Working Paper No. 26144. National Bureau of Economic Research,
    Cambridge, MA.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994a. "Entrepreneurial Decisions
    and Liquidity Constraints." Rand Journal of Economics 25, 334­347.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen, 1994b. "Sticking It Out:
    Entrepreneurial Survival and Liquidity Constraints." Journal of Political Economy 102, 53­
    75.
Hylland, Aanund, and Richard Zeckhauser, 1979. "Distributional Objectives Should Affect
    Taxes But Not Program Choice or Design." Scandinavian Journal of Economics 81 (2),
    264­284.
Judd, Kenneth L., 1985. "Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model." Journal
    of Public Economics 28, 59­83.
Kaplow, Louis, 1989. "Horizontal Equity: Measures in Search of a Principle." National Tax
    Journal 42, 139­154.
Kaplow, Louis, 1990. "Optimal Taxation with Costly Enforcement and Evasion." Journal of
    Public Economics 43, 221­236.
Kaplow, Louis, 1994. "Taxation and Risk Taking: A General Equilibrium Perspective." National
    Tax Journal 47, 789­798.
Kaplow, Louis, 1995. "A Fundamental Objection to Tax Equity Norms: A Call for
    Utilitarianism." National Tax Journal 48, 497­514.
Kaplow, Louis, 1996a. "How Tax Complexity and Enforcement Affect the Equity and Efficiency
    of the Income Tax." National Tax Journal 49, 135­150.
Kaplow, Louis, 1996b. "Optimal Distribution and the Family." Scandinavian Journal of
    Economics 98, 75­92.
Kaplow, Louis, 1996c. "The Optimal Supply of Public Goods and the Distortionary Cost of
    Taxation." National Tax Journal 49 (4), 513­533.
Kaplow, Louis, 1998a. "Accuracy, Complexity, and the Income Tax." Journal of Law,
    Economics, & Organization 14, 61­83.
Kaplow, Louis, 1998b. "Tax Policy and Gifts." American Economic Review Papers and
    Proceedings 88 (2), 283­288.
Kaplow, Louis, 2001a. "A Framework for Assessing Estate and Gift Taxation." In Gale, William
    G., James R. Hines Jr., and Joel Slemrod (eds.), Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation, 164­
    215. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.
Kaplow, Louis, 2001b. "Horizontal Equity: New Measures, Unclear Principles." In Hassett,
    Kevin A., and R. Glenn Hubbard (eds.), Inequality and Tax Policy, 75­97. American
    Enterprise Institute Press, Washington, D.C.
Kaplow, Louis, 2004. "On the (Ir)Relevance of Distribution and Labor Supply Distortion to
    Government Policy." Journal of Economic Perspectives 18 (4), 159­175.
Kaplow, Louis, 2005. "Why Measure Inequality?" Journal of Economic Inequality 3, 65­79.
Kaplow, Louis, 2006a. "On the Undesirability of Commodity Taxation Even When Income
    Taxation Is Not Optimal." Journal of Public Economics 90 (6­7), 1235­1250.
Kaplow, Louis, 2006b. "Public Goods and the Distribution of Income." European Economic
    Review 50, 1627­1660.
Kaplow, Louis, 2007a. "Optimal Income Transfers." International Tax and Public Finance 14,
    295­325.



                                             34
Kaplow, Louis, 2007b. "Primary Goods, Capabilities, or . . . Well-Being?" Philosophical Review
    116, 603­632.
Kaplow, Louis, 2007c. "Taxation." In Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Steven Shavell (eds.),
    Handbook of Law and Economics, vol. 1, 647­755. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Kaplow, Louis, 2008a. The Theory of Taxation and Public Economics. Princeton University
    Press, Princeton.
Kaplow, Louis, 2008b. "Optimal Policy with Heterogeneous Preferences." B.E. Journal of
    Economic Analysis and Policy: Advances 8 (1: 40), 1­28.
Kaplow, Louis, 2009. "Capital Levies and Transition to a Consumption Tax." In Auerbach, Alan
    J., and Daniel N. Shaviro (eds.), Institutional Foundations of Public Finance: Economic and
    Legal Perspectives, 112­146. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Kaplow, Louis, 2010a. "Concavity of Utility, Concavity of Welfare, and Redistribution of
    Income." International Tax and Public Finance 17, 25­42.
Kaplow, Louis, 2010b. "Taxing Leisure Complements." Economic Inquiry 48, 1065­1071.
Kaplow, Louis, 2011. "Targeted Savings and Labor Supply." International Tax and Public
    Finance 18 (5), 507­518.
Kaplow, Louis, 2012. "Optimal Control of Externalities in the Presence of an Income Tax."
    International Economic Review 53 (2), 487­509.
Kaplow, Louis, 2015a. "Government Policy and Labor Supply with Myopic or Targeted Savings
    Decisions." In Brown, Jeffrey R. (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 29, 159­193.
    NBER and University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Kaplow, Louis, 2015b. "Myopia and the Effects of Social Security and Capital Taxation on
    Labor Supply." National Tax Journal 68, 7­32.
Kaplow, Louis, 2017. "A Distribution-Neutral Perspective on Tax Expenditure Limitations." In
    Moffitt, Robert A. (ed.), Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 31, 161­188. NBER and
    University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Kaplow, Louis, 2019. "Market Power and Income Taxation." NBER Working Paper No. 25578.
    National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell, 2001. "Any Non-welfarist Method of Policy Assessment
    Violates the Pareto Principle." Journal of Political Economy 109, 281­286.
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell, 2002. Fairness versus Welfare. Harvard University Press,
    Cambridge, MA.
King, Mervyn A., 1983. "An Index of Inequality: With Applications to Horizontal Equity and
    Social Mobility." Econometrica 51, 99­115.
Kopczuk, Wojciech, 2013. "Incentive Effects of Inheritances and Optimal Estate Taxation."
    American Economic Review 103 (3), 472­477.
Lindahl, Erik, 1919. "Die Gerechtigkeit der Besteuerung: Eine Analyse der Steuerprinzipien auf
    der Grundlage der Grenznutzentheorie. Lund: Gleerup and H. Ohlsson." In Musgrave,
    Richard A., and Alan Peacock (eds.), Classics in the Theory of Public Finance, 168­176
    (Chapter 4, "Positive Lösung," translated as "Just Taxation--A Positive Solution").
    Macmillan: London (1958).
Mayshar, Joram, 1991. "Taxation with Costly Administration." Scandinavian Journal of
    Economics 93, 75­88.
Michalopoulos, Charles, Philip K. Robins, and David Card, 2005. "When Financial Work
    Incentives Pay for Themselves: Evidence from a Randomized Social Experiment for
    Welfare Recipients." Journal of Public Economics 89, 5­29.



                                              35
Mirrlees, James A., 1971. "An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation." Review
    of Economic Studies 38(2), 175­208.
Mirrlees, James A., 1976. "Optimal Tax Theory: A Synthesis." Journal of Public Economics 6,
    327­358.
Mirrlees, James A., 1994. "Optimal Taxation and Government Finance." In Quigley, John M.,
    and Eugene Smolensky (eds.), Modern Public Finance, 213­231. Harvard University Press,
    Cambridge, MA.
Musgrave, Richard A, 1959. The Theory of Public Finance. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Myles, Gareth D., 1995. Public Economics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Ng, Yew-Kwang, 1984. "Quasi-Pareto Social Improvements." American Economic Review 74,
    1033­1050.
Ramsey, Frank P., 1927. "A Contribution to the Theory of Taxation." Economic Journal 37, 47­
    61.
Rawls, John, 1971. A Theory of Justice. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Rawls, John, 1982. "Social Unity and Primary Goods." In Sen, Amartya, and Bernard Williams
    (eds.), Utilitarianism and Beyond, 159­185. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Saez, Emmanuel, 2002. "The Desirability of Commodity Taxation under Non-Linear Income
    Taxation and Heterogeneous Tastes." Journal of Public Economics 83, 217­230.
Salanié, Bernard, 2003. The Economics of Taxation. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Salanié, Bernard, 2011. The Economics of Taxation, 2nd ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1954. "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure." Review of Economics and
    Statistics 36, 387­389.
Sandmo, Agnar, 1993. "Optimal Redistribution When Tastes Differ." Finanzarchiv 50, 149­163.
Sen, Amartya, 1985a. Commodities and Capabilities. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Sen, Amartya, 1985b. "Well-being, Agency and Freedom: The Dewey Lectures 1984." Journal
    of Philosophy 82, 169­221.
Sen, Amartya, 1997. On Economic Inequality, enlarged ed. Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Shavell, Steven, 1981. "A Note on Efficiency vs. Distributional Equity in Legal Rulemaking:
    Should Distributional Equity Matter Given Optimal Income Taxation?" American Economic
    Review Papers and Proceedings 71 (2), 414­418.
Simon, Herbert A., 1962. "The Architecture of Complexity." Proceedings of the American
    Philosophical Society 106 (6), 467­482.
Slemrod, Joel, and Christian Gillitzer, 2014. Tax Systems. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Slemrod, Joel, and Wojciech Kopczuk, 2002. "The Optimal Elasticity of Taxable Income."
    Journal of Public Economics 84, 91­112.
Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki, 1987. "The Optimal Size of a Tax Collection Agency."
    Scandinavian Journal of Economics 89, 183­192.
Slemrod, Joel, and Shlomo Yitzhaki, 2001. "Integrating Expenditure and Tax Decisions: The
    Marginal Costs of Funds and the Marginal Benefit of Projects." National Tax Journal 54,
    189­201.
Smith, Matthew, Danny Yagan, Owen Zidar, and Eric Zwick, 2019. "Capitalists in the Twenty-
    First Century." NBER Working Paper No. 25442. National Bureau of Economic Research,
    Cambridge, MA.
Stern, Nicholas H., 1982. "Optimum Taxation with Errors in Administration." Journal of Public
    Economics 17, 181­211.




                                             36
Stiglitz, Joseph E., 1987. "Pareto Efficient and Optimal Taxation and the New New Welfare
     Economics." In Auerbach, Alan J., and Martin Feldstein (eds.), Handbook of Public
     Economics, vol. 2, 991­1042. North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Partha Dasgupta, 1971. "Differential Taxation, Public Goods, and
     Economic Efficiency." Review of Economic Studies 38, 151­174.
Vickrey, William, 1945. "Measuring Marginal Utility by Reactions to Risk." Econometrica 13,
     319­333.
Westen, Peter, 1990. Speaking of Equality: An Analysis of the Rhetorical Force of "Equality" in
     Moral and Legal Discourse. Princeton University Press, Princeton.




                                              37
