                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           REGIONAL MONETARY POLICIES AND THE GREAT DEPRESSION

                                     Pooyan Amir-Ahmadi
                                       Gustavo S. Cortes
                                     Marc D. Weidenmier

                                      Working Paper 26695
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26695


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




Marc Weidenmier acknowledges financial support from Chapman University. We are grateful to
Mark Carlson, James Hamilton, William Lastrapes, Ralf Meisenzahl, Eugenio Rojas, Angela
Vossmeyer, David Wheelock, and seminar participants at the Midwest Macroeconomics Meeting
for helpful suggestions. We thank Asaf Bernstein for kindly sharing price data. Remaining errors
are ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pooyan Amir-Ahmadi, Gustavo S. Cortes, and Marc D. Weidenmier. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Regional Monetary Policies and the Great Depression
Pooyan Amir-Ahmadi, Gustavo S. Cortes, and Marc D. Weidenmier
NBER Working Paper No. 26695
January 2020
JEL No. E52,E58,N1,N12

                                        ABSTRACT

The Great Depression provides a unique setting to test the impact of monetary policies on
economic activity in a monetary union within the same country during a severe crisis. Until the
mid-1930s, the 12 Federal Reserve banks had the ability to set their own discount rates and
conduct independent monetary policy. Using a structural VAR with sign restrictions and new
monthly data for each Federal Reserve district between 1923-33, we extract a national monetary
policy factor from the 12 discount rates of the Federal Reserve banks. We then identify the
region-specific component for each Fed district by subtracting the common factor component of
monetary policy from the discount rate of each Federal Reserve bank. Our findings suggest that
there was significant variation in regional monetary policy and that the district reserve banks
played a key role in the economic contraction.

Pooyan Amir-Ahmadi                             Marc D. Weidenmier
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign     Argyros School of Business and Economics
Department of Economics                        Chapman University
1407 W. Gregory Dr                             One University Drive
Urbana, IL 61801                               Orange, CA 92866
United States                                  and NBER
pooyan@illinois.edu                            weidenmi@chapman.edu

Gustavo S. Cortes
Warrington College of Business
University of Florida
306 Stuzin Hall, PO Box 117168
Gainesville, FL 32611
gustavo.cortes@warrington.ufl.edu
    "Why was monetary policy so inept? (...) The monetary system collapsed, but it clearly need not have done so (...)
     pursuit of the policies outlined by the [Federal Reserve] System itself (...) would have prevented the catastrophe."
                                                             -- Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz (1963)

   "I would like to say to Milton and Anna: regarding the Great Depression. You're right, we did it. We're very sorry.
                                                                           But thanks to you, we won't do it again."
                                       -- Ben S. Bernanke (2002), Governor of the Federal Reserve System



1 Introduction

The Great Depression is the most severe economic downturn in the last 100 years and one of the

most studied events in the history of economics. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argued in their

seminal work, "A Monetary History of the United States," that the Federal Reserve did not respond

to the one-third decline in the money supply. The Fed failed to play the role of a lender-of-last-

resort and provide liquidity assistance to banks which led to bank failures and bank suspensions.

The Fed's inadequate response turned a "garden variety recession" into a depression (Hamilton

(1987); Bordo (1989); Bordo et al. (2000); Bordo and Rockoff (2013)). Bernanke (1983) subsequently

argued that the collapse of the banking system played an important role in the depth and duration

of the Great Depression because firms had reduced access to credit and therefore could not under-

take profitable investment opportunities. Financially solvent banks also reduced lending because

they were concerned about the possibility of a bank run.

   Unlike today when monetary policy decision-making is centralized in Washington DC, the

twelve regional Federal Reserve banks had the power to set their own discount rate until the mid-

1930s. The decentralized nature of US monetary policy during this period raises an important

question: To what extent was the economic contraction of the Great Depression driven by regional

and national monetary shocks? We address this question by studying regional and national varia-

tions in monetary policy during the Great Depression. Chandler (1971), for example, noted that the

New York Fed had the most aggressive and expansionary monetary policy of all the Federal Reserve

banks during the Great Depression. On the other hand, many of the Federal Reserve district banks

adhered to the real bills doctrine and did not believe in aggressive countercyclical monetary policy.

   Regional monetary policy has been explored using the border approach pioneered by Richardson

and Troost (2009). The authors examine bank failures along the border of the Atlanta and St. Louis

Federal Reserve Reserve Districts that basically splits Mississippi in half. They find that bank failures

were lower in the Atlanta Fed District (which aggressively loaned to illiquid banks) compared to

                                                           1
the St. Louis Fed (that followed the real bills doctrine).1 Although the Mississippi experiment sheds

light on the importance of regional monetary policy during the Great Depression, our study employs

vector autoregressions to simultaneously quantify the aggregate and dynamic effects of national and

regional monetary policy shocks on economic activity in each of the twelve Federal Reserve districts.

We construct a new database of economic and financial time series for the period 1923-33. We em-

ploy a structural VAR with sign restrictions, pioneered by Uhlig (2005), Faust (1998) and Canova

and De Nicolò (2002) and further advanced among others by Rubio-Ramírez et al. (2010) and Arias

et al. (2018) to impose only the mildest, uncontroversial restrictions (i.e., those widely accepted by

standard macroeconomic theory) to identify the impact of monetary policy shocks on real activity.

Ramey (2016) provides a comprehensive overview and evaluation of the recent advances in the iden-

tification of macroeconomic shocks to explain economic fluctuations. Our results suggest that there

was significant regional heterogeneity in monetary policy. Region-specific VARs show that monetary

policy had a significant effect on local retail sales, building permits, as well as short-term interest

rates and prices. A monetary policy shock explains between 10 and 25 percent of the forecast error

variance of retail sales in the twelve Federal Reserve districts after five years. With respect to build-

ing permits, a 25 basis point increase in the discount rate explains, at the mean, between 9 and 22

percent of the movements in building permits. The baseline results are robust to imposing the sign

restrictions for as little as 1 quarter and to not imposing sign restrictions on real-economic variables.

    We follow up the baseline empirical analysis by directly tackling the question of whether

national- or regional-led monetary policy mattered more for real activity. To do so, we extract

a common factor from the twelve Federal Reserve discount rates.                               We then construct the

orthogonal region-specific component of a Federal Reserve's discount rate by subtracting the

discount rate in a given Fed district by the common factor. Again, we find strong evidence that

regional monetary policy shocks mattered. They explain, at the mean, about 10 to 25 percent

of the forecast error variance of local retail sales at a five-year horizon.                        National monetary

shocks, on the other hand, only explain about 10 percent of the forecast error variance in

retail sales.    With respect to building permits, we find that a contractionary monetary policy
    1 Jalil(2014) would later confirm that Richardson and Troost's (2009) results hold for a relatively more general setting,
i.e., across the entire border of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. Ziebarth (2013) also uses Richardson and Troost's
(2009) setting and finds that bank failures in Mississippi had a negative effect on revenue stemming from a fall in
physical output, but finds mixed results on employment (no effect on plant-level despite a large decline on county-level
employment). National-level analyses of US monetary policy during the Great Depression can be found, among others,
in Ritschl and Woitek (2000), Amir-Ahmadi and Ritschl (2010), and Breitenlechner et al. (2019).


                                                             2
shock reduces building permits and accounts for between 9 and 23 percent of the forecast

error variance in the real estate variable at a five-year horizon.

   We then analyze the monetary policy actions of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta given that

the 6th District aggressively provided assistance to troubled banks (Richardson and Troost (2009)).

We find that monetary policy shocks in the Atlanta Federal Reserve District are milder than con-

ventional (discount-window) policy would suggest. Overall, our results are consistent with the

findings of Richardson and Troost (2009) and also provide insight into the dynamic effects of the

Atlanta Fed's bank assistance program on economic activity.

   Next, we test our baseline results with a battery of robustness checks. Uhlig's (2005) main cri-

tique is that conventional identification strategies impose questionable timing and zero restrictions

on the contemporaneous response of output to a monetary policy shock. This motivates his agnostic

identification strategy via sign restrictions leaving output unrestricted. Uhlig (2005) finds ambigu-

ous output effects to an unexpected monetary tightening. More recently, Ramey (2016) confirmed

and reiterated this critique across various identification strategies. To address this critique we first

show that our results do not depend on including restrictions for the real activity variables (i.e., re-

tail sales and building permits) in our set identification of monetary policy shocks. In other words,

the basic tenor of our results is obtained even following Uhlig's (2005) fully-agnostic approach that

places no restrictions on the response of real activity to monetary shocks. We then augment our

baseline VAR model with the spread of the discount rate of each Federal Reserve bank with respect

to the discount rate of the New York Federal Reserve to capture the influence of New York Fed pol-

icy as discussed in Friedman and Schwartz (1963). We then incorporate failed bank deposits into our

baseline VARs (Calomiris and Mason (2003); Anari et al. (2005)). We find that the credit channel mea-

sure does not alter the baseline results. There remains considerable heterogeneity in the impact of a

contractionary monetary policy shock across the twelve Federal Reserve districts. Again, the find-

ings suggest that contractionary monetary policy shocks at the regional Federal Reserve banks had

a larger negative impact on economic activity than national monetary policy shocks or an increase

in the discount rate by the New York Fed. We then use narrative sign restrictions (Antolín-Díaz and

Rubio-Ramírez (2018)) to inform our impulse-responses with minimal restrictions in line with the

historical narrative regarding one of the most studied episodes of monetary policy: the April 1932

expansionary open market operations (Hsieh and Romer (2006); Bordo and Sinha (2016)). The tenor



                                                   3
of our baseline results remains unchanged. Finally, we discuss the robustness of our conclusions

by comparing the baseline responses with prior-robust identified sets. Specifically addressing the

critique regarding sign-identified SVARs and following the transparent reporting standards detailed

in Baumeister and Hamilton (2015, 2020), Schorfheide (2017), Granziera et al. (2018), and Watson

(2019), we report our baseline results along with their respective identified sets (i.e. the maximum

and minimum estimates reported as bounds).2 Again, we find remarkably similar dynamic re-

sponses driven by evidence in the data. The similarity of results using both methods suggest our

conclusions on the substantial heterogeneity of monetary policy across Fed districts are robust.

    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses the institutional evolution

of the Fed from its inception in 1913 until the centralization of monetary policy in the mid-1930s.

Section 3 describes the data and our empirical strategy. Section 4 presents the results of the empirical

analysis. We first report the findings for the baseline VAR model, followed by our examination of

the impact of regional and national monetary policy on economic activity in the twelve Federal

Reserve districts. Section 5 provides robustness tests of the baseline results. Section 6 concludes

with a discussion of the implications of the results for future research.



2 The Federal Reserve System before the Centralization of Monetary

     Policy

President Woodrow Wilson signed the Federal Reserve Act on December 23, 1913. The legislation

established a central bank in the United States following a series of financial crises -- often charac-

terized by bank runs and bank suspensions -- during the classical gold standard period. A central

bank could provide a more elastic currency and play the role of a lender of last resort during a

financial panic to assist illiquid banks (Miron (1986); Bernstein et al. (2010)).

    The Federal Reserve Act created a public-private partnership where the Federal Reserve Board

in Washington, DC provided oversight of the twelve Federal Reserve banks. Regional banks were

established in large cities within each district.3 Each Federal Reserve bank had the power to set

their own discount rate and cover ratio to maintain the gold standard. The head of each Fed-
    2 In recent work, Baumeister and Hamilton (2020) discuss various useful tools and strategies for reporting results and

drawing conclusions in set-identified SVARs.
    3 Boston (1st District), New York (2nd ), Philadelphia (3rd ), Cleveland (4th ), Richmond (5th ), Atlanta (6th ), Chicago (7th ),

St. Louis (8th ), Minneapolis (9th ), Dallas (10th ), Kansas City (11th ), and San Francisco (12th ).


                                                                 4
                 Boston                     New York                          Philadelphia                 Cleveland
    6                            6                                 6                            6
    5                            5                                 5                            5
    4                            4                                 4                            4
    3                            3                                 3                            3
    2                            2                                 2                            2
        1924      1928    1932       1924      1928     1932           1924      1928    1932       1924     1928      1932
               Richmond                       Atlanta                          Chicago                     St. Louis
    6                            6                                 6                            6
    5                            5                                 5                            5
    4                            4                                 4                            4
    3                            3                                 3                            3
    2                            2                                 2                            2
        1924      1928    1932       1924      1928     1932           1924      1928    1932       1924     1928      1932
               Minneapolis                  Kansas City                         Dallas                 San Francisco
    6                            6                                 6                            6
    5                            5                                 5                            5
    4                            4                                 4                            4
    3                            3                                 3                            3
    2                            2                                 2                            2
        1924      1928    1932       1924      1928     1932           1924      1928    1932       1924     1928      1932
Figure 1. Discount Rate set by each Federal Reserve district. Each panel plots the discount rates of the 12
Federal Reserve banks. The black thick line represents the data for the respective Fed District indicated in the
title of the panel, and the data for the remaining Fed districts are depicted in grey for comparison purposes.
To highlight the New York Fed District, we depict its time series in red in its respective panel.


eral Reserve bank was given the title of governor which signified that the district banks exercised

considerable control over monetary policy in each region.

   The regional Fed banks formed the Open Market Investment Committee (OMIC) to discuss

monetary policy. The group regularly met beginning in 1923 and sometimes coordinated monetary

policy among the Federal Reserve district banks. The Fed system learned that the buying and

selling of government bonds influenced short-term interest rates. Open market purchases helped

stimulate economic activity in 1924 and 1927. The actions of the OMIC were not binding, however,

and reserve bank governors could implement their own monetary policy if they did not agree with

the recommendations of the OMIC. As Figure 1 shows, there was substantial heterogeneity in the

discount rates across Federal Reserve banks. One episode that exemplifies such disagreement was


                                                               5
the Great Crash of 1929, when regional Federal Reserve banks differed in their response to the stock

market crash. The New York Fed stepped in and provided liquidity to financial markets, a lender-of-

resort action praised by Friedman and Schwartz (1963). Many of the regional Federal Reserve banks

did not change their discount rate and provide liquidity to their local stock exchange. Rather, the

dissenting governors believed that central banks should not respond to large changes in asset prices.

   The New York Fed continued to reduce discount rates after the Great Crash. By the end of 1929,

its discount rate was 4.5 percent. Following six more rate cuts, the discount rate of the New York Fed

bottomed out at 1 percent. In contrast, six other Federal Reserve banks lowered their discount rate

from 5 to 3.5 percent and four Federal Reserve banks cut their discount rate from 5 to 2.5 percent.

The exception was the Boston Fed which lowered its discount rate from 5 to 2 percent. Chandler

(1971) concluded that the New York Fed was by far the most aggressive Federal Reserve bank in

reducing its discount rate in the early years after the onset of the Great Depression.

   As shown by Chandler (1971), many of the regional Federal Reserve banks did not believe

in expansionary and interventionist monetary policy. Fed officials were often proponents of the

real bills doctrine, that called for a reduction in lending during economic downturns. A letter by

William McChesney Martin, Governor of the St. Louis Federal Reserve Bank, outlines the gov-

ernor's reasoning for supporting non-interventionist monetary policy during the banking panic

of 1930 (Chandler (1971, p. 142) apud Jalil (2014)):

     "I cannot see how the situation can be benefited by putting 50 millions of dollars, or, in fact, any

     other amount, into the general market at this time... The reason that more money is not being

     used is because it is not needed, and when there is already money to meet the expressed needs,

     seems to me unwise to artificially to add to the amount already sufficient in order to encourage a

     use which because based on a redundancy of money rather than actual needs may be hazardous."

Several other Federal Reserve banks held the same position on monetary interventions as the St.

Louis Fed. Chandler (1971) points out that the Dallas and Richmond Federal Reserve banks also

embraced the real bills doctrine and did not support activist monetary policy. A notable exception

was the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank which, as noted above, aggressively lent funds to mem-

ber and non-member banks during the Great Depression.

   As pointed out by Bernanke (2002) and Friedman and Schwartz (1963), Federal Reserve lead-

ership was another important factor in the coordination of monetary policy in the early years of

                                                      6
the central bank. Benjamin Strong, the President of the New York Fed, was an influential leader in

the Federal Reserve System. He helped coordinate monetary policy among the 12 Federal Reserve

districts on many occasions even though he frequently disagreed with policy recommendations

from the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, DC. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argued that he

understood the importance of the lender-of-last-resort function for central banks. Notably, they be-

lieved that the Great Depression would have been less severe if Strong did not die in 1928. Without

his guidance, there was a leadership vacuum at the Fed.

   The Banking Acts of 1933 and 1935 introduced new banking regulation and largely transformed

the Federal Reserve System into its current makeup. Known as the Glass-Steagall Act, the 1933

legislation created deposit insurance and called for the separation of commercial and investment

banking. The law also included Regulation Q, which prohibited the payment of interest on check-

ing accounts. In addition, the Banking Act of 1933 created the Federal Open Market Committee

(FOMC), but did not provide the Federal Reserve Board with voting rights. The Banking Act of

1935 reorganized the structure of the Federal Reserve (Richardson et al. (2013)). The Board of

Governors of the Federal Reserve System -- which replaced the Federal Reserve Board -- became

more independent from the executive branch of government. The Secretary of the Treasury and

the Comptroller of the Currency were no longer members of the Federal Reserve Board. The re-

gional Federal Reserve banks lost much of their control over monetary policy. The head of the

regional Federal Reserve banks were no longer called governors. Instead, they were given the new

title of "president," which symbolized a reduction in the power of the regional banks to imple-

ment their own monetary policy. The regional Federal Reserve banks could no longer conduct

open market operations in their respective districts. Rather, the newly created Federal Reserve

Open Market Committee (FOMC) determined the size and scope of open market operations, which

centralized monetary policy decision-making in the nation's capital.



3 Empirical Strategy

3.1 Data

We briefly present the economic and financial time series used in the empirical analysis. For greater

details, the reader can consult the data appendix (Internet Appendix A). Retail sales for each of



                                                 7
the twelve Federal Reserve districts are from Park and Richardson (2012), who compiled monthly

data from the archives of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The building

permits data are taken from Cortes and Weidenmier (2019). The construction measure covers 215

cities across the United States. The data were collected from several issues of Dun & Bradstreet's,

a well-known monthly business and financial publication in the 1920s and the 1930s. The real-

time data are assembled from building inspector reports collected by the F. W. Dodge Division, a

McGraw-Hill Information Systems company. The value of building permits is based on the estimated

cost of new commercial and residential buildings provided by building inspectors. Food prices for

50 cities are taken from several issues of the Bulletin of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The

monetary aggregate, M1, is constructed by adding total currency in circulation and total demand

deposits of member banks for each Federal Reserve district. The monetary data along with the

discount rates and commercial paper rates are collected from various issues of the Federal Reserve

Bulletin. The database covers the period 1923:M01­1933:M02, when the Federal Reserve Bulletin

stopped reporting detailed data on the regional Federal Reserve banks. As a result, the sample

period covers most of the 1920s and the entire NBER-defined Great Depression period -- except

for March 1933, the last month of the downturn.


3.2 Region-Specific VARs

For our baseline specification, we follow Arias et al. (2018) and estimate a Bayesian VAR for each

regional Federal Reserve district with data on retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ), food prices

( pt ), M1 (mt ), commercial paper rates (cpt ), and the respective Federal Reserve district discount rates

(rt ). We model the regional dynamics of the following vector of observables:

                                       (                                    )
                                yt =       rst , bpt , pt , mt , cpt , rt       .                       (1)


All variables for each region enter the VAR in log levels except for the interest rate data, which enter

in levels. We consider a Gaussian VAR in the n × 1 vector of observables yt . The VAR is given by



                                                   P
                                       yt  A0 =    yt-p  Ap + c + t ,                                   (2)
                                                  p =1




                                                         8
with t  N (0, In ), for 1  t  T , where c is the constant term, t is an n × 1 vector of orthog-

onal structural shocks that have an economic interpretation, Ap is an n × n matrix of structural

parameters for 0  p  P with A0 invertible, P is the lag length, and T is the sample size. The

SVAR described in equation (2) can be written as


                                                         y t  A 0 = x t  A + + t
                                                                               
                                                                                 ,                                  (3)

               [                        ]
where A+  =        A1  · · · Ap        c and xt  = [yt-1  · · · yt-P                 1]. The dimension of A+  is m × n,

where m = nP + 1. We refer to A0 and A+ as the structural parameters. The reduced-form

vector autoregression (VAR) implied by equation (3) is


                                                           yt  = xt  B + ut,                                        (4)


where the reduced form coefficient matrix is B = A+ A-                                  -1
                                                     0 , the innovation vector is ut = t A0 ,
                                                       1

                                                                            -1
and the innovation covariance matrix can be factored as E [ut ut ] =  = A0 A0 .                                     Let

 = (A0 , A+ ) collect the value of the structural parameters.


3.2.1 Impulse Response Functions

Given a value  of the structural parameters, one can compute the impulse response functions

(IRFs). The response of the ith variable to the jth structural shock at horizon k corresponds to the

element in row i and column j of the matrix Lk () which is defined recursively by

                          (    )
                            -1
                L 0 (  ) = A0
                                   k   (             )
                                                -1
                Lk () =                    A p A0        Lk-p (  ) ,                      for   1  k  P,
                               p =1
                                   P   (             )
                                                -1
                Lk () =                    A p A0        Lk-p (  ) ,                     for    P  k  ,
                               p =1


3.2.2 Structural Shocks and Historical Decomposition

Given a value  of the structural parameters and the data, the structural shocks at time t are


                                                     
                                                     t () = yt  A0 - xt  A+ .                                       (5)


                                                                    9
The historical decomposition calculates the cumulative contribution of each shock to the observed

unexpected change in the variables between two periods. Formally, the contribution of the jth shock

to the observed unexpected change in the ith variable between periods t and t + h is

                                                                     h
                       H i , j,t,t + h (  , t , . . . , t + h ) =    ei,n Lp  () e j,n ej,n t+h- p ,              (6)
                                                                    p =0


where e j,n the jth column of In , for 1  i, j  n and for h  0.


3.2.3 Estimation and Identification

As it is well-known, structural VARs require additional identifying restrictions to map the

reduced-form innovations (ut ) to structural shocks (t ).                        For set-identified SVAR models, this

typically involves factoring  by a Cholesky decomposition with a lower-triangular factor
           ~ -1 and a rotation matrix Q, where Q  O (n) is the set of all orthogonal n × n
denoted by A

matrices (see, e.g., Uhlig (2005), Rubio-Ramírez et al. (2010) and Arias et al. (2018)). For the

reduced form representation, this can be summarized as:
                                                  (        )
                    ut =   ~ -1
                          t A   Q ,     =  ~
                                           A -1
                                                Q   ~
                                                    A -1
                                                         Q   ,                          QQ = In .                 (7)


In set-identified SVARs, the key identifying restrictions in the mapping of innovations to struc-

tural shocks formally constrains the domain of the rotation matrix Q such that the qualitative sign

restriction on the resulting impulse-response functions are satisfied. We can write our full model as:

                            p ( y T , B, , Q ) =  ( B,  | y T ) 0 ( B,  )  Q ( Q | B,  ),                         (8)


where yT collects the history of observables, (·) is the likelihood function, 0 (·) denotes the prior

over the identifiable reduced-form parameters, and Q (·) denotes the prior over Q that incorporates

restrictions on impulse responses. For the estimation of the model, we use a uniform-normal-

inverse-Wishart distribution for the priors over the orthogonal reduced-form parameterization. In

our empirical implementation, we use a standard Minnesota-type prior over (B, ) and otherwise

specifically follow Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018) to do causal inference for the orthogonal




                                                                    10
reduced-form parameterization implementing Algorithm 1, set the lag length to 6 and the standard

Minnesota prior implemented with dummy observation priors.4


3.3 Identification of Monetary Policy Shocks

3.3.1 Sign Restrictions

Since the seminal papers by Faust (1998), Canova and De Nicolò (2002) and, most prominently

Uhlig (2005), sign-restricted SVARs have become an increasingly popular tool for estimating

dynamic causal effects in macroeconomics.                  Many researchers use Uhlig's (2005) algorithm

or its variants to impose a few theory-based or uncontroversial restrictions on the sign of

impulse response functions to identify a shock of interest.                      As these types of identifying

constraints restrict the resulting identified responses to a bounded set, we refer to these

models as set-identified. Over the past few years, a growing literature has proposed important

methodological refinements and advances (e.g., Rubio-Ramírez, Waggoner, and Zha (2010);

Baumeister and Hamilton (2015); Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018); Arias, Rubio-Ramírez,

and Waggoner (2018); Granziera, Moon, and Schorfheide (2018)).

    The main advantages of the approach are that the identifying sign constraints are theoreti-

cally well motivated, minimal, and uncontroversial. Its limitations are that the identifying sign

constraints typically offer weak identification, i.e., restricting only the direction by means of the

sign of a few IRFs for a few periods. In many applications, this results in notably large er-

ror bands that are either insignificant or inconclusive. Therefore, it is difficult and rare to find

robust evidence and clear conclusions among competing hypotheses on the sources of business

cycle fluctuations when employing these methods.5

    Among the many important advances, Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018) show

that combining the standard approach with simple narrative sign restrictions (NSR) on the

structural shocks and/or the historical decomposition tend to be highly informative.                              This
   4A   thorough discussion of the hyperparameters and its choices for Bayesian VARs can be found in Giannone et al.
(2015) and Del Negro and Schorfheide (2011). Following the notation of Del Negro and Schorfheide (2011), we choose an
overall tightness parameter of 1 = .2, a decay parameter of 2 = 2, prior for the covariance matrix of error terms 3 = 1,
sums-of-coefficients prior with 4 = 1 and co-persistence prior with 5 = 1.
    5 Uhlig (2005) argues that this is precisely why sign restrictions offer a useful and new perspective. They offer a

transparent assessment of what we can robustly conclude from the data while imposing only what macroeconomists
believe they know.




                                                          11
approach imposes the sign of the identified shock series at specified points in time to agree

with the established narrative account of these episodes.


3.3.2 Baseline Identification

Our basic identification restrictions for a contractionary monetary policy shock essentially follows

Uhlig (2005), imposing the impulse response functions of retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ),

food prices ( pt ), and money aggregate M1 (mt ) to be negative following the shock for 6 months,

while the impulse-response functions of the Federal Reserve discount rate (rt ) is constrained to be

positive for that period and the commercial paper rate is left unconstrained. Beyond its transparent

nature to impose only what macroeconomic theory established as facts, in our case we do not

have to take a stance on a specific policy instrument in place. Our baseline sign restrictions are

summarized in Table 1. While we do not impose any narrative sign restrictions in our baseline

specification, we present robustness checks that include variations of our standard sign restrictions

and the inclusion of narrative sign restrictions in Section 5.


                                         -- Place Table 1 About Here --


3.3.3 Monetary Policy and the Great Depression

We now describe four monetary policy events during the Great Depression that Friedman

and Schwartz (1963) considered to be exogenous to define narrative sign restrictions as in

Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018).6                    For convenience, all narrative sign restrictions

discussed in detail here are also briefly described in Table 2.


                                         -- Place Table 2 About Here --


   The first episode is a monetary contraction. In the words of Bernanke (2002), it was "a delib-

erate tightening of monetary policy that began in the Spring of 1928 and continued until the stock market

crash of October 1929. Why did the Federal Reserve tighten in early 1928? A principal reason was the

Board's ongoing concern about speculation on Wall Street." Friedman and Schwartz (1963) point out

that by July 1928 the discount rate of the New York Fed had been raised to 5 percent, its high-

est level since 1921. The holdings of government securities by the Federal Reserve System also
   6 This   section borrows the rich narrative description from Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Bernanke (2002).


                                                           12
fell from $600 million at the end of 1927 to $210 million by August 1928. They concluded that

this period represented a tightening in monetary policy not related to economic conditions. This

leads us to define our first narrative sign restriction:

Narrative Sign Restriction 1 (Monetary Policy Contraction in April 1928). Beyond standard sign

restrictions on the impulse response functions, the sign of the monetary policy shock must be positive in April

1928 to represent an identified monetary policy shock.

   The second episode is also a monetary contraction. The Federal Reserve raised the discount

rate from 1 to 2 percent on October 9, 1931. The increase was then followed by another rise in

the discount rate to 3 percent on October 16, 1931. The policy was a response to the speculative

attacks on the pound sterling that led the UK to abandon the gold standard. Again, the interest rate

increase is exogenous to US economic conditions since the policy was directly aimed at preventing

a run on the dollar. Friedman and Schwartz (1963) argued that the 200 basis point increase in the

discount rate increased bank failures and bank runs, with 522 commercial banks closing their doors

in October alone. The policy tightening contributed to the decline in the money supply as well as

economic activity. We therefore define our second narrative sign restriction as:

Narrative Sign Restriction 2 (Monetary Policy Contraction in October 1931). Beyond standard sign

restrictions on the impulse response functions, the sign of the monetary policy shock must be positive in

October 1931 to represent an identified monetary policy shock.

   The third episode we study is an expansionary intervention. Friedman and Schwartz (1963),

Hsieh and Romer (2006), and Bordo and Sinha (2016) argue that the monetary expansion of April

1932 was one of the most important monetary policy shocks in US history. In fact, the open market

expansion was the largest in the history of the Federal Reserve at the time of its implementation.

All 12 Federal Reserve banks participated in the monetary expansion that was largely undertaken

because of political pressure from Congress. The Board of Governors eventually acquiesed to moral

suasion and conducted large-scale open market operations between April and June of 1932. The

large quantitative easing program appears to have temporarily increased economic activity before

fizzling out following the removal of the monetary stimulus in the late summer of 1932.

   Figure 2 shows the holdings of US government securities for the 12 regional Federal Reserve

banks. The New York Fed stands out as it accounts for about 40 percent of the total government

                                                      13
                                                                                                    New York




                      US Government Bond Holdings (Million USD)
                                                                  600




                                                                  400




                                                                                                    Chicago

                                                                  200
                                                                                                    Cleveland
                                                                                                    Philadelphia
                                                                                                    San Francisco
                                                                                                    Boston
                                                                                                    St Louis
                                                                                                    Kansas City
                                                                                                    Minneapolis
                                                                                                    Atlanta
                                                                    0                               Richmond
                                                                                                    Dallas
                                                                        1930   1931        1932   1933         1934

Figure 2. The 1932 Monetary Policy Expansion. This figure depicts the time series of US government bond
holdings of the twelve Federal Reserve districts around the 1932 monetary policy expansion episode. The
data are from the Federal Reserve Bulletins and are in million USD.


securities in the system. The size of the Federal Reserve banks' portfolio of government securities

varies considerably across the 12 Federal Reserve districts, but its expansionary stance is unambigu-

ous across districts. This leads us to define our third narrative sign restriction:


Narrative Sign Restriction 3 (Monetary Policy Expansion in April 1932). Beyond standard sign re-

strictions on the impulse response functions, the sign of the monetary policy shock must be negative in April

1932 to represent an identified monetary policy shock.


   The fourth and last episode studied by Friedman and Schwartz (1963) was a contractionary

shock from January 1933 to the banking holiday in March 1933. There was considerable eco-

nomic uncertainty during this period given that President Roosevelt was elected in November

1932 but did not take office until March of 1933. Market participants were unclear about the fu-

ture direction of US economic policy, although many speculated that Roosevelt might devalue the

dollar or leave the gold standard altogether. Some people converted their cash into gold which

pressured the banking system and the gold reserves of the Federal Reserve (Bernanke (2002)).

Between September 1932 and March 1933, the United States experienced its largest decline in

economic activity during the Great Depression.


                                                                                      14
Narrative Sign Restriction 4 (Monetary Policy Contraction in January 1933). Beyond standard sign

restrictions on the impulse response functions, the sign of the monetary policy shock must be positive in

January 1933 to represent an identified monetary policy shock.


    Finally, we focus again on the monetary stimulus of April 1932.                        Given its expansionary

effects, we consider an additional narrative sign restriction that imposes a magnitude restric-

tion on the importance of monetary shocks in April 1932.                         Specifically, the narrative sign

restriction requires the monetary policy shock to be the most important contributor to the

Federal Reserve discount rate shock in April 1932. This is formalized by defining a "strong"

expansion on our fifth and last narrative sign restriction:7


Narrative Sign Restriction 5 (Strong Monetary Policy Expansion in April 1932). Let Narrative Sign

Restriction 3 be dominant for rt , i.e., for the periods specified by Narrative Sign Restriction 3, monetary policy

shocks are the most important and dominant contributor to the movements in the Fed discount rate, rt .


3.4 Modelling National and Regional Monetary Policies: Factor-Augmented VARs

We model the distinction between national and regional monetary policy shocks using a dynamic

factor model for the regional discount rate. We estimate the following specification using data on

the twelve discount rates dn,t of each Federal Reserve district n = 1, . . . , N :


                          d n , t = i f t + r n , t                         rn,t  N (0, n
                                                                                        2
                                                                                          )                          (9)

                            f t =  ( L ) f t -1 + u t                         ut  N (0,  f )                        (10)


where f t is the national factor of discount rates that captures the common component of the twelve

discount rates, i is the factor loading of region n and rn,t is the idiosyncratic component which cap-

tures the regional-specific component of monetary policy. The dynamics of the national monetary

policy factor are captured by the lag polynomial ( L), the variance of regional monetary policy in

region n is captured by n
                        2 and  is the covariance matrix of the national monetary policy innova-
                              f

    7 In the language of Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018), a "strong" narrative sign restriction means that the

absolute value of the contribution of monetary policy shocks is larger than the absolute value of the contribution of any
other structural shock.




                                                           15
           Boston                        New York                          Philadelphia                  Cleveland

                                                                    2                            2
                                2
1
                                                                    1                            1
                                1
0                                                                   0
                                                                                                 0
                                0
-1                                                                  -1
                                                                                                 -1
                               -1
                                                                    -2
-2
                               -2                                                                -2
                                                                    -3


         Richmond                          Atlanta                           Chicago                      St. Louis
                                2                                   2
3                                                                                                2
                                1                                   1
2                                                                                                1
                                0                                   0
1                                                                                                0
                               -1
0                                                                   -1                           -1
                               -2
-1                                                                  -2                           -2
                               -3
-2                                                                  -3                           -3


         Minneapolis                     Kansas City                         Dallas                     San Francisco
3                               2
                                                                                                 2
2                                                                   2
                                1
1                                                                   1                            1
                                0
0                                                                   0                            0
                               -1                                                                -1
-1                                                                  -1

-2                             -2                                   -2                           -2
1922    1926    1930    1934    1922    1926    1930    1934        1922   1926   1930    1934   1922   1926    1930    1934

Figure 3. Common Factor (in grey) vs. Regional-specific (in red) discount rates. This figure depicts the
standardized national and regional components for each Federal Reserve district. All panels depict the time
series (in grey) of the national component, which is the same on all districts. The red line represents the
regional component of monetary policy, i.e., the discount rate's idiosyncratic factor of each Fed district.


tion. Equations (9) and (10) form a state space model that we estimate with Bayesian methods and

standard priors. More details on the estimation are provided in the Internet Appendix C.8

     The time series of the national and the regional components of discount rates are shown in

Figure 3. We can see that the discount rate of the New York Fed closely matches the national
     8 The decomposition of regional discount rate data into national and regional specific is not sensitive to the specific

estimation and factor extraction approach. We try different specifications such as (i) a Bayesian forward-filtering backward
sampling approach employing natural conjugate prior for the parameters and hyperparameters, allowing for uncertainty
in the measure of the respective unobserved components and (ii) a traditional dynamic principal component approach
that delivers an exact decomposition without uncertainty. As both approaches deliver virtually the same results, we
report results for the former approach for brevity. The implemented priors for the parameter estimation of the state
model (9)-(10) are standard flat priors; a normal-inverse Gamma prior for the former, and a Normal-inverse Wishart prior
for the latter equation.




                                                               16
component of monetary policy. This finding is consistent with Friedman and Schwartz's (1963)

view that New York was the center of the US financial system and carried out a large share of

the open market operations in the Federal Reserve System. This also suggests that the New York

Federal Reserve Bank exerted some leadership in monetary policy.



4 Results

We start by presenting results for our baseline region-specific VARs in the next subsection. Then, we

present results for the Factor-Augmented VAR model that distinguishes between the national and re-

gional component of monetary policy shocks. We conclude showing results that revisit key episodes

of monetary policy during the Great Depression through the lens of our empirical framework.


4.1 Region-Specific VARs

The impulse response function (IRF) analysis for the baseline vector autoregressions appear in Fig-

ures 4 through 7. For comparison purposes, all panels include (in grey) the IRF of the New York

Fed. The graphs show the impact of a 25 basis point increase in the discount rate for each of the

12 regional Federal Reserve banks. The impulse responses show the posterior median and 68%

error bands. A 25 basis point shock is employed for the impulse response analysis since it is the

median rate increase over the sample period. Figure 4 shows that a shock to the discount rate

significantly reduces retail sales for all Federal Reserve Districts. The findings for the New York

District are particularly interesting because a contractionary monetary policy shock has less of an

impact on retail sales than any of the other Federal Reserve districts. There is also some evidence

that an increase in the discount rate by the Boston Federal Reserve has a smaller impact on retail

sales than the other regional Federal banks. For the remaining districts, a contractionary monetary

policy shock has a much larger effect in reducing retail sales.

   The forecast error variance decompositions (FEVD) in Table 3 portray a similar story. Panel

A shows that a shock to the New York Fed discount rate can only explain about 10 percent of

the movements in retail sales after 60 months. For Boston, we find that a discount rate shock

explains about 15 percent of the forecast error variance after 5 years. In contrast, a contractionary

monetary policy shock accounts for about 20 percent of the fluctuations in retail sales for Atlanta,



                                                 17
Figure 4. VAR Impulse-Response Functions for Retail Sales. This figure depicts the response of retail
sales in the twelve Federal Reserve districts to a 25-basis-point contractionary monetary policy shock. For
comparison purposes, all panels include (in grey) the IRF of the New York Federal Reserve District. The
sign-restriction of the monetary policy shock (Uhlig (2005)) is binding for 6 months and is detailed in Table 1.


Cleveland, Philadelphia, Chicago, St. Louis, Richmond, Kansas City, Minneapolis, and the San

Francisco Federal Reserve District. Panel B shows the maximum median FEVD and the horizon for

which this maximum is achieved across all Fed districts. The maximum median FEVD for retail

sales surpasses 20 percent in almost all districts. The horizons for which the maximum median

FEVD is reached are longer than a year for all districts, with the exception of New York.

                                    -- Place Table 3 About Here --

   In Figure 5, we find qualitatively similar responses for building permits, a forward-looking

economic indicator that is sensitive to interest rates. A shock to the discount rate for the New

York Fed has a much smaller impact on building permits than in the other Federal Reserve dis-

tricts. The forecast error variance decompositions in Table 3 show that the New York Fed dis-

count rate can explain about 18 percent of the movements in the construction variable after five

                                                      18
Figure 5. VAR Impulse-Response Functions for Building Permits. This figure depicts the response of
building permits in the twelve Federal Reserve districts to a 25-basis-point contractionary monetary policy
shock. For comparison purposes, all panels include (in grey) the IRF of the New York Federal Reserve District.
The sign-restriction of the monetary policy shock (Uhlig (2005)) is binding for 6 months and is detailed in
Table 1.


years. The IRF for the Boston Fed shows a similar pattern. A 25 basis point increase in the dis-

count rate of the Boston Fed has a significant but small impact on building permits. A much

different story emerges if we look at the remaining Federal Reserve banks, however. The FEVD

shows that a one-standard deviation shock to the discount rate can explain between 15 and 25

percent of the movements in the real estate variable.

   The regional Federal Reserve money supply estimates also display significant variation across

the districts. Figure 6 shows that an increase in the discount rate significantly reduces M1 in all

twelve Federal Reserve bank districts. Notably, the responses of the New York and Boston Federal

Reserve districts show much less persistence in the decrease of the money supply in response to a

discount rate increase. The findings align with our baseline results. Specifically, the decline in M1

in response to a contractionary monetary policy shock becomes insignificant in less than a year in

                                                     19
Figure 6. VAR Impulse-Response Functions for M1. This figure depicts the response of the monetary
aggregate M1 in the twelve Federal Reserve districts to a 25-basis-point contractionary monetary policy shock.
For comparison purposes, all panels include (in grey) the IRF of the New York Federal Reserve district. The
sign-restriction of the monetary policy shock is binding for 6 months.


Boston and New York. M1 declines for up to five years in the other Federal Reserve districts. The

FEVDs in Table 3, Panel B indicate that monetary policy shocks account for about 15-25 percent of

the movements of the money supply across the twelve Federal Reserve districts.

   Finally, Figure 7 reports the IRFs for food prices in each Fed district. A contractionary monetary

policy shock consistently reduces the price level in all twelve Federal Reserve districts. As before, the

responses of prices to monetary policy contractionary shocks display heterogeneity in persistence

and magnitude across Fed districts. The IRFs for the remaining variables of the baseline VAR

-- shown in Section B.1 of the Internet Appendix -- are statistically significant and conform to

economic theory. For example, we find that a 25 basis point increase in the discount rate accounts

for 20 to 30 percent of the movements of commercial paper rates.




                                                     20
Figure 7. VAR Impulse-Response Functions for Food Prices. This figure depicts the response of food
prices in the twelve Federal Reserve districts to a 25-basis-point contractionary monetary policy shock. For
comparison purposes, all panels include (in grey) the IRF of the New York Federal Reserve District. The
sign-restriction of the monetary policy shock (Uhlig (2005)) is binding for 6 months and is detailed in Table 1.


4.2 National and Regional Factor-Augmented VAR

We now present results for the national and regional components of monetary policy shocks.9 We

begin analyzing the impact of monetary policy shocks on retail sales. Figure 8 shows that retail sales

decrease in all districts in response to a national monetary policy contraction. With few exceptions,

most IRFs look similar to the baseline response of the New York Fed District, suggesting that the

common component of monetary policy affects regions similarly. This is in stark contrast with

the response of retail sales to regional-specific monetary policy shocks, shown in Figure 9. In the

regional case, most IRFs differ from the New York Fed District's IRF (with the exception of Boston,
   9 For conciseness, we present results on the effects of monetary policy on real-side variables, i.e., retail sales and
building permits. The figures for the responses of remaining variables to national (regional) monetary policy shocks are
shown in Section B.2 (Section B.3) of the Internet Appendix.



                                                           21
Figure 8. Factor-Augmented VAR Impulse-Response Functions for Retail Sales: National Monetary Policy.
This figure depicts the response of the monetary aggregate M1 in the twelve Federal Reserve districts to a
25-basis-point contractionary monetary policy shock. For comparison purposes, all panels include (in grey)
the IRF of the New York Federal Reserve District. The sign-restriction of the monetary policy shock (Uhlig
(2005)) is binding for 6 months and is detailed in Table 1.


as expected from our previous results). The responses of retail sales are significantly more negative

and more persistent than that of the New York Fed District.

   The response of building permits also suggests that regional-specific monetary policy shocks

matter more for economic activity. Figure 10 shows that most districts display similar IRFs than that

of the New York Fed District. An exception is the Dallas Fed District, which presents a significantly

more negative and persistent response as compared to the New York Fed's response. Similarly, the

regional component of monetary policy shocks has a much more pronounced effect on other Fed

Districts. As shown by Figure 11, the IRF of the New York Fed District is significantly less negative,

despite being as persistent as the IRFs of the other Fed districts.

   Forecast error variance decompositions for the national monetary policy factor relative to retail

sales shown in Table 4 deliver a similar conclusion. Panel A of Table 4 shows that ten out of the

                                                   22
Figure 9. Factor-Augmented VAR Impulse-Response Functions for Retail Sales: Regional Monetary Policy.
This figure depicts the response of the monetary aggregate M1 in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts to a
25-basis-point contractionary monetary policy shock. For comparison purposes, all panels include (in grey)
the IRF of the New York Fed's district. The sign-restriction of the monetary policy shock (Uhlig (2005)) is
binding for 6 months and is detailed in Table 1.


twelve districts display FEVDs below 20 percent of retail sales' forecast error variance across dis-

tricts five years later. In addition, Panel B indicates that there are only three Federal Reserve districts

where the peak FEVD exceeds 20 percent. Overall, national-level monetary policy contractions ex-

plain between 12 and 22 percent of the forecast error variance five years later. In contrast, Table 5

reports that regional monetary contractions matter more for economic activity than national mone-

tary shocks. Only three out of twelve districts present FEVDs below 20 percent after five years. In

fact, many districts display FEVDs of 27 percent or higher. Regional monetary shocks can explain

between 14 and 33 percent of the forecast error variance of retail sales five years later.

   The same pattern arises when comparing the FEVD of national versus regional-level monetary

policy contractions for building permits across Fed districts. A national monetary policy shock

explains between 9 and 22 percent of the movements in the building permits across the Federal

                                                    23
Figure 10. Factor-Augmented VAR Impulse-Response Functions for Building Permits: National Monetary
Policy. This figure depicts the response of the monetary aggregate M1 in the twelve Federal Reserve Districts
to a 25-basis-point contractionary monetary policy shock. For comparison purposes, all panels include (in
grey) the IRF of the New York Federal Reserve District. The sign-restriction of the monetary policy shock
(Uhlig (2005)) is binding for 6 months and is detailed in Table 1.


Reserve System after 5 years. There are only two districts that have FEVDs greater than 20 percent

at a five-year forecast horizon for building permits (Atlanta and Dallas). The maximum median

FEVD exceeds 25 percent for only four out of the 12 regional Federal Reserve banks. For a re-

gional monetary policy shock, we find that an increase in the discount rate explains between 11 and

32 percent on the movements in building permits. Eight of the 12 Federal Reserve districts have

FEVDs greater than 20 percent after five years. The maximum median FEVD is also 25 percent

or greater for eight of the 12 Federal Reserve Districts.


                            -- Place Table 4 and Table 5 About Here --




                                                     24
Figure 11. Factor-Augmented VAR Impulse-Response Functions for Building Permits: Regional Monetary
Policy. This figure depicts the response of the monetary aggregate M1 in the twelve Federal Reserve districts
to a 25-basis-point contractionary monetary policy shock. For comparison purposes, all panels include (in
grey) the IRF of the New York Federal Reserve District. The sign-restriction of the monetary policy shock
(Uhlig (2005)) is binding for 6 months and is detailed in Table 1.


4.3 Monetary Policy and Bank Failures

We now present the results of our FAVAR model augmented with the rate of failed bank deposits to

total deposits in each Fed district. For brevity, we present results relative to the three Federal Reserve

districts that were previously analyzed by the literature (New York, Atlanta, and St. Louis). Panel A

of Figure 12 shows the histogram of the impact response of failed bank deposits to a contractionary

monetary policy shock for each Fed district identified as described in Table 6. A striking feature

of the histogram is the probability mass concentration in lower values for New York and Atlanta

vis-à-vis the St. Louis Fed district. This suggests that the effect of monetary policy contractions

on bank failures are notably severe in the St. Louis district, a result also backed by the natural

experiment approach of Richardson and Troost (2009). Panels B, C, and D of Figure 12 show IRFs in



                                                     25
   (A) Impact Response of Failed Bank Deposit Share                  (B) Failed Bank Deposit Share




                     (C) Retail Sales                                     (D) Building Permits




Figure 12. Contractionary Monetary Policy Shocks, Bank Failures, and Real Economic Activity. This figure
displays the impulse-response function of the share of failed bank deposits to total deposits to a contractionary
monetary policy shock.


their standard presentation for the impact of monetary policy contractions on failed bank deposits,

retail sales, and building permits. An interesting result from comparing these responses is that real

activity as measured by retail sales (Panel C) displays a more negative response to monetary policy

shocks in St. Louis than in Atlanta, which is also consistent with the real effects of the distinct

Federal Reserve policies across both districts discussed in Richardson and Troost (2009).


                                        -- Place Table 6 About Here --




                                                       26
5 Robustness Checks

We now turn to robustness checks and variations of our model. As before, we focus our discus-

sion on the responses of real-side variables (retail sales and building permits) to monetary policy

shocks. The findings for all variables in the robustness models are quite similar to our baseline

results and are available from the authors upon request.


Variations in Sign Restrictions.           Our baseline results rely on sign restrictions that bind for 6

months. In Section B.4 of the Internet Appendix, we report IRFs using alternative horizons for

sign restrictions of 1 quarter as described in Table 7.10 We can see that the conclusions of our base-

line IRFs remain unchanged. Furthermore, Section B.5 of the Internet Appendix shows that the

basic tenor of the results remains unchanged when we use the sign restrictions described earlier in

Table 2, where retail sales and building permits are left unrestricted and the narrative approach of

Antolín-Díaz and Rubio-Ramírez (2018) is employed by exploiting the four "exogenous" monetary

policy shocks discussed by Friedman and Schwartz (1963) and Bernanke (2002).


                                       -- Place Table 7 About Here --


Deviations from New York Federal Reserve Policy. The baseline empirical results do not control

for the impact of the New York Fed, which conducted a large share of the country's open market

operations. New York was also the center of the US financial system. As a result, we augment

our baseline, regional-specific vector autoregressions with the spread between each Federal Reserve

district and the discount rate of the New York Federal Reserve. As Figure 1 shows, the discount

rate of the New York Fed can be interpreted as an approximation of national monetary policy.

The interest-rate differential is a measure of the idiosyncratic component of monetary policy for a

given Fed district. We then estimate a VAR for each Federal Reserve district using the idiosyncratic

deviation of monetary policy for a given district from the discount rate of the New York Fed (see

Table 8). The impulse responses of retail sales and building permits to a 25 basis point increase

in the idiosyncratic component of monetary policy for each Federal Reserve district are shown in

Section B.6. The results of the New York Fed spread specification are similar to the baseline FAVAR.
   10 We only report IRFs to be parsimonious in the number of tables and figures. Forecast error variance decompositions
or historical decompositions for these alternative variations are available from the authors upon request.



                                                          27
Figure 13. Comparison of identified set with posterior error bands: Retail Sales. This figure compares the
identified set of the impulse response functions (solid lines) with the respective posterior error bands (shaded
area) for retail sales.


Regional monetary policy shocks, proxied by the idiosyncratic component, are statistically and

economically significant. The IRFs are in line with our baseline IRFs, that retail sales and building

permits decrease in response to a contractionary monetary policy shock.


                                    -- Place Table 8 About Here --



Incorporating Failed Bank Deposits.            In the previous section, we augmented the FAVAR

model with failed bank deposits.            Section B.7 of the Internet Appendix presents impulse

responses of real activity variables for all Fed districts using the bank-failure augmented

model previously described in Table 6.            The impulse responses for the failed bank deposit-

augmented model are similar to the baseline responses.                 A contractionary monetary policy

shocks reduces retail sales and building permits.



                                                      28
Figure 14. Comparison of identified set with posterior error bands: Building Permits. This figure compares
the identified set of the impulse response functions (solid lines) with the respective posterior error bands
(shaded area) for building permits.


Minimal Narrative Sign Restrictions.        In one of the robustness checks above, we used our narra-

tive sign restrictions all combined. We now analyze our IRFs imposing a narrative sign restriction

only on the 1932 monetary intervention which was the largest open market purchase undertaken

by the Fed since its founding in 1913. Specifically, we now impose only Narrative Sign Restric-

tion 5, requiring the 1932 open market operations pursued by the Fed to be an expansionary and

dominant force of monetary policy shocks in 1932:M04 as described in Table 9. Section B.8 of the

Internet Appendix presents impulse responses of this variation. As we can observe, the impulse

responses are broadly similar to our baseline results.

                                   -- Place Table 9 About Here --


Robustness of Bounds for Conclusions.         To address Baumeister and Hamilton's (2015) critique of

set-identified SVARs, we report the robustness of the results by comparing the identified set with

                                                    29
the posterior error bands. This allows us to check whether our conclusions are robust or simply

driven by the prior over the rotations (see, e.g., Schorfheide (2017), Granziera et al. (2018), Watson

(2019), and Baumeister and Hamilton (2020) for a detailed discussion). We present these bounds

of the identified set as solid lines and our baseline impulse responses in shaded areas in Figure 13

(retail sales) and Figure 14 (building permits). As shown by both figures, we find the bounds of our

reported posterior IRFs and the identified sets to be remarkably close. We do not find a pathological

strong concentration of our reported posteriors within the identified set. Most importantly, our

reported identified sets confirm the robustness of the heterogeneity we find across regions.



6 Concluding Remarks

What role did national and regional monetary policy play in the dramatic decline of the national

money supply and the Great Depression? We address this question using a standard structural

vector autoregression that uses Uhlig (2005) sign restrictions. The empirical analysis, as measured

by the discount rate or the money supply, explains between 10 and 25 percent of the forecast error

variance in retail sales for the twelve Federal Reserve districts. We find similar results for building

permits. Contractionary monetary policy shocks by the New York Federal Reserve and our national

monetary factor generally had a smaller impact on retail sales and building permits. A one-standard

deviation shock to the discount rate only explains about 10 percent of the forecast error variance

of the two measures of economic activity. The baseline results are robust to imposing the sign

restrictions for as little as 1 quarter and to not imposing sign restrictions on real economic variables.

Our results are also robust to a large battery of robustness checks that include augmenting the

baseline specification with the share of failed bank deposits and the spread of each Fed district's

discount rate with respect to the discount rate of the New York Fed. Our conclusions also remain

unchanged when we impose minimal narrative sign restrictions to our baseline impulse-responses.

   Overall, the results show that regional monetary policy shocks had large economic effects in all

12 Federal Reserve districts. The empirical analysis shows that regional monetary policy shocks

had a larger effect on regional economic conditions than national monetary policy. This conclusion

remains when national monetary policy is measured by a common factor taken from the discount

rates of the 12 Federal Reserve banks or when we simply augment each regional VAR with the

discount rate of the New York Fed. This suggests that the regional Federal Reserve banks were

                                                   30
more responsible for the dramatic decline in the money supply that had real economic effects dur-

ing the Great Depression than national monetary policy. Finally, our results are broadly consistent

with Richardson and Troost (2009) and provide additional insights on the aggregate, dynamic re-

sponses of real economic activity to monetary policy shocks during the Depression. Our paper

can be seen as a first exploration of the real effects of monetary policy using an ideal empirical

setting of one country with 12 quasi-independent central banks through the lens of widely-used

VAR models. Researchers could benefit from our empirical setting in future studies of how mon-

etary policy affects other outcomes of interest.




                                                31
References

Amir-Ahmadi, P. and A. Ritschl (2010): "Depression econometrics: a FAVAR model of monetary policy
  during the Great Depression," CEP Discussion Paper, London School of Economics.

Anari, A., J. Kolari, and J. R. Mason (2005): "Bank asset liquidation and the propagation of the US Great
  Depression," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 753­773.

Antolín-Díaz, J. and J. F. Rubio-Ramírez (2018): "Narrative sign restrictions for SVARs," American Economic
  Review, 108, 2802­29.

Arias, J. E., J. F. Rubio-Ramírez, and D. F. Waggoner (2018): "Inference based on Structural Vector Autore-
  gressions identified with sign and zero restrictions: Theory and applications," Econometrica, 86, 685­720.

Baumeister, C. and J. D. Hamilton (2015): "Sign Restrictions, Structural Vector Autoregressions, and Useful
  Prior Information," Econometrica, 85, 1963­1999.

------ (2020): "Drawing Conclusions from Structural Vector Autoregressions Identified on the Basis of Sign
  Restrictions," NBER Working Paper n. 26606.

Bernanke, B. S. (1983): "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depres-
  sion," American Economic Review, 73, 257­276.

------ (2002): "Remarks by Governor Ben S. Bernanke," Conference to Honor Milton Friedman on his Ninetieth
  Birthday, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, November 8, 2002.

Bernstein, A., E. Hughson, and M. D. Weidenmier (2010): "Identifying the effects of a lender of last resort
  on financial markets: Lessons from the founding of the Fed," Journal of Financial Economics, 98, 40­53.

Bordo, M. D. (1989): "The contribution of "A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960" to monetary
  history," in Money, History, and International Finance: Essays in Honor of Anna J. Schwartz, University of
  Chicago Press, 15­78.

Bordo, M. D., C. J. Erceg, and C. L. Evans (2000): "Money, sticky wages, and the Great Depression,"
  American Economic Review, 90, 1447­1463.

Bordo, M. D. and H. Rockoff (2013): "Not Just the Great Contraction: Friedman and Schwartz's A Monetary
  History of the United States 1867 to 1960," American Economic Review, 103, 61­65.

Bordo, M. D. and A. Sinha (2016): "A lesson from the Great Depression that the Fed might have learned: a
  comparison of the 1932 open market purchases with quantitative easing," NBER Working Paper n. 22581.



                                                         32
Breitenlechner, M., G. P. Mathy, and J. Scharler (2019): "Decomposing the US Great Depression: How
  important were loan supply shocks?" Working Paper.

Calomiris, C. W. and J. R. Mason (2003): "Consequences of bank distress during the Great Depression,"
  American Economic Review, 93, 937­947.

Canova, F. and G. De Nicolò (2002): "Monetary disturbances matter for business fluctuations in the G-7,"
  Journal of Monetary Economics, 49, 1131­1159.

Chandler, L. V. (1971): American monetary policy, 1928-1941, Harper & Row.

Cortes, G. S. and M. D. Weidenmier (2019): "Stock Volatility and the Great Depression," Review of Financial
  Studies, 32, 3544­3570.

Del Negro, M. and F. Schorfheide (2011): "Bayesian Macroeconometrics," The Oxford Handbook of Bayesian
  Econometrics, 293­389.

Faust, J. (1998): "The robustness of identified VAR conclusions about money," in Carnegie-Rochester Conference
  Series on Public Policy, Elsevier, vol. 49, 207­244.

Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz (1963): A Monetary History of the United States, 1867­1960, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.

Giannone, D., M. R. Lenza, and G. Primiceri (2015): "Inference for VARs identified with sign restrictions,"
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 97, 412­435.

Granziera, E., H. R. Moon, and F. Schorfheide (2018): "Inference for VARs identified with sign restric-
  tions," Quantitative Economics, 9, 1087­1121.

Hamilton, J. D. (1987): "Monetary factors in the Great Depression," Journal of Monetary Economics, 19, 145­
  169.

Hsieh, C.-T. and C. D. Romer (2006): "Was the Federal Reserve constrained by the gold standard during the
  Great Depression? Evidence from the 1932 open market purchase program," Journal of Economic History,
  66, 140­176.

Jalil, A. J. (2014): "Monetary intervention really did mitigate banking panics during the Great Depression:
  Evidence along the Atlanta Federal Reserve District border," Journal of Economic History, 74, 259­273.

Miron, J. A. (1986): "Financial panics, the seasonality of the nominal interest rate, and the founding of the
  Fed," American Economic Review, 76, 125­140.



                                                         33
Park, H. and G. Richardson (2012): "Retail trade by federal reserve district, 1919 to 1939: A statistical
  history," Research in Economic History, 151­231.

Ramey, V. (2016): "Macroeconomic Shocks and Their Propagation," in Handbook of Macroeconomics, Elsevier,
  vol. 2, chap. 2, 71­162.

Richardson, G., A. Komai, and M. Gou (2013): "Banking Act of 1935," The History of the Federal Reserve at
  the Fed's Centennial Web Site.

Richardson, G. and W. Troost (2009): "Monetary intervention mitigated banking panics during the great
  depression: quasi-experimental evidence from a federal reserve district border, 1929­1933," Journal of Polit-
  ical Economy, 117, 1031­1073.

Ritschl, A. and U. Woitek (2000): "Did monetary forces cause the Great Depression? A Bayesian VAR
  analysis for the US economy," IEER Working Paper, University of Zurich.

Rubio-Ramírez, J. F., D. F. Waggoner, and T. Zha (2010): "Structural Vector Autoregressions: Theory of
  Identification and Algorithms for Inference," Review of Economic Studies, 77, 665­696.

Schorfheide, F. (2017): Macroeconometrics A Discussion, Cambridge University Press, vol. 2 of Econometric
  Society Monographs, 128142.

Uhlig, H. (2005): "What are the effects of monetary policy on output? Results from an agnostic identification
  procedure," Journal of Monetary Economics, 52, 381­419.

Watson, M. (2019): "Comment on On the Empirical (Ir)Relevance of the Zero Lower Bound by D. Debortoli,
  J. Gali, and L. Gambetti," NBER Macroeconomics Annual.

Ziebarth, N. L. (2013): "Identifying the effects of bank failures from a natural experiment in Mississippi
  during the Great Depression," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 5, 81­101.




                                                     34
Tables

Table 1. Baseline Sign Restrictions Imposed for Identification. This table details the sign restrictions
imposed on the variables included in the VAR. Positive sign restrictions are denoted by "+", negative sign
restrictions are denoted by "-", and variables left without sign restrictions are denoted by "x". The variables
included in the VARs are the following: retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ), food prices ( pt ), money
aggregate M1 (mt ), commercial paper rate (cpt ), and Federal Reserve discount rate (rt ).

                                 SR              rst   bpt    pt mt     cpt   rt
                                                 -      -     - -        x    +
                                 SR-Horizon                  6 month


Table 2. Variation: Common Monetary Policy FAVAR with Narrative Sign Restrictions on all four major
monetary policy episodes and agnostic sign restrictions excluding constraints on output. This table details
the sign restrictions imposed on the variables included in the VAR. Positive sign restrictions are denoted by
"+", negative sign restrictions are denoted by "-", and variables left without sign restrictions are denoted
by "x". The variables included in the VARs are the following: retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ), food
prices ( pt ), money aggregate M1 (mt ), commercial paper rate (cpt ), and Federal Reserve discount rate (rt ).

 SR                            rst    bpt   pt   mt                          cpt                            rt
                                x      x    -    -                            x                             +
 SR-Horizon                                                            6 month
 Narrative Sign Restriction    Brief description of narrative                                             Date
 Narrative SR1 : (-)           Antispeculative monetary policy tightening                               1928:M04
 Narrative SR2 : (-)           Contractionary monetary policy tightening following Sterling crisis      1931:M10
 Narrative SR3 : (+)           Expansionary shock                                                       1932:M04
 Narrative SR4 : (-)           Contractionary shock                                                     1933:M01
 Narrative SR5 : (strong)      Let Narrative SR3 be dominant for rt




                                                       35
Table 3. Forecast Error Variance Decomposition for Regional-Specific VARs. Panel A shows the median
FEVD relative to a monetary policy shock for each one of the twelve Federal Reserve districts. The first six
columns refer to the horizon where h = 0 months, whereas columns 7 to 12 refer to the horizon h = 60
months. Panel B reports the respective maximum median FEVD and its corresponding horizon in brackets.
The variables included in the VARs are the following: retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ), food prices
( pt ), money aggregate M1 (mt ), commercial paper rate (cpt ), and Federal Reserve discount rate (rt ).

                                         Panel A. Selected Horizons
                                 Horizon:   Month 0                        Horizon:   Month 60
      Fed District      rst    bpt    pt     mt    cpt       rt    rst    bpt    pt     mt    cpt     rt
      Boston           10%     9% 11%       12% 12%        18%    15%    17% 10%        8% 12%      14%
      New York         11%     9% 12%       13% 11%        13%    12%    19%    6%      9% 13%      13%
      Philadelphia      8%     8% 12%       12% 10%         9%    23%    18% 20%       14% 17%      15%
      Cleveland         9%    11% 12%       16% 11%        14%    21%    16% 10%       15% 17%      16%
      Richmond         14%    13% 11%       10%    9%      13%    20%    11%    8%     14% 16%      12%
      Atlanta          12%    12% 11%       11% 10%        13%    24%    26% 13%       24% 17%      15%
      Chicago          12%    10% 10%       12% 12%        17%    20%    13%    8%     14% 14%      11%
      St. Louis        14%    14% 11%       11% 11%        10%    25%    18% 15%       11% 19%      16%
      Minneapolis      12%    10% 10%       12% 14%        15%    15%    20% 17%       13% 12%      14%
      Kansas City      11%     9% 14%       14% 15%        15%    18%    21% 10%       14% 17%      13%
      Dallas           16%    13% 12%        8% 17%        11%    21%    24% 11%       24% 18%      14%
      San Francisco    11%    12%    9%     11% 15%        12%    25%    21% 11%       18% 15%      15%

                                Panel B. Maximum Median FEVD Horizons
                                             Max median FEVD [at Horizon]
             Fed District          rst        bpt       pt       mt       cpt                 rt
             Boston           16% [20]   24% [13]  16% [7]  14% [6]   13% [5]            18% [2]
             New York          14% [9]   29% [13]  12% [1]  16% [6]   18% [4]            16% [3]
             Philadelphia     23% [48]   20% [27] 21% [32] 14% [60]   19% [8]            17% [5]
             Cleveland        24% [22]   24% [13]  14% [6] 21% [11]   17% [8]           16% [60]
             Richmond         21% [37]    18% [7]  13% [5] 15% [26]   17% [7]            13% [2]
             Atlanta          24% [52]   30% [27]  14% [8] 27% [21] 17% [60]            15% [60]
             Chicago          22% [25]   22% [12]  13% [4] 19% [10]   16% [4]            17% [0]
             St. Louis        27% [37]   26% [14] 17% [24]  15% [9] 19% [59]            16% [60]
             Minneapolis      17% [14]   24% [23] 17% [47]  18% [7]   14% [1]            18% [3]
             Kansas City      21% [19]   39% [11]  19% [9] 24% [12]   18% [6]            16% [1]
             Dallas           22% [41]   32% [18]  15% [4] 26% [30] 18% [60]             16% [3]
             San Francisco    26% [33]   28% [16] 15% [10] 25% [14] 15% [60]            15% [60]




                                                      36
Table 4. Forecast Error Variance Decomposition for Factor-Augmented VAR: National Common Factor.
Panel A shows the median FEVD relative to a shock to the national common factor of monetary policy
for each one of the twelve Federal Reserve districts. The first six columns refer to the horizon where h = 0
months, whereas columns 7 to 12 refer to the horizon h = 60 months. Panel B reports the respective maximum
median FEVD and its corresponding horizon in brackets. The variables included in the Factor-Augmented
VARs are the following: retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ), food prices ( pt ), money aggregate M1 (mt ),
commercial paper rate (cpt ), Federal Reserve discount rate (rt ), the national common factor of discount rates
( f^t ) and the regional (idiosyncratic) component of discount rates ( f^i,t ).

                                           Panel A. Selected Horizons
                                  Horizon:   Month 0                         Horizon:   Month 60
      Fed District      rst     bpt    pt     mt    cpt        rt    rst    bpt    pt     mt    cpt      rt
      Boston            9%      8%    9%     13% 12%         17%    13%    12%    7%      9% 11%        9%
      New York         12%      9% 11%       12% 10%         16%    12%    14%    5%      7% 12%       10%
      Philadelphia     10%      9% 11%       13% 10%         11%    18%    16% 11%       14% 15%       12%
      Cleveland         9%     11% 11%       17% 10%         13%    16%    10%    6%     13% 14%       11%
      Richmond         13%     11% 10%       11%    8%       11%    15%     9%    5%     13% 14%        9%
      Atlanta          11%     11%    9%     11%    9%       14%    22%    22%    9%     21% 14%       14%
      Chicago          10%      8%    8%     11% 11%         27%    18%    11%    6%     13% 13%       10%
      St. Louis        12%     14%    9%     12% 11%         11%    21%    13% 11%       11% 17%       13%
      Minneapolis      14%     11%    9%      9% 11%         15%    16%    19% 13%       12% 12%       10%
      Kansas City      12%      8% 12%       12% 12%         18%    14%    14%    8%     12% 13%       11%
      Dallas           16%     12% 10%        8% 16%         16%    18%    21%    7%     22% 17%       11%
      San Francisco    11%     11%    9%     10% 14%         16%    17%    14%    7%     18% 14%       11%

                                 Panel B. Maximum Median FEVD Horizons
                                                Max median FEVD [at Horizon]
               Fed District          rst          bpt       pt      mt       cpt                rt
               Boston           13% [16]     20% [13]  11% [5]  13% [0] 14% [4]            17% [0]
               New York         14% [10]     25% [13]  11% [0]  14% [6] 17% [4]            16% [0]
               Philadelphia     18% [41]     18% [23]  13% [6] 14% [10] 18% [6]            16% [3]
               Cleveland        19% [14]     20% [11]  12% [3]  20% [7] 17% [7]            13% [1]
               Richmond         16% [35]      17% [8]  11% [3] 14% [20] 16% [7]            11% [1]
               Atlanta          22% [60]     28% [17]  11% [7] 22% [18] 16% [8]            14% [0]
               Chicago          20% [30]     19% [10]  10% [3] 16% [11] 17% [4]            27% [0]
               St. Louis        23% [34]     21% [11] 12% [11]  15% [9] 19% [7]           13% [60]
               Minneapolis      17% [10]     20% [19] 13% [59] 15% [10] 16% [4]            15% [0]
               Kansas City      17% [11]     31% [10]  15% [6] 22% [10] 17% [7]            18% [1]
               Dallas           18% [56]     29% [12]  13% [4] 24% [23] 17% [5]            16% [1]
               San Francisco    17% [24]     21% [10]  10% [3] 25% [14] 15% [7]            16% [0]




                                                        37
Table 5. Forecast Error Variance Decomposition for Factor-Augmented VAR: Regional Factor. Panel A
shows the median FEVD relative to a shock to the regional (idiosyncratic) factor of monetary policy for each
one of the twelve Federal Reserve districts. The first six columns refer to the horizon where h = 0 months,
whereas columns 7 to 12 refer to the horizon h = 60 months. Panel B reports the respective maximum median
FEVD and its corresponding horizon in brackets. The variables included in the Factor-Augmented VARs are
the following: retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ), food prices ( pt ), money aggregate M1 (mt ), commercial
paper rate (cpt ), Federal Reserve discount rate (rt ), the national common factor of discount rates ( f^t ) and the
regional (idiosyncratic) component of discount rates ( f^i,t ).

                                           Panel A. Selected Horizons
                                  Horizon:   Month 0                          Horizon:   Month 60
       Fed District      rst    bpt    pt     mt    cpt         rt    rst    bpt    pt     mt    cpt       rt
       Boston           10%    10% 11%       11% 14%          18%    19%    24% 16%       11% 13%        15%
       New York         10%     9% 12%       14% 11%          14%    14%    23%    7%     10% 15%        15%
       Philadelphia      7%     8% 12%       12% 11%           9%    27%    19% 22%       14% 14%        12%
       Cleveland         9%    12% 12%       15% 11%          15%    27%    20% 14%       19% 18%        20%
       Richmond         13%    16% 12%       10%    8%        14%    22%    11% 11%       13% 12%         9%
       Atlanta          10%    14% 12%       11% 13%          10%    28%    21% 16%       25% 14%        14%
       Chicago          12%    11% 10%       12% 14%          11%    23%    16% 11%       15% 13%        19%
       St. Louis        14%    15% 11%       10% 10%          11%    29%    22% 18%       12% 17%        16%
       Minneapolis      12%    10% 10%       14% 17%           7%    18%    25% 24%       13% 10%        14%
       Kansas City       9%    10% 16%       13% 20%          11%    26%    26% 15%       16% 14%        15%
       Dallas           14%    13% 14%        8% 19%           9%    30%    32% 17%       21% 17%        15%
       San Francisco    11%    13% 10%       11% 15%          10%    33%    28% 18%       16% 16%        19%

                                  Panel B. Maximum Median FEVD Horizons
                                                Max median FEVD [at Horizon]
              Fed District           rst         bpt       pt       mt       cpt                  rt
              Boston            20% [30]    29% [21] 21% [12]  16% [7]   14% [0]             18% [0]
              New York          15% [14]    31% [16]  12% [1]  17% [6]   18% [4]             16% [3]
              Philadelphia      28% [52]    21% [26] 23% [37] 14% [60] 14% [60]             12% [60]
              Cleveland         29% [30]    27% [14] 18% [13] 21% [20] 18% [60]             20% [60]
              Richmond          22% [52]     16% [0]  17% [9] 13% [36] 12% [60]              14% [0]
              Atlanta           28% [58]    22% [26] 16% [58] 26% [35] 14% [60]             14% [60]
              Chicago           24% [32]    22% [15]  16% [8]  19% [9]   14% [0]            19% [60]
              St. Louis         29% [43]    27% [18] 19% [30] 15% [10] 17% [60]             16% [60]
              Minneapolis       18% [60]    25% [35] 24% [60]  15% [3]   17% [0]            15% [30]
              Kansas City       27% [37]    33% [18] 25% [11] 21% [17]   20% [0]            15% [60]
              Dallas            30% [59]    34% [32] 19% [18] 23% [30]   19% [0]            15% [60]
              San Francisco     34% [49]    32% [28] 23% [21] 22% [13] 16% [60]             19% [14]




                                                         38
Table 6. Variation: Regional Monetary Policy FAVAR with Bank Failures. This table details the sign
restrictions imposed on the variables included in the VAR. Positive sign restrictions are denoted by "+",
negative sign restrictions are denoted by "-", and variables left without sign restrictions are denoted by "x".
The variables included in the VARs are the following: retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ), food prices
( pt ), money aggregate M1 (mt ), commercial paper rate (cpt ), and Federal Reserve discount rate (rt ).

                              SR               rst         bpt     pt mt         cpt     rt    b ft
                                               -            -      - -            x      +     +
                              SR-Horizon                          6 month


Table 7. Variation: Shorter Horizon Constraint. This table details the sign restrictions imposed on the
variables included in the VAR. Positive sign restrictions are denoted by "+", negative sign restrictions are
denoted by "-", and variables left without sign restrictions are denoted by "x". The variables included in the
VARs are the following: retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ), food prices ( pt ), money aggregate M1 (mt ),
commercial paper rate (cpt ), and Federal Reserve discount rate (rt ).

                                 SR                  rst     bpt        pt mt      cpt        rt
                                                     -        -         - -         x         +
                                 SR-Horizon                            3 month


Table 8. Variation: Regional VAR with Discount Rate Spread over New York Fed. This table details the
sign restrictions imposed on the variables included in the VAR. Positive sign restrictions are denoted by "+",
negative sign restrictions are denoted by "-", and variables left without sign restrictions are denoted by "x".
The variables included in the VARs are the following: retail sales (rst ), building permits (bpt ), food prices
( pt ), money aggregate M1 (mt ), commercial paper rate (cpt ), and Federal Reserve discount rate (rt ).

                               SR              rst         bpt        pt mt cpt          spreadt
                                               -            -         - -       x          +
                               SR-Horizon                               6 month


Table 9. Variation: Common Monetary Policy FAVAR with Expansionary Narrative Sign Restriction of
April 1932. This table details the sign restrictions imposed on the variables included in the VAR. Positive
sign restrictions are denoted by "+", negative sign restrictions are denoted by "-", and variables left without
sign restrictions are denoted by "x". The variables included in the VARs are the following: retail sales (rst ),
building permits (bpt ), food prices ( pt ), money aggregate M1 (mt ), commercial paper rate (cpt ), and Federal
Reserve discount rate (rt ).

                               SR                    rst         bpt
                                                               pt mt cpt      rt
                                                     -         - --      x    +
                               SR-Horizon                      6 month
                               Narrative SR :        Expansionary shock 1932:M04
                                                           dominant for rt




                                                                 39
