                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      CIGARETTE TAXES AND SMOKING AMONG SEXUAL MINORITY ADULTS

                                    Christopher Carpenter
                                       Dario Sansone

                                     Working Paper 26692
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26692


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Grant
#76601. Results do not imply the endorsement of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation or any
other organization. We are grateful to Joseph Sabia and participants at the 2020 AEA/ASSA
meetings for helpful comments. The usual caveats apply. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christopher Carpenter and Dario Sansone. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Cigarette Taxes and Smoking Among Sexual Minority Adults
Christopher Carpenter and Dario Sansone
NBER Working Paper No. 26692
January 2020
JEL No. I1

                                          ABSTRACT

We provide the first quasi-experimental evidence on the relationship between cigarette taxes and
sexual minority adult smoking by studying individuals in same-sex households (a large share of
whom are in same-sex romantic relationships) from the 1996-2018 Behavioral Risk Factor
Surveillance System. We find that cigarette taxes significantly reduced smoking among men and
women in same-sex households, and the effects we find for men in same-sex households are
significantly larger than the associated effects for men in different-sex households (the vast
majority of whom are heterosexual married/partnered men). This result suggests that the sizable
disparities in adult smoking rates between heterosexual and sexual minority men would have
been even larger in the absence of stricter tobacco control policy. In line with previous research
indicating that cigarette taxes have `lost their bite', we find no significant relationship between
cigarette taxes and sexual minority smoking in more recent years.


Christopher Carpenter
Department of Economics
Vanderbilt University
VU Station B, Box #351819
2301 Vanderbilt Place
Nashville, TN 37235
and NBER
christopher.s.carpenter@vanderbilt.edu

Dario Sansone
Vanderbilt University
dario.sansone@vanderbilt.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26692
1. Introduction
A very large literature in health economics demonstrates that higher excise taxes on cigarettes are
associated with lower rates of smoking. While the earliest studies demonstrated this finding using
across-states variation in taxes (see, for example, Chaloupka and Wechsler, 1997), numerous
studies have also applied more internally valid difference-in-difference approaches that leverage
within-state changes in cigarette taxes (see, for example, Cotti et al., 2016, as well as Pesko et al.,
2019). The majority of published studies in economics have demonstrated that cigarette tax hikes
significantly reduce adult smoking, although the estimates differ substantially in magnitude (Gallet
and List, 2003).
Moreover, several studies also examine the effects of cigarette taxes on smoking behaviors for
various at-risk sub-groups. For example, youths are of particular interest given that most adult
smokers started smoking before age 18 and given concerns that youths may not fully understand
the consequences of their decisions about risky behaviors. Studies of youths have returned mixed
effects: while DeCicca et al. (2002) find no effects of cigarette taxes on youth smoking in the
National Education Longitudinal Study, Carpenter and Cook (2008) use data from the 1991-2005
Youth Risk Behavior Surveys and find that youth smoking was significantly negatively related to
state excise taxes on cigarettes. More recently, Hansen et al. (2017) have documented that cigarette
taxes have `lost their bite' among youths over the period 2007-2015. In addition to youths,
economists have also studied how cigarette taxes affect other sub-populations, including older-
adults (DeCicca and McLeod, 2008; MacLean et al., 2016), pregnant women (Ringel and Evans,
2001; Colman et al., 2003; Lien and Evans, 2005; Simon, 2016), racial and ethnic minorities
(Farrelly et al., 2001), and light and heavy smokers (Cotti et al., 2016; Nesson, 2017).
In this paper, we contribute to the literature on heterogeneity in the effects of cigarette taxes on
smoking by providing the first quasi-experimental evidence for sexual minority adults. Based on
CDC (2018a) statistics, gay men, lesbian women, and bisexual individuals are a particularly
important sub-population to study because their smoking rates (20.3 percent) are much higher than
the smoking rates of heterosexual adults (13.7 percent). This difference in smoking rates by sexual
minority status (6.6 percentage points) is larger than the difference in smoking rates between men
and women (3.6 percentage points); younger adults age 18-24 and older adults age 65+ (2.2
percentage points); white and black adults (0.3 percentage points); adults in the regions of the US
with the highest (Midwest) and lowest (West) smoking rates (5.9 percentage points); and
unmarried versus married adults (2 percentage points). Although public health scholars have long
documented differences in smoking rates by sexual minority status, we are not aware of any
research that has related changes in state excise taxes on cigarettes to changes in rates of smoking
for sexual minorities. Our study is the first to fill this gap. 3


3
    For this reason, we do not provide a detailed literature review here. Hatzenbuehler et al. (2014) study 577 adults in
    the 2004 wave of the National Epidemiologic Survey of Alcohol Related Conditions and find that sexual minority
    adults in areas with more restrictive tobacco environments had lower smoking rates than otherwise similar sexual
    minority adults in areas with more permissive tobacco environments. The authors do not separately examine
    cigarette taxes per se, however, and they only examine one cross section of data.
                                                                                                                       2
There are many reasons why cigarette taxes and related tobacco control policies might be expected
to have different effects for sexual minorities compared to heterosexuals. First, as noted above,
smoking rates among sexual minorities are much higher than among heterosexual individuals.
Public health research has suggested that this may be due to `minority stress' (Meyer, 1995): i.e.,
high levels of chronic stress due to stigmatization, internalized homophobia, harassment, and
discrimination that could lead sexual minority individuals to use smoking as a coping mechanism.
As sexual minorities face the same broad policy environment as heterosexual individuals, the
higher smoking rates in sexual minority communities may indicate that tobacco control policies
such as cigarette taxes could be less effective at reducing smoking among sexual minorities than
among heterosexual individuals. It could be, for example, that the average sexual minority smoker
is more addicted to smoking than the average heterosexual smoker; if so, this would lead to less
responsiveness of sexual minority smokers to taxes than the associated responsiveness of
heterosexual individuals. Second, previous research has found that tobacco industry marketing
specifically targets sexual minorities (Dilley et al., 2008), which may also undermine the
effectiveness of stricter tobacco controls for this group.
Third, research has shown that, compared to heterosexual individuals, sexual minority individuals
have lower rates of health insurance coverage (Gonzales and Blewett, 2014), are less likely to have
routine access to care, and are less likely to have regular check-ups (Buchmueller and Carpenter,
2010). Unique health profiles of sexual minorities also make them differentially likely to access
certain types of specialty care (e.g., obstetrics-related care). If these differences translate to lower
rates of insurance-related smoking cessation treatment or worse access to information on the
benefits of quitting smoking from health care professionals, then tobacco control policies that work
through insurance or access to care mechanisms may also show less efficacy among sexual
minorities.
Fourth, there are large literatures documenting income and earnings differences for sexual
minorities relative to heterosexual sub-populations (see for instance Plug and Berkhout, 2004;
Carpenter, 2007; Drydakis, 2009; Tilcsik, 2011; Geijtenbeek and Plug, 2018; Aksoy et al., 2019).
With some exceptions (Weichselbaumer, 2003), the main findings are that gay men earn less than
similarly situated heterosexual men, while lesbians earn more than similarly situated heterosexual
women. Differentials in high school graduation and college completion rates have also been found
by Black et al. (2007), Carpenter (2009), Carpenter et al. (2019), and Sansone (2019a), with most
of these studies finding higher human capital accumulation for sexual minority adults as compared
to heterosexual individuals. Since human capital and the availability of economic resources can
play a key role in determining the effects of the excise taxes on cigarettes (Remler, 2004; Franks
et al., 2007; Harding et al., 2012; Goldin and Homonoff, 2013), it is possible that the effects of
these policies would differ by sexual minority status. For example, lower earnings may make
sexual minorities more responsive to cigarette tax hikes than heterosexual individuals if taxes
constitute a larger share of income for sexual minorities. Furthermore, higher education could help
sexual minorities better understand the adverse health consequences of smoking that are signaled
by higher taxes.

                                                                                                      3
Thus, while there is no credible quasi-experimental evidence on cigarette tax hikes and smoking
among sexual minorities, there are several reasons why we might expect the effects of cigarette
taxes to differ by sexual orientation. Furthermore, the direction of the tax impact is unclear ex-
ante. If sexual minority smokers are more addicted to smoking than heterosexual smokers, are
disproportionately targeted by tobacco marketing, or have less access to anti-smoking assistance,
we might expect cigarette taxes to be less effective at reducing smoking among sexual minorities
as compared to heterosexual individuals. In contrast, if sexual minority smokers have lower
earnings and greater education compared to heterosexual individuals, we might expect that
cigarette tax hikes might be more effective at reducing smoking among sexual minorities as
compared to heterosexual individuals. Ultimately, this is an empirical question, and one we address
in this paper.
One important challenge in credibly estimating the effects of cigarette taxes on smoking behaviors
among sexual minorities is the relative absence of good data on sexual orientation, particularly in
surveys that also include information on smoking behaviors. While several large surveys have
begun to add questions about sexual orientation, credible estimation in difference-in-differences
models for this setting requires substantial data before and after cigarette tax hikes. This is a
problem because few datasets include direct information on sexual orientation prior to the mid-
2010s. As multiple studies have found that cigarette tax effects on cigarette smoking were larger
in the 1990s and 2000s than in the more recent decade (Hansen et al., 2017; Callison and Kaestner,
2014), the lack of historical data on smoking behaviors among sexual minority adults is a
particularly serious challenge.
A key contribution of this paper is to overcome this data challenge by using information on
household structure and sex composition from the Centers for Disease Control's Behavioral Risk
Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) for the period 1996-2018. This approach has been used
previously to study household income among sexual minorities (Carpenter, 2004) and the effects
of LGBT public policies on these sub-populations (Carpenter et al., 2018). Specifically, in the
BRFSS individuals are asked about the total number of adults in the household as well as how
many of the adults are men and how many of the adults are women. The intuition is very simple:
households with exactly two adult men or exactly two adult women (excluding those younger than
25) are disproportionately likely to contain sexual minorities in same-sex romantic relationships.
Moreover, we can use independent data with more direct measures of sexual orientation available
from 2014 to confirm that this is the case. While this method of identifying sexual minorities is
indirect and has a few other important limitations (e.g., it cannot be used to identify most single
sexual minorities), it does have many advantages as well, including the fact that it returns
meaningfully large samples of individuals in same-sex households over a long period
(approximately 200,000 individuals in same-sex households in the BRFSS from 1996 to 2018).
To preview our results, in our difference-in-differences models with controls for individual
demographic characteristics, other state-by-year contextual and policy variables, and fixed effects
for state and time, we find clear evidence that cigarette taxes were significantly related to lower
rates of smoking among individuals in same-sex households. Over the period 1996-2018 we

                                                                                                  4
estimate that a one dollar increase in the state excise tax on cigarettes was associated with a 1.8
percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being a daily smoker among men in same-sex
households. We find similar estimates when looking at the probability of being a current smoker.
The associated estimates for women in same-sex households are smaller but still statistically
significant when analyzing daily smoking. The results for men in same-sex households are
particularly robust to the inclusion of state-specific time trends, the exclusion of states with
numerous local cigarette tax jurisdictions, the further restriction on subsets of same-sex households
more likely to contain sexual minorities, and a range of other robustness tests.
We also replicate several patterns from the published literature, including that cigarette taxes have
been less effective at reducing smoking rates in the more recent period (2011-2018). Consistent
with this finding, we show that between 2014 and 2018 ­ when we directly observe individual
level self-reports of sexual orientation for adults in 35 states that administered a unified sexual
orientation and gender identity module and released their data for public use ­ we do not find any
meaningful relationship between cigarette taxes and smoking among self-identified gay men,
lesbian women, bisexual or queer individuals. 4
Finally, we show that cigarette taxes are estimated to have reduced smoking among individuals in
different-sex households ­ the vast majority of whom were married or partnered heterosexual
individuals. Nevertheless, we find that cigarette taxes were significantly more effective at reducing
smoking among men in same-sex households than among men in different-sex households. These
results are in line with the previous literature suggesting that certain tobacco policies - including
cigarette taxes - may benefit more disadvantaged groups and even reduce inequalities in smoking
(Thomas et al., 2008). Overall, our results are the first to credibly document that cigarette taxes
reduced smoking among sexual minority adults and indicate that the large sexual orientation-
related gap in adult smoking rates would have been even larger in the absence of cigarette excise
tax increases from 1996 to 2018.

2. Data
2.1 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS)
The Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) is a nationally representative health
survey conducted by the Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The first BRFSS
survey was conducted in 1984 in 15 states and has been extended to all 50 states (plus the District
of Columbia) since 1993. More than 400,000 noninstitutionalized adults (18 years or older) are
interviewed each year by phone, making it the largest ongoing telephone health survey in the
world. Phone calls are made 7 days per week, during both daytime and evening hours. Participants
do not receive monetary compensation for taking part in this survey.



4
    We are unable to provide reliable estimates for self-identified transgender individuals due to small sample sizes
    (there are only 4,075 self-identified transgender individuals in the BRFSS public use file from 2014 to 2018,
    compared to 35,756 self-identified lesbian women, gay men, bisexual and queer individuals).
                                                                                                                   5
BRFSS collects state data about U.S. residents regarding their health-related risk behaviors and
events, chronic health conditions, and use of preventive services. The BRFSS survey also includes
standard demographic questions such as age, race, ethnicity, education, and marital status. This
dataset has already been used to analyzed the impact of cigarette taxes by, among others, DeCicca
and McLeod (2008), and Pesko et al. (2019).
Beginning with the 2011 dataset, the CDC started making survey calls to cell-phone numbers in
addition to landlines in order to keep the data representative of the U.S. population. Furthermore,
it changed the statistical method used to compute sampling weights, moving from post-
stratification to iterative proportional fitting (Pierannunzi et al., 2012). Given these methodological
changes, we consider models using the full sample, as well as separately from 1996-2010 and
2011-2018. The 2018 wave includes also individuals interviewed in the first three months of 2019.
In addition, we follow prior research that pools all BRFSS waves and adjusts weights accordingly
(Simon et al., 2017).

2.2 Identifying same-sex couples in the BRFSS
As already mentioned in the introduction, we identify same-sex couples in the BRFSS using the
same procedure implemented by Carpenter et al. (2018). Specifically, we use the fact that in the
BRFSS one randomly selected adult in the household is asked to state the number of adult men
and the number of adult women in the household. Combined with information on the sex of the
respondent, this permits the identification of households containing exactly two adult men and
exactly zero adult women; henceforth, men in same-sex households (SSH). Similarly, households
that contain exactly two adult women and no adult men are defined as women in same-sex
households, while households with exactly one man and one woman are recorded as individuals
in different-sex households (DSH).
The underlying idea is that sexual minority individuals are much more likely than heterosexual
respondents to live in a household composed of exactly two same-sex adults, and thus these data
can be used as an indirect way of identifying meaningfully large samples of sexual minority adults
in same-sex relationships. One incidental advantage of this indirect approach is that individuals do
not have to explicitly self-identify as a sexual minority to the interviewer, somewhat reducing
concerns about selective disclosure. Another advantage is that this approach can be used to identify
same sex household throughout the history of the BRFSS: we go back to 1996 because the smoking
questions are comparable since that year.
Two data restrictions are necessary in order to use the aforementioned technique to identify same-
sex households. First, the analysis is restricted to individuals aged 25 and older. Because the
relationship between sexual orientation and our household structure measure should be weaker for
younger adults (who are more likely to be students and/or co-residing with another same-sex adult
for reasons other than a romantic relationship), individuals aged 18-24 are excluded from the main
sample. Second, because the household screener with questions about the number of adult men
and adult women in the household was not administered to the cellphone sample, all cellphone
interviews are excluded from the analysis. As noted above, the cellphone sample was not added

                                                                                                     6
until 2011, so we can separately estimate results for the period 1996-2010 using all BRFSS
respondents.
Starting from 2014, the BRFSS has also offered an identically-worded sexual orientation and
gender identity (SOGI) optional module to states, and 35 states have used the module at least once
and permit the BRFSS to release their data on the public use file. We use these more recent data
in two important ways. First, we use the 2014-2018 BRFSS data to estimate similar models of the
effects of cigarette taxes on self-reported smoking rates of self-identified gay men, lesbian women,
bisexual and queer individuals. Second, we use these data ­ which also include information on
household sex composition for individuals not in the cellphone sample ­ to provide direct evidence
on whether individuals in same-sex households are indeed more likely to self-identify as non-
heterosexual. As demonstrated in Carpenter et al. (2018) using the same kind of comparisons, but
based on a more limited number of years, only 1% of individuals in different-sex households
identified as non-heterosexual. On the other hand, 11% of women and 28% of men in same-sex
households identified as non-heterosexual. In addition, in line with the fact that gay and bisexual
men are the groups most affected by HIV in the U.S. (CDC, 2018b), the authors find that men in
same-sex households were more likely to report having ever been tested for HIV than men in
different-sex households.
The same approach to identify same-sex households in the BRFSS has also been used before by
Carpenter (2004). The author provides further evidence consistent with the idea that many
individuals in same-sex households were indeed individuals in same-sex couples. For instance, he
shows that a high percentage of male respondents in same-sex households reported condom use
for disease prevention, not contraception. These individuals were also more likely to report anal
sex without condoms than other male respondents. Similarly, women in same-sex households were
much less likely to report birth control use than women in different-sex households. 5

3. Econometric framework
3.1 Difference-in-difference model
Formally, the estimated difference-in-difference model is the following:
                 =  +  ( ) +  +  +  + 
                                       1 + 2 + 

where  is the relevant smoking behavior for individual i living in state s at time t. The
coefficient of interest is  . The specification includes state fixed effects ( ), month and year fixed

5
    Using a different dataset (the American Community Survey), Sansone (2019b) provides further evidence on the
    reliability of the same-sex household measure to identify sexual minorities. Given the structure of this dataset, the
    author was able to divide same-sex households into same-sex roommates and same-sex married/unmarried couples.
    While the proportion of same-sex roommates was similar to that of same-sex married/unmarried couples in less
    tolerant states, it was smaller in more LGBT-friendly states. Moreover, the proportion of same-sex roommates had
    remained stable over time in more tolerant states, but it had declined in less tolerant states. At the same time, the
    proportion of unmarried and married same-sex couples had increased. These patterns support the hypothesis that
    individuals in same-sex relationships were more likely to report being roommates when they preferred not to
    disclose their sexual orientation, thus emphasizing the advantage of using same-sex households as the main criteria
    to identify LGB individuals.
                                                                                                                       7
effects ( ), time-varying state-level controls (    
                                                      ), as well as individual-level controls ( ).
Individual controls  are: age (in five year age groups), race, ethnicity, and education. 6 As
described in Angrist and Pischke (2014), the common trends assumption can be modified by
controlling for state-specific time trends ( ). This specification is estimated using only the sample
of same-sex households. Standard errors are clustered at the state level (Bertrand et al., 2004). All
models are weighted using the BRFSS sampling weights rescaled following Simon et al. (2017).

3.2 Policy exogeneity
Taxes on cigarettes are levied at the federal, state, and municipal levels. In line with most of the
previous literature, and since the public-use BRFSS data do not contain detailed sub-state
geographic information over the entire sample period, this analysis focuses on state excise taxes.

In order for the coefficient  in the difference-in-difference specification described in the previous
section to estimate the causal impact of cigarette taxes on health outcomes, it has to be the case
that there are no time-varying factors correlated with the state decision to increase tobacco taxes
and influencing health indicators among individuals in same-sex households. All state time-
invariant factors, such as location, are already controlled for by the state fixed effects  , while the
time fixed effects  account for macroeconomic shocks or federal policies affecting all U.S. states
at the same time.
Historically, tobacco taxes have been enacted to increase state funding, often motivated by
budgetary shortfalls, without any tax revenues being earmarked for helping smokers quit (Dewan,
2009). State financial conditions are unlikely to be directly correlated with LGBTQ health
outcomes. Nevertheless, as the knowledge of the adverse health effects of smoking has spread,
states have started using taxes to reduce cigarette consumption. As a result, states where the
tobacco industry is stronger, or in which the population is more resistant to taxation, might have
been less likely to increase their cigarette taxes. Despite this, Midwest and Southern states were
just as likely to raise tobacco taxes in the early 2000s (Simon, 2016). In addition, tobacco tax
increases have been implemented in almost all states: in the time period considered in our main
empirical analysis (1996-2019), only two states ­ Missouri and North Dakota ­ did not increase
their tobacco tax. The remaining forty-eight states, plus the District of Columbia, passed 160
cigarette tax changes since 1996. Most states increased their taxes more than once. Moreover, since
it can take several years for a tax law to go into effect after the initiation of a campaign for a
tobacco tax increase (Gruber and Köszegi, 2001), Simon (2016) argues that such a delay implies
that, once enacted, the tobacco tax is unlikely to be correlated with short-term changes in
antismoking sentiment.
To address any further endogeneity concern, we additionally control for the state time-varying
population and employment rate. The main specification also includes controls for LGBT policies:
same-sex marriage legalization, constitutional or statutory bans on same-sex marriage,

6
    While running a state-level regression with weights for population would give the same point estimates, the
    inclusion of individual-level controls may increase precision (Angrist and Pischke, 2009). See Section A in the
    Online Appendix for detailed descriptions of how the control variables have been created.
                                                                                                                 8
introduction of same-sex civil unions and domestic partnerships, anti-discrimination laws, sodomy
laws, and hate-crime legislation that includes sexual orientation-motivated bias. Finally, we also
include controls for other relevant state policies: bans on smoking in restaurants, private
workplaces or bars, Tobacco 21 laws, Affordable Care Act Medicaid expansions, and Medicaid
private options.

3.3 Triple-difference model
The main econometric specification can be extended by estimating a triple-difference model, i.e.
by comparing changes in smoking for individuals in same-sex households to the associated
changes in smoking for individuals in different-sex households coincident with cigarette tax hikes
within the same states over time. As we will demonstrate that taxes are also effective at
significantly reducing smoking among individuals in different-sex households, it is worth noting
that we do not conceptualize of individuals in different-sex households in this specification as
constituting pure controls who are not treated by cigarette taxes. Instead, the goal of this fully
interacted model is to provide novel evidence on whether cigarette taxes were differentially
effective at reducing smoking among individuals in same-sex households as compared to
individuals in different-sex households.
More formally, the equation of interest can be written as follows:

 =  +  ( )   -   +  +  +  +  + 

where  indicates smoking behavior for individual i living in state s at time t. The subscript g
indicates whether the respondent is in a same-sex household or a different-sex household. The
coefficient of interest is  . The specification includes state-specific time effects that are common
across same-sex and different-sex households ( ), time-varying effects specific to same-sex
households ( ), state-specific shocks among same-sex households ( ), and individual controls
 .

4. Results
4.1 Trends and descriptive patterns
Figures 1 and 2 show trends in rates of daily smoking and current (daily or occasional) smoking
respectively, separately for men in same-sex households, men in different-sex households, women
in same-sex households, and women in different-sex households. For the sake of completeness,
although not exactly comparable, we include data from 1993 to 1995 in these trend graphs. 7
Notably, all the series exhibit general reductions in smoking rates over this time period. In both
figures men in same-sex households have the highest smoking rates, followed by women in same-
sex households, men in different-sex households, and women in different-sex households.



7
    As described in Section A.1 in the Online Appendix, some of the questions on smoking in the BRFSS changed
    multiple times between 1993 and 1996, thus making it difficult to harmonize responses over this time period.
                                                                                                              9
We present descriptive statistics in Table 1 separately for women in same-sex households, women
in different-sex households, men in same-sex households, and men in different-sex households. In
line with the previous literature, Table 1 indicates that men and women in same-sex households
have substantially higher smoking rates than men and women in different-sex households. Women
in same-sex households are younger, less likely to be white, less likely to be married, and less
likely to have a bachelor's degree than women in different-sex households. Men in same-sex
households are older, less likely to be white, and less likely to be married than men in different-
sex households.
As already mentioned in Section 2.2, we present evidence in Table 2 on the relationship between
household structure and self-reported sexual orientation using data from individuals in states that
released their SOGI module to the public use file in the 2014-2018 BRFSS. For individuals
interviewed by landline in this sample, we observe both the household sex composition as well as
the individual's self-reported sexual orientation. This allows us to directly examine whether our
measure of individuals living in same-sex households has purchase for identifying samples that
likely contain non-heterosexual adults, as demonstrated previously by Carpenter et al. (2019).
Indeed, Table 2 indicates that very small shares of individuals in different-sex households ­ less
than two percent ­ identify as non-heterosexual in the SOGI data. This percentages are even
smaller when focusing on gay men and lesbian women: 0.1 percent of women in different-sex
households identify as lesbians, while 0.9 percent of men in different-sex households identify as
gay.
In contrast, fully 13.7 percent of women in same-sex households and 24.5 percent of men in same-
sex households identify as non-heterosexual, consistent with the idea that a substantial share of
individuals in same-sex households are sexual minority adults. The lower rows of Table 2 further
show the share identifying as heterosexual or non-heterosexual for individuals in same-sex
households, separately by the respondent's marital status. A very interesting pattern emerges:
among individuals in same-sex households who describe their marital status as `a member of an
unmarried couple', fully 89.6 percent of women and 68 percent of men identify as non-
heterosexual. For individuals in same-sex households who describe themselves as married, the
associated shares identifying as non-heterosexual are also very large: 58.6 percent for women and
49.2 percent for men. A considerable fraction of never married individuals in same-sex households
also identify as non-heterosexual: 15.6 percent for women and 29.1 percent for men. These patterns
suggest that household structure and household sex composition convey important information
about sexual orientation and support our investigation into the effects of state cigarette taxes on
smoking behaviors for this sample, a substantial share of which is composed of sexual minority
adults.

4.2 Estimation results
4.2.1 Main difference-in-difference estimates
Table 3 presents our baseline difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of state cigarette
taxes on smoking outcomes for women in same-sex households in the top panel and for men in

                                                                                                 10
same-sex households in the bottom panel. 8 Each column is from a separate model, and we report
the coefficient on the state excise tax on cigarettes, measured in nominal U.S. dollars. 9 Columns
1-3 present results for the daily smoker outcome, while columns 4-6 present results for the current
smoker outcome. Columns 1 and 4 present results from the basic difference-in-differences model
including only state, month, and year fixed effects. Columns 2 and 5 add controls for individual
demographic characteristics, and columns 3 and 6 add the state/time varying contextual and policy
variables.
The results in Table 3 indicate that cigarette taxes reduced smoking probability for individuals in
same-sex households. In the top panel for women in same-sex households we estimate in column
3 that a one dollar increase in cigarette taxes was associated with a 0.6 percentage point reduction
in the likelihood of being a daily smoker. In the bottom panel, for men in same-sex households we
estimate in column 3 that a one dollar increase in cigarette taxes was associated with a 1.8
percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being a daily smoker. In columns 4-6 of Table 3 we
estimate generally similar effects of cigarette taxes at reducing the likelihood of current smoking
among individuals in same-sex households, though the estimates for women in same-sex
households in the top panel of columns 4-6 of Table 3 are not statistically significant. 10

4.2.2 Robustness checks
In Table 4 we present a variety of results exploring robustness and heterogeneity in the estimated
effects of cigarette taxes on daily smoking among individuals in same-sex households. We again
present results for women in the top panel and men in the bottom panel. Each column represents a
different sample or specification change, and each entry is the coefficient on the cigarette tax from
a separate regression. We reprint the baseline estimates from column 3 of Table 3 for daily
smoking into column 1 of Table 4. In column 2 we add state-specific linear time trends. Doing so
results in smaller and statistically insignificant estimates for women in same-sex households but
returns slightly larger and statistically significant estimates for men in same-sex households. 11

8
   As reported in Table B1 in the Online Appendix, we do not find any meaningful relationship between state excise
   taxes on cigarettes and the likelihood that an individual is observed to be in a same-sex household. Furthermore,
   there is no significant relationship between cigarette taxes and the race, age, or educational level of individuals in
   same-sex households. In addition, Figure B1 in the Online Appendix shows that the share of all two-adult
   households in the BRFSS that is a same-sex household is quite stable over the time period considered in our
   empirical analysis. These patterns suggest that composition bias is unlikely to be a serious concern in our study.
9
   Our main results are also robust to adjusting cigarette taxes for inflation, an approach followed in some of the
   previous studies (Callison and Kaestner, 2014; Pesko et al., 2019). If anything, the estimated impact of cigarette
   taxes on daily smoking is even larger (Online Appendix Table B4).
10
    Online Appendix Table B2 reports estimates for the other control variables, which generally conform to
   expectations: for instance, older individuals smoke less than younger individuals, and more educated individuals
   smoke less than individuals with less education.
11
   Online Appendix Table B3 shows the results of additional robustness tests for the daily smoking outcome. For
   example, controlling for quadratic state time trends (in addition to linear state trends) does not change the finding
   that cigarette taxes significantly reduce smoking for men in same-sex households. Similarly, the main findings do
   not change when adding controls for income per capita at the state-year level, or when adding potentially
   endogenous individual level controls included in some of the previous studies (Callison and Kaestner, 2014; Pesko
   et al., 2019) such as employment status, health insurance status, and household income. Estimating models without
   sample weights returns somewhat smaller estimates of the effect of cigarette taxes on smoking among individuals
                                                                                                                      11
In column 3 we report results for the slightly longer period 1993-2018, thus adding 1993-1995
data even if the smoking questions were slightly different. Doing so has no effect on the results for
men in same-sex households but returns a slightly smaller estimate for women in same-sex
households that is no longer statistically significant. In column 4 we exclude states that have large
numbers of local jurisdictions that levy substantial local level taxes on cigarettes: Alaska, Illinois,
Massachusetts, New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia. Doing so does not change the finding that
higher taxes significantly reduce smoking among individuals in same-sex households.
In column 5 we restrict attention to individuals age 30-64 to try to narrow in on the sample for
whom the `individuals in same-sex households' measure is likely to be most strongly related to a
sexual orientation minority status. This age restriction further eliminates young people who may
be cohabiting for non-romantic purposes and older adults who may be living with a same-sex adult
child or caregiver. The results are similar to the baseline estimates, though again the estimate for
women in same-sex households is not statistically significant.
In columns 6 and 7 we show estimates from models separately estimated on the 1996-2010 period
and the 2011-2018 period, respectively. This is informative both because of the change in BRFSS
sampling that occurred with the 2011 wave, and because multiple recent papers have suggested
that cigarette taxes have `lost their bite' at reducing smoking in recent years. Indeed, we find
evidence consistent with this hypothesis: while estimates in the earlier period suggest significant
effects of cigarette taxes at reducing daily smoking among men in same-sex households, estimates
for the later period are smaller and not statistically significant. For women, we also estimate
substantial reductions in smoking associated with cigarette taxes in the 1996-2010 period in
column 6, though the estimate is not statistically significant.
Finally, in column 8 we report estimates from models that restrict attention to individuals in same-
sex households who report being never married or a member of an unmarried couple over the
period 1996-2010. Over this time range, legal access to same-sex marriage was extremely limited
in the United States, so sexual minorities individuals were more likely to be single or cohabitating
with an unmarried partner. Restricting attention to these individuals returns larger estimates of the
effects of cigarette taxes on reduced daily smoking for men, while the estimate for women is not
statistically significant. 12
Taken together, the findings in Table 4 indicate that the relationship between cigarette taxes and
daily smoking is highly robust for men in same-sex households. That the estimates for women in
same-sex households are somewhat more sensitive to these robustness and heterogeneity tests may




   in same-sex households, but the estimates remain negative and significant. Our results on daily smoking for both
   men and women in same-sex households are also robust to estimating logit or probit models (as done in Carpenter
   and Cook, 2008, Hansen et al., 2017, and suggested in Kahn-Lang and Lang, 2019).
12
   As shown in Table B4 in the Online Appendix, similar conclusions are obtained when focusing in on a sample even
   more likely to contain sexual minorities (30 to 64-year-old respondents who report being never married or a member
   of an unmarried couple between 1996 and 2010).
                                                                                                                  12
result from the pattern observed in Table 2 that being an individual in a same-sex household is a
stronger signal of a sexual orientation minority status for men than for women. 13

4.2.3 Comparing effects for individuals in same-sex households vs. different-sex households
In Table 5 we examine whether cigarette taxes reduced daily smoking among individuals in
different-sex households, which are primarily composed of heterosexual married and partnered
people. We present results for women in the top panel and men in the bottom panel. Each entry is
from a separate regression using our preferred specification with controls for individual
demographic characteristics; state, year, and month fixed effects; state and time varying economic,
demographic, and policy controls. Column 1 reprints the estimates for individuals in same-sex
households from column 3 of Table 3. Column 2 shows that higher cigarette taxes are associated
with reduced rates of smoking for both women and men in different-sex households on the order
of 0.6 and 0.4 percentage points for a dollar increase in cigarette taxes, respectively. This largely
replicates prior research that has examined the full population (see, for example, Pesko et al.,
2019).
In column 3 we present results from models that include individuals in same-sex households and
individuals in different-sex households and focuses on the interaction between the state excise
taxes on cigarettes and a dummy variable for individuals in same-sex household. The patterns in
the top panel of column 3 return no evidence that cigarette taxes had differential effects at reducing
daily smoking among women in same-sex households as compared to the associated effect on
women in different-sex households. In contrast, the results in the bottom panel of column 3 of
Table 5 indicate that cigarette taxes were differentially effective at reducing daily smoking among
men in same-sex households compared to the associated effects for men in different-sex
households: the interaction coefficient indicates that a one dollar increase in state cigarette taxes
was 0.9 percentage points more effective at reducing smoking among men in same-sex households
than among men in different-sex households. This suggests that in the absence of higher cigarette
taxes, the disparity in adult smoking rates between sexual minority men and heterosexual men
would have been even larger.
Columns 4 and 5 repeat the same exercise as in columns 2 and 3, but instead of using individuals
in different-sex households as the comparison group for individuals in same-sex households, we
use all individuals regardless of household structure as the comparison group for individuals in
same-sex households. It is worth remembering that the overwhelming majority of individuals

13
     We do not find any evidence of nonlinearities in the impact of cigarette taxes (Table B4 of the Online Appendix).
     In the same table we consider an alternative outcome variable (an indicator variable for having tried to quit smoking
     in the past month) and find evidence that cigarette taxes significantly increased the likelihood of trying to quit
     smoking for women in same-sex households. We also dropped each state one at a time in Online Appendix Table
     B5 and found that no individual state is driving the main results reported in Table 3. In addition, in Figures B2 and
     B3 of the Online Appendix we show event study estimates of the effect of large tax changes, following Callison
     and Kaestner (2014) and Pesko et al. (2019). Neither event study suggests that differential pre-trends are a serious
     concern in this context. In line with the estimates in Table 3, the evidence for a significant effect of cigarette tax
     hikes at reducing smoking is stronger for men in same-sex households than for women in same-sex households also
     when looking at these event studies.
                                                                                                                        13
identified as heterosexual (see Table 2). The patterns in columns 4 and 5 are very similar to those
reported in columns 2 and 3 of Table 5 and again indicate that cigarette taxes were differentially
effective at reducing daily smoking among men in same-sex households.
Columns 6 and 7 confirm that the same basic pattern also holds when we examine current smoking
instead of daily smoking: a one dollar increase in cigarette taxes is associated with a statistically
significant 1.1 to 1.2 percentage point reduction in the likelihood of being a current smoker for
men in same-sex households compared to men in different-sex households.

4.2.3 Self-identified sexual minorities (2014-2018)
Finally, we turn to evidence using individual-level self-reports of a non-heterosexual identity from
the 2014-2018 BRFSS sample of individuals in states that administered the sexual orientation and
gender identity (SOGI) module and released this microdata to the public use file. The number of
states in the sample varies across years: 35 states participated at some point between 2014 to 2018.
We present descriptive statistics on this pooled sample in Online Appendix Table B6 (the format
of which follows Table 1). Column 1 presents means for heterosexual women, column 2 presents
means for non-heterosexual women, column 3 presents means for heterosexual men, and column
4 presents means for non-heterosexual men. Notably, the patterns by self-reported sexual
orientation in Online Appendix Table B6 are qualitatively very similar to those in Table 1 using
the measure of same-sex households that allow us to go back much further in time (1996 compared
to 2014). In particular, we continue to find that self-identified sexual minorities have higher current
and daily smoking rates than heterosexual adults.
In Table 6 we present the difference-in-differences estimates of the effects of cigarette taxes on
current and daily smoking probabilities for self-reported non-heterosexual and heterosexual adults
for the 2014-2018 period. To match the earlier analyses, we restrict attention to individuals who
were interviewed via landlines. We present results for women in the top panel and results for men
in the bottom panel, and we present results for the daily smoker outcome in columns 1-2 and for
the current smoker outcome in columns 3-4. Each entry in Table 6 is from a separate regression
with all the individual and state controls, plus state and time fixed effects.
The results in Table 6 do not consistently indicate that cigarette taxes significantly reduced
smoking among self-identified non heterosexual individuals. Although we find that cigarette taxes
are estimated to have significantly reduced smoking among self-identified non-heterosexual
women in the top panel of column 3 of Table 6, its magnitude is implausibly large. Moreover, we
do not find a similar significant reduction in daily smoking for self-identified non-heterosexual
women in column 2. 14 The bottom panel of Table 6 indicates that the relationship between cigarette

14
     In Online Appendix Table B7 we also show that the significant association between cigarette taxes and smoking
     among self-identified non-heterosexual women is not robust to focusing only on women in states that provided
     SOGI data in three, four or all five years from 2014-2018. Online Appendix Table B8 also shows that this result is
     not robust to adding the cellphone interviews back into the sample or to restricting attention to self-identified non-
     heterosexual women who also reported they were in a same-sex household (to match the sample restriction in the
     analyses from 1996-2018). Additionally, none of the robustness exercises in Online Appendix Tables B7 or B8
     indicate that cigarette taxes significantly reduced smoking among self-identified non-heterosexual men.
                                                                                                                        14
taxes and smoking among self-identified non-heterosexual men is very small and not statistically
significant for both the daily smoker outcome and the current smoker outcome. Finally, columns
2 and 4 Table 6 shows that these patterns are not appreciably different for self-identified
heterosexual individuals from 2014 to 2018. Taken together, the results in Table 6 are consistent
with the null findings in column 7 of Table 4 which showed that cigarette taxes were not effective
at reducing smoking among men or women in same-sex households over the period from 2011 to
2018. As already mentioned, this is consistent with prior work suggesting that cigarette taxes have
become less effective in more recent periods (Hansen et al. 2017, Callison and Kaestner 2014).

5. Discussion and Conclusion
In this paper, we contribute to a large literature in health economics that has examined whether
state excise taxes on cigarettes are significantly related to lower rates of smoking. Prior research
has examined these effects for the general adult population, youths, older individuals, pregnant
women, and racial and ethnic minorities. Our paper provides the first credible evidence on the
effects of cigarette taxes on smoking among sexual minority adults and suggests that taxes were
effective at reducing daily smoking among women and men in same-sex households from 1996-
2018. Results for men are particularly robust and indicate that a one dollar increase in state
cigarette taxes was associated with approximately a 1.8 percentage point reduction in the
likelihood of daily smoking, controlling for additional smoking policies, other LGBT-related
policies, a host of individual characteristics, as well as state, year, and month fixed effects.
Moreover, we find that cigarette tax hikes over this period were differentially more effective at
reducing smoking among men in same-sex households as compared to men in different-sex
households. This finding suggests that the substantial sexual orientation-related disparity in
smoking would have been even larger in the absence of stricter tobacco controls over the period.
This finding is particularly novel and is consistent with a large body of prior work that gay men
have lower earnings and higher educational attainment than similarly situated heterosexual men.
Their lower earnings may indicate that taxes constitute a larger share of income for gay men
compared to heterosexual men, which may contribute to the increased responsiveness of smoking
to cigarette taxes for men in same-sex households as compared to men in different-sex households.
Similarly, more education may indicate that sexual minorities are able to better understand the
adverse health consequences of smoking that are signaled by higher taxes, again contributing to
their increased responsiveness to cigarette taxes. In addition, given the higher smoking rates among
sexual minorities, it is possible that compliers ­ i.e., individuals who would reduce or stop smoking
following an increase in cigarette taxes ­ represented a larger share of non-heterosexual
respondents.
When we focus on individuals in same-sex households only in more recent years (2011-2018), as
well as when we examine individual level data on sexual orientation from 2014 to 2018 for a select
sample of states, we do not find evidence that higher cigarette taxes reduced smoking. These results
are consistent with the idea that cigarette taxes are no longer an effective health policy tool.
Different underlying channels could explain these results. First, there is evidence that the gay

                                                                                                   15
earnings differential is disappearing (Clarke and Sevak, 2013; Carpenter and Eppink, 2017), thus
sexual minorities may have become less responsive to prices. Second, recent legislative reforms,
such as the legalization of same-sex marriage, could have increased mental health among sexual
minorities and reduced the need of smoking as a coping mechanism. However, we do not find any
significant impact of cigarette taxes for heterosexual respondents. Therefore, the likely explanation
is that in most cases the individuals who still smoke, both heterosexuals and non-heterosexuals,
are hard-core smokers who are not responsive to cigarette tax hikes.
These findings are subject to some notable limitations. First, like the vast majority of prior work
in this area, we rely on self-reported smoking outcomes and self-reported information to identify
sexual minority status (or proxies for sexual minority status). Second, our measure of respondent
sex and household sex composition is a stronger proxy for non-heterosexual identity for men than
for women, which may explain why our results for women in same-sex households are smaller
and less robust than the results for men in same-sex households.
Despite these limitations, our work represents the first evidence using credible within-state
variation in cigarette taxes to understand how smoking among sexual minority populations
responds to stricter tobacco controls. In fact, our paper represents more generally some of the first
evidence on how population-targeted health policies such as tobacco control may have differential
effects on sexual minority populations compared to heterosexual populations. A large literature in
health economics has asked whether policies such as the Affordable Care Act or welfare reform
have had measurably different effects on demographically identifiable groups such as racial and
ethnic minorities as compared to whites, or women as compared to men (Bitler et al., 2003;
Buchmueller et al., 2016). Our paper represents one of the first steps toward making the case that
sexual orientation is another demographic characteristic on which we may expect differential
effects of public policies. Future work should use these and other data to consider other contexts
where economic theory may predict differential effects of public policies on health behaviors and
health outcomes by sexual minority status.




                                                                                                   16
References
Aksoy, C.G., Carpenter, C.S., Frank, J., Huffman, M.L., 2019. Gay Glass Ceilings: Sexual Orientation and Workplace
      Authority in the UK. J. Econ. Behav. Organ. 159, 167­180.
Angrist, J.D., Pischke, J.S., 2014. Mastering 'Metrics. Princeton University Press.
Angrist, J.D., Pischke, J.S., 2009. Mostly Harmless Econometrics: An Empiricist's Companion. Princeton University
      Press.
Bertrand, M., Duflo, E., Mullainathan, S., 2004. How Much Should We Trust Difference-In-Difference Estimates? Q.
      J. Econ. 119, 249­275.
Bitler, M.P., Gelbach, J.B., Hoynes, H.W., 2003. Some evidence on race, welfare reform, and household income, in:
      American Economic Review. pp. 293­298.
Black, D.A., Sanders, S.G., Taylor, L.J., 2007. The economics of lesbian and gay families. J. Econ. Perspect. 21, 53­
      70.
Buchmueller, T., Carpenter, C.S., 2010. Disparities in health insurance coverage, access, and outcomes for individuals
      in same-sex versus different-sex relationships, 2000-2007. Am. J. Public Health 100, 489­495.
Buchmueller, T.C., Levinson, Z.M., Levy, H.G., Wolfe, B.L., 2016. Effect of the Affordable Care Act on Racial and
      Ethnic Disparities in Health Insurance Coverage. Am. J. Public Health 106, 1416­21.
Callison, K., Kaestner, R., 2014. Do Higher Tobacco Taxes Reduce Adult Smoking? New Evidence of the Effect of
      Recent Cigarette Tax Increases on Adult Smoking. Econ. Inq. 52, 155­172.
Carpenter, C.S., 2009. Sexual orientation and outcomes in college. Econ. Educ. Rev. 28, 693­703.
Carpenter, C.S., 2007. Revisiting the income penalty for behaviorally gay men: Evidence from NHANES III. Labour
      Econ. 14, 25­34.
Carpenter, C.S., 2004. New evidence on gay and lesbian household incomes. Contemp. Econ. Policy 22, 78­94.
Carpenter, C.S., Cook, P.J., 2008. Cigarette taxes and youth smoking: New evidence from national, state, and local
      Youth Risk Behavior Surveys. J. Health Econ. 27, 287­299.
Carpenter, C.S., Eppink, S.T., 2017. Does It Get Better? Recent Estimates of Sexual Orientation and Earnings in the
      United States. South. Econ. J. 84, 426­441.
Carpenter, C.S., Eppink, S.T., Gonzales, G., 2019. Transgender Status, Gender Identity, and Socioeconomic Outcomes
      in the United States. Work. Pap.
Carpenter, C.S., Eppink, S.T., Gonzales, G.J., McKay, T., 2018. Effects of Access To Legal Same-Sex Marriage on
       Marriage and Health: Evidence from BRFSS. NBER Work. Pap. Ser. 24651.
CDC, 2018a. Tobacco Product Use Among Adults: United States, 2017. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep. 67, 1­8.
CDC, 2018b. HIV and Gay and Bisexual Men. CDC Fact Sheet September, 1­2.
Chaloupka, F.J., Wechsler, H., 1997. Price, tobacco control policies and smoking among young adults. J. Health Econ.
       16, 359­373.
Clarke, G., Sevak, P., 2013. The disappearing gay income penalty. Econ. Lett. 121, 542­545.
Colman, G., Grossman, M., Joyce, T., 2003. The effect of cigarette excise taxes on smoking before, during and after
       pregnancy. J. Health Econ. 22, 1053­1072.
Cotti, C., Nesson, E., Tefft, N., 2016. The effects of tobacco control policies on tobacco products, tar, and nicotine
       purchases among adults: Evidence from household panel data. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 8, 103­123.
Courtemanche, C., Feng, B., 2020. Can Cigarette Taxes Still Reduce Teen Smoking? Work. Pap.
DeCicca, P., Kenkel, D., Mathios, A., 2002. Putting out the fires: Will higher taxes reduce the onset of youth smoking?
       J. Polit. Econ. 110, 144­169.
DeCicca, P., McLeod, L., 2008. Cigarette taxes and older adult smoking: Evidence from recent large tax increases. J.
       Health Econ. 27, 918­929.
Dewan, S., 2009. States Look at Tobacco to Balance the Budget. New York Times.
Dilley, J.A., Spigner, C., Boysun, M.J., Dent, C.W., Pizacani, B.A., 2008. Does tobacco industry marketing
       excessively impact lesbian, gay and bisexual communities? Tob. Control 17, 385­390.
Drydakis, N., 2009. Sexual orientation discrimination in the labour market. Labour Econ. 16, 364­372.
Farrelly, M.C., Bray, J.W., Pechacek, T., Woollery, T., 2001. Response by Adults to Increases in Cigarette Prices by
       Sociodemographic Characteristics. South. Econ. J. 68, 156.
Franks, P., Jerant, A.F., Leigh, J.P., Lee, D., Chiem, A., Lewis, I., Lee, S., 2007. Cigarette Prices, Smoking, and the
       Poor: Implications of Recent Trends. Am. J. Public Health 97, 1873­1877.
Gallet, C.A., List, J.A., 2003. Cigarette demand: a meta-analysis of elasticities. Health Econ. 12, 821­835.
Geijtenbeek, L., Plug, E., 2018. Is there a penalty for registered women? Is there a premium for registered men?
       Evidence from a sample of transsexual workers. Eur. Econ. Rev. 109, 334­347.
Goldin, J., Homonoff, T., 2013. Smoke Gets in Your Eyes: Cigarette Tax Salience and Regressivity. Am. Econ. J.

                                                                                                                    17
      Econ. Policy 5, 302­336.
Gonzales, G., Blewett, L.A., 2014. National and state-specific health insurance disparities for adults in same-sex
      relationships. Am. J. Public Health 104, 95­105.
Gruber, J., Köszegi, B., 2001. Is Addiction "Rational"? Theory and Evidence. Q. J. Econ. 116, 1261­1303.
Hansen, B., Sabia, J.J., Rees, D.I., 2017. Have Cigarette Taxes Lost Their Bite? New Estimates of the Relationship
      between Cigarette Taxes and Youth Smoking. Am. J. Heal. Econ. 3, 60­75.
Harding, M., Leibtag, E., Lovenheim, M.F., 2012. The Heterogeneous Geographic and Socioeconomic Incidence of
      Cigarette Taxes: Evidence from Nielsen Homescan Data. Am. Econ. J. Econ. Policy 4, 169­198.
Kahn-Lang, A., Lang, K., 2019. The Promise and Pitfalls of Differences-in-Differences: Reflections on `16 and
      Pregnant' and Other Applications. J. Bus. Econ. Stat. Accepted.
Lien, D.S., Evans, W.N., 2005. Estimating the impact of large cigarette tax hikes: The case of maternal smoking and
      infant birth weight. J. Hum. Resour. 40, 373­392.
MacLean, J.C., Kessler, A.S., Kenkel, D.S., 2016. Cigarette Taxes and Older Adult Smoking: Evidence from the
      Health and Retirement Study. Health Econ. 25, 424­438.
Meyer, I.H., 1995. Minority Stress and Mental Health in Gay Men. J. Health Soc. Behav. 36, 38.
Nesson, E., 2017. Heterogeneity in Smokers' Responses to Tobacco Control Policies. Health Econ. 26, 206­225.
Pesko, M.F., Courtemanche, C.J., Maclean, J.C., 2019. The Effects of Traditional Cigarette and E-Cigarette Taxes on
      Adult Tobacco Product Use. NBER Work. Pap. 26017.
Pierannunzi, C., Town, M., Garvin, W., Shaw, F.E., Balluz, L., 2012. Methodologic Changes in the Behavioral Risk
      Factor Surveillance System in 2011 and Potential Effects on Prevalence Estimates. Morb. Mortal. Wkly. Rep.
      61, 410­413.
Plug, E., Berkhout, P., 2004. Effects of sexual preferences on earnings in the Netherlands. J. Popul. Econ. 17, 117­
      131.
Remler, D.K., 2004. Poor Smokers, Poor Quitters, and Cigarette Tax Regressivity. Am. J. Public Health 94, 225­229.
Ringel, J.S., Evans, W.N., 2001. Cigarette Taxes and Smoking During Pregnancy. Am. J. Public Health 91, 1851­
      1856.
Sansone, D., 2019a. LGBT students: new evidence on demographics and educational outcomes. Econ. Educ. Rev.
      Accepted.
Sansone, D., 2019b. Pink Work: Same-Sex Marriage, Employment and Discrimination. J. Public Econ. Accepted.
Simon, D., 2016. Does Early Life Exposure to Cigarette Smoke Permanently Harm Childhood Welfare? Evidence
      from Cigarette Tax Hikes. Am. Econ. J. Appl. Econ. 8, 128­159.
Simon, K., Soni, A., Cawley, J., 2017. Affordable Care Act. The Impact of Health Insurance on Preventive Care and
      Health Behaviors: Evidence From the First Two Years of the ACA Medicaid Expansions. J. Policy Anal. Manag.
      36, 390­417.
Thomas, S., Fayter, D., Misso, K., Ogilvie, D., Petticrew, M., Sowden, A., Whitehead, M., Worthy, G., 2008.
      Population tobacco control interventions and their effects on social inequalities in smoking: Systematic review.
      Tob. Control 17, 230­237.
Tilcsik, A., 2011. Pride and Prejudice: Employment Discrimination against Openly Gay Men in the United States.
      Am. J. Sociol. 117, 586­626.
Weichselbaumer, D., 2003. Sexual orientation discrimination in hiring. Labour Econ. 10, 629­642.




                                                                                                                   18
Figure 1: Rates of daily smoking, by sex and whether in a same-sex household.




                     .3
                     .25
              Daily smoker
              .15    .1.2
                     .05




                               1990        2000                    2010                     2020
                                                       Wave

                                          Men in SSH               Women in SSH
                                          Men in DSH               Women in DSH



             Source: BRFSS 1993-2018. Weighted means. Respondents younger than 25 have been excluded.

Figure 2: Rates of current smoking, by sex and whether in a same-sex household.
                     .4   .3
              Current smoker
              .2     .1




                               1990        2000                    2010                     2020
                                                       Wave

                                          Men in SSH               Women in SSH
                                          Men in DSH               Women in DSH



             Current smokers include both daily and occasional smokers. Source: BRFSS 1993-2018. Weighted means.
             Respondents younger than 25 have been excluded.




                                                                                                                   19
  Table 1: Descriptive statistics.
                                                    Women                                              Men
                                       Same-sex          Different-sex                  Same-sex             Different-sex
                                      households          households                   households             households
                                          (1)                 (2)                          (3)                    (4)
Cigarette tax (in $)                     0.973               0.918                        0.918                  0.899
Current smoker                           0.224               0.157                        0.306                  0.186
Daily smoker                             0.172               0.120                        0.228                  0.142
Below age 40                             0.252               0.340                        0.400                  0.325
White                                    0.687               0.853                        0.759                  0.835
Black                                    0.224               0.070                        0.123                  0.076
Hispanic                                 0.118               0.091                        0.124                  0.091
Married                                  0.061               0.869                        0.140                  0.881
Member of unmarried couple               0.049               0.029                        0.110                  0.029
Never married                            0.303               0.026                        0.405                  0.040
High school degree or GED                0.289               0.291                        0.272                  0.276
Some college                             0.282               0.277                        0.259                  0.245
Bachelor's degree or more                0.282               0.336                        0.351                  0.377
N                                       143,455            1,752,290                     57,511                1,337,016

Weighted means. Sample size (N) refers to the total number of respondents in the relevant sub-group. Respondents younger than 25
have been excluded. Source: BRFSS 1996-2018.




                                                                                                                           20
Table 2: Household structure, sexual orientation, and marital status.
                                                      Women                                      Men
     Sample             Subgroup          Heterosexual Non-heterosexual              Heterosexual Non-heterosexual
   All landline            All               97.3%              2.7%                    96.7%            3.3%
   respondents                              295,254            7,066                   174,150          6,190
   Different-sex            All              98.5%              1.5%                    98.0%            2.0%
    household                               125,360            1,558                    95,747          1,098
                                          Of which lesbian: 0.1% (147 obs)            Of which gay: 0.9% (224 obs)
    Same-sex                All              86.3%             13.7%                    75.5%           24.5%
    household                                9,772             1,508                     3,020          1,294
                         Married             41.4%             58.6%                    50.8%           49.2%
                                              436                633                      401             556
                     Member of an            10.4%             89.6%                    32.0%           68.0%
                    unmarried couple           73                295                       34             327
                     Never Married           84.4%             15.6%                    70.9%           29.1%
                                             2,412               299                      875             299
                        Divorced             97.7%              2.3%                    92.8%            7.2%
                                             3,144               168                      872              79
                        Widowed              98.6%              1.4%                    99.2%            0.8%
                                             3,253                76                      690              13
                        Separated            96.2%              3.8%                    96.6%            3.4%
                                              388                 23                      129              8
                         Refused             82.3%             17.7%                    70.6%           29.4%
                                               66                 14                       19              12

  Weighted means and raw sample sizes. Source: BRFSS 2014-2018. This sample include all relevant respondents (age 25+)
  from states that administered the SOGI module at least once and released data to the BRFSS public use file. Non-
  heterosexual includes respondents whose reported sexual orientation was lesbian, gay, bisexual or other. Only respondents
  from landline (not mobile phones) interviews have been considered.




                                                                                                                              21
Table 3: Cigarette taxes reduced smoking among men and women in same-sex households.
                                                    Daily smoker                           Current smoker
                                            (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)         (5)      (6)
    Women in same-sex households
    Cigarette tax                          -0.004      -0.004      -0.006**        -0.002      -0.002       -0.004
                                          (0.003)     (0.002)      (0.003)        (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.004)
    N                                     141,517     141,517      141,517        141,517     141,517      141,517
    Mean of dependent variable             0.165       0.165        0.165          0.218       0.218        0.218
    Adjusted R-squared                     0.013       0.077        0.077          0.010       0.084        0.084

    Men in same-sex households
    Cigarette tax                        -0.014***    -0.012**     -0.018***     -0.016***    -0.014***    -0.019***
                                          (0.004)     (0.004)       (0.006)       (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.005)
    N                                     56,807       56,807       56,807        56,807       56,807       56,807
    Mean of dependent variable             0.208       0.208         0.208         0.274        0.274        0.274
    Adjusted R-squared                     0.015       0.077         0.078         0.015        0.074        0.075

    Controls for:
    State, month, and year FE                X           X            X              X            X            X
    Individual controls                                  X            X                           X            X
    State time-varying controls                                       X                                        X

    Sample: individuals in same-sex households (respondent's age 25+). All specifications include state, year, and
    month fixed effects, as well as an indicator equal to one if respondent was interviewed after 2010. Individual
    controls: education, age, race, and ethnicity. State policies and controls: bans on same-sex marriage, same-sex
    marriage legalization, domestic partnership, civil union, LGBT anti-discrimination laws, LGBT hate crime laws,
    sodomy laws, smoking bans in non-hospitality workplaces, restaurants, and bars, tobacco 21 laws, Medicaid pre-
    expansion, ACA expansion, Medicaid private option, population, and unemployment rate. Standard errors clustered
    at the state level in parentheses. Since it was not possible to identify same-sex households among respondents
    interviewed through mobile phones, only individuals interviewed by landlines are included in these analyses.
    Weighted regressions. Source: BRFSS 1996-2018. All estimated coefficients for the controls in columns 3 and 6 are
    reported in Table B2 in the Online Appendix. * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                                                        22
      Table 4: Cigarette tax effects on daily smoking. Robustness and heterogeneity.
                                       Baseline Table       Add linear state      1993-2018       Drop states with       Only 30 to       1996-2010        2011-2018        Only never married
                                        3, Column 6          time trends                          high local taxes       64-year-old                                         or member of an
                                                                                                                                                                            unmarried couple,
                                                                                                                                                                                1996-2010
                                              (1)                  (2)                (3)                (4)                  (5)              (6)             (7)                 (8)
Women in same-sex households
Cigarette tax                              -0.006**              -0.004             -0.005            -0.010***             -0.005           -0.007           0.007                 -0.009
                                           (0.003)              (0.005)            (0.003)             (0.004)             (0.004)          (0.006)          (0.006)               (0.012)
N                                          141,517              141,517            147,414            128,322              92,881           88,988           52,529                29,765
Mean of dependent variable                  0.165                 0.165             0.168               0.165                0.197            0.185           0.132                 0.169
Adjusted R-squared                          0.077                 0.078             0.078               0.081                0.071            0.076           0.073                 0.065

Men in same-sex households
Cigarette tax                              -0.018***            -0.021***          -0.017***          -0.020***           -0.028***        -0.023***          -0.013              -0.044***
                                            (0.006)              (0.007)            (0.006)            (0.007)             (0.007)          (0.009)          (0.022)               (0.015)
N                                           56,807               56,807             59,924             51,183              38,933           37,779           19,028                17,926
Mean of dependent variable                   0.208                0.208              0.211              0.208               0.236            0.226            0.170                 0.215
Adjusted R-squared                           0.078                0.079              0.078              0.079               0.074            0.077            0.082                 0.064

Controls for:
State, month, and year FE                      X                    X                  X                  X                   X                X                X                     X
Individual controls                            X                    X                  X                  X                   X                X                X                     X
State time-varying controls                    X                    X                  X                  X                   X                X                X                     X

Sample: individuals in same-sex households (respondent's age 25+, 30-64 in Column 5). Same standard errors, state, year, and month fixed effects, individual controls, state policies and controls
as Table 3. Column 2 includes state-specific linear time trends. Column 4 exclude states with the highest local taxes (Alaska, Illinois, New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia). Column 8 includes
only individuals in a same-sex household who were never married or were a member of an unmarried couple. Weighted regressions. Source: BRFSS 1996-2018 (Columns 1-2, 4-5), 1993-2018
(Column 3), 1996-2010 (Columns 6 and 8), 2011-2018 (Column 7). * p < 0.10, ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                                                                                                                             23
Table 5: Cigarette taxes were more effective at reducing smoking among men in same-sex households (SSH) than among men in
different-sex households (DSH).
                                                                                        Daily smoker                                                 Current smoker
                                                           (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)             (5)                 (6)            (7)
      Sample is individuals in                        SSH (Table 3,          DSH        SSH vs. DSH             All         SSH vs. All         SSH vs. DSH SSH vs. All
                                                       Column 3)                                            individuals     individuals                        individuals
      Women
      Cigarette tax                                       -0.006**         -0.006***            --           -0.006***           --                   --                --
                                                          (0.003)           (0.001)                           (0.001)
      Cigarette tax * In a same-sex household                --                --            0.001               --            -0.0001              0.005             0.004
                                                                                            (0.003)                           (0.0026)             (0.003)           (0.003)
      N                                                   141,517         1,732,820        1,874,337        3,776,544        3,776,544            1,874,337         3,776,544
      Mean of dependent variable                           0.165            0.108            0.112            0.123             0.123               0.148             0.163
      Adjusted R-squared                                   0.077            0.070            0.072            0.067             0.068               0.077             0.072

      Men
      Cigarette tax                                       -0.018***        -0.004**             --           -0.004***           --                   --                --
                                                           (0.006)         (0.001)                            (0.001)
      Cigarette tax * In a same-sex household                 --              --            -0.009**             --           -0.008**            -0.012***         -0.011***
                                                                                            (0.004)                           (0.004)              (0.003)           (0.004)
      N                                                    56,807         1,321,561        1,378,368        2,320,809        2,320,809            1,378,368         2,320,809
      Mean of dependent variable                           0.208            0.117            0.121            0.142            0.142                0.158             0.185
      Adjusted R-squared                                   0.078            0.076            0.079            0.072            0.073                0.087             0.081

      Controls for:
      State, month, and year FE                               X                X                                 X
      Individual controls                                     X                X                X                X               X                    X                 X
      State time-varying controls                             X                X                                 X
      State-year, state-SSH, and year-SSH FE                                                    X                                X                    X                 X

      Sample: individuals (age 25+) in same-sex households (Column 1); individuals in different-sex households (Column 2); individuals in same-sex and different sex
      households (Columns 3 and 6); all landline respondents, also those not in a 2-adult household (Columns 4-5 and 7). Same standard errors, state, year, and month
      fixed effects, individual controls, state policies and controls as Table 3. The triple-difference models in columns 3 and 5-7 include all time-state, time-SSH, and state-
      SSH double interactions, so the coefficient of cigarette tax is omitted because of perfect collinearity. Weighted regressions. Source: BRFSS 1996-2018. * p < 0.10,
      ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                                                                                                                   24
Table 6: Cigarette tax effects among heterosexual and non-heterosexual individuals, 2014-
2018 (selected states).
                                                Daily smoker                              Current smoker
                                             (1)             (2)                        (3)              (4)
     Sample is                         Non-heterosexual Heterosexual              Non-heterosexual Heterosexual
     Women
     Cigarette tax                           -0.059              0.001                 -0.081**             -0.008*
                                            (0.043)             (0.005)                (0.037)              (0.005)
     N                                       6,979              292,715                 6,979               292,715
     Mean of dependent variable              0.136               0.088                  0.184                0.121
     Adjusted R-squared                      0.487               0.058                  0.453                0.063

     Men
     Cigarette tax                          0.00008              0.007                   -0.011              0.007
                                           (0.01967)            (0.005)                 (0.027)             (0.006)
     N                                       6,129              172,679                  6,129              172,679
     Mean of dependent variable              0.139               0.098                   0.190               0.131
     Adjusted R-squared                      0.242               0.065                   0.233               0.077

     Controls for:
     State, month, and year FE                 X                    X                      X                   X
     Individual controls                       X                    X                      X                   X
     State time-varying controls               X                    X                      X                   X

     Sample respondents (age 25+) whose reported sexual orientation is lesbian, gay, bisexual or other has been counted
     as non-heterosexual, while respondents whose reported sexual orientation is straight has been counted as
     heterosexual. Columns 1 and 3 include all non-heterosexual individuals in any state and year that released SOGI
     data to the public-use BRFSS. Columns 2 and 4 include all heterosexual individuals in any state and year that
     released SOGI data to public-use BRFSS. Same standard errors, state, year, and month fixed effects, individual
     controls, state policies and controls as Table 3. As in Table 3, only respondents from landline (not mobile phones)
     interviews have been considered. Weighted regressions. Source: BRFSS 2014-2018 (selected states). * p < 0.10, **
     p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01




                                                                                                                           25
