                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      THE EMPLOYMENT EFFECTS OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY EARNINGS TEST

                                      Alexander M. Gelber
                                         Damon Jones
                                        Daniel W. Sacks
                                           Jae Song

                                       Working Paper 26696
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26696


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




This research was supported by the U.S. Social Security Administration (SSA) through grant
#RRC08098400-09 to the National Bureau of Economic Research as part of the SSA Retirement
Research Consortium, as well as by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. This research was completed
partly while Gelber was on leave at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, partly
funded by a grant from the Alfred P. Sloan foundation. We thank Gary Engelhardt as well as
seminar participants at SSA and the Retirement Research Consortium for comments, and we
thank Jeff Shrader for sharing his code for two-sample two-stage least squares. The findings and
conclusions expressed are solely those of the author(s) and do not represent the views of SSA,
any agency of the Federal Government, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26696.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alexander M. Gelber, Damon Jones, Daniel W. Sacks, and Jae Song. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Employment Effects of the Social Security Earnings Test
Alexander M. Gelber, Damon Jones, Daniel W. Sacks, and Jae Song
NBER Working Paper No. 26696
January 2020
JEL No. H55,J22,J26

                                         ABSTRACT

We investigate the impact of the Social Security Annual Earnings Test (AET) on the employment
decisions of older Americans. The AET reduces Social Security benefits by one dollar for every
two dollars earned above the exempt amount. Using a differences-in-differences design, we find
that the employment rate of those predicted to become subject to the AET decreases substantially
relative to those not predicted to become subject to it. The point estimates suggest that the AET
reduces the employment rate of Americans aged 63-64 by at least 1.2 percentage points.


Alexander M. Gelber                             Daniel W. Sacks
Department of Economics                         Kelly School of Business
University of California at San Diego           Indiana University
9500 Gilman Dr.                                 1309 E. 10th Street
San Diego, CA 92093                             Bloomington, IN 47405
and NBER                                        dansacks@indiana.edu
gelber@gmail.com
                                                Jae Song
Damon Jones                                     Social Security Administration
Harris School of Public Policy                  Office of Disability Adjudication
University of Chicago                           and Review
1155 East 60th Street                           5107 Leesburg Pike, Suite 1400
Chicago, IL 60637                               Falls Church, VA 22041
and NBER                                        jae.song@ssa.gov
damonjones@uchicago.edu
I. Introduction

         As the economy-wide employment-to-population ratio has fallen by around four

percentage points since its peak in 2000, many policy makers are interested in ways to affect

employment rates (Abraham and Kearney, 2017). For older Americans, the Social Security

Annual Earnings Test (AET) has a large effect on Social Security Old Age and Survivor

Insurance (OASI) benefits and could therefore affect employment substantially. The AET

reduces OASI claimants' current OASI benefits as a proportion of earnings, once a claimant

earns in excess of an exempt amount. For example, for OASI claimants aged 62 to 65 in 2018,

current OASI benefits are reduced by 50 cents for every extra dollar earned above $17,040. The

bite of the AET can be substantial. For example, we estimate that in 2003--the last year for

which we have the relevant data--the AET reduced the current OASI benefits of 538,000

individuals. The AET reduced their benefits by over half on average (51.4 percent), or $4.3

billion in aggregate.1

         This large benefit reduction rate may reduce OASI claimants' incentives for additional

work. Indeed, the AET is a leading candidate in helping to explain the upward spike in the

hazard of retirement at age 62 (Gruber and Wise 1999). The importance of the AET is now

increasing as the Normal Retirement Age (NRA) gradually rises from 65 for those born in 1937

and earlier, to 67 for those born in 1960 and later, exposing more OASI claimants to the AET,

which does not apply to older ages.




1
  If earnings and/or employment are reduced by the AET, then the calculated reduction in benefits reflects a lower
bound on the reduction in current benefits we would hypothetically observe if earnings and employment were inert
in response to the AET. Thus, this strengthens our case that the AET substantially affects current OASI benefits. As
discussed below, when current OASI benefits are reduced due to the AET, future benefits are typically enhanced;
however, our point here is simply that the AET greatly affects benefits, at least in their timing, and therefore has
important potential implications.


                                                         2
         The prior literature on the AET has tended to focus on the policy's intensive margin

effect, i.e. the choice of how much to earn, given that an individual earns a positive amount (e.g.

Burtless and Moffitt, 1985; Friedberg, 1998; Friedberg, 2000; Song and Manchester, 2007;

Gelber et al., 2013; Engelhardt and Kumar 2009; Engelhardt and Kumar 2014). For example, the

AET could reduce the incentive for additional earnings above the exempt amount and cause an

individual to choose part-time work rather than full-time work. This literature generally finds

moderate substitution elasticities at the intensive margin with respect to the AET. However,

nearly all prior studies find little evidence of extensive margin responses, i.e. little evidence that

older workers respond to the AET on the margin of whether to work or not. The earlier empirical

literature on the AET largely concludes that the policy has little meaningful effect on the labor

supply of older men (Viscusi 1979; Burtless and Moffit 1985; Gustman and Steinmeier 1985;

Vroman 1985; Honig and Reimers 1996; Leonesio 1990).

         More recently, researchers have examined the effect of the AET on employment

decisions using a difference-in-differences framework to study the effects of the year 2000

elimination of the AET for those over the NRA, comparing the evolution of employment rates of

those over vs. under the NRA. Using this design, several studies find little evidence for an effect

on the employment rate (Gruber and Orszag, 2003; Song, 2003; Song and Manchester, 2007;

Haider and Loughran, 2008), while Friedberg and Webb (2009) find significant but modest

effects in some specifications in Current Population Survey data.2

         In this paper, we revisit the effects of the AET on the employment rate of older workers


2
  Examining the effects of earnings tests in other countries using difference-in-differences designs, Baker and
Benjamin (1999) find a significant effect of the Canadian earnings test on weeks worked per year but no significant
effect on employment at some point during the year, and Disney and Smith (2002) find inconclusive evidence on the
impact of the U.K. earnings test on the employment rate. French (2005) uses method of simulated moments in a
lifecycle model to estimate the effects of health, wealth (including all forms of pension wealth, not just incentives
created by the AET), and wages on labor supply and retirement; simulations based on these estimates imply that
eliminating the AET would cause individuals to retire later on average.


                                                         3
using administrative data and a different methodological approach. We propose a new strategy

for investigating the effects of the AET on the employment rate by examining how employment

outcomes vary with the change in the perceived incentive to work that occurs when one earns

above the AET exempt amount. At this exempt amount the perceived incentives to work change

notably due to the AET and could therefore reduce employment among those affected in this

population. Using a differences-in-differences design, we compare employment rates subsequent

to reaching the Social Security retirement age of those with predicted earnings above and below

the AET exempt amount, who form the "treatment" and "control" groups, respectively. We

implement this design using earnings histories derived from Social Security Administration

(SSA) data on a 1 percent random sample of the U.S. population in birth cohorts 1931 to 1943

over the years 1986 to 2006. Our sample includes 240,000 people with 2.4 million annual

observations.

          Our results show much larger effects on employment than the bulk of previous literature

had indicated. We find that the employment rate of those subject to the AET decreases

significantly relative to those not subject to it. This effect occurs suddenly at the ages individuals

become subject to the AET, bolstering the credibility of the estimates. Our point estimates

suggest that the AET reduces the employment rate of affected older Americans aged 63-64 by at

least 1.2 percentage points. This conclusion is robust to a battery of placebo and robustness

checks.

          These findings indicate that the AET is an important factor affecting the work decisions

of older Americans and therefore should be a key focus of policy-makers. The combination of a

large administrative dataset with individual-level microdata (also used in various forms in Song,

2003, Song and Manchester, 2007, and Haider and Loughran, 2008) and our novel identification




                                                  4
strategy leads to estimates of sizeable elasticities. However, the effect we estimate applies to a

younger group than those studied in the difference-in-differences literature cited above: we focus

on those locating near the exempt amount in the policy-relevant 63-to-64-year-old group to

which the AET currently applies. Our findings are therefore not directly comparable to this

previous literature, but provide relatively novel estimates for a younger group of current policy

relevance.

        Recent work by Gelber et al. (2018), which also studies workers below and above the

exempt amount, represents an additional exception to the conclusion that the AET has little

effect on older workers' employment rate.3 Whereas the Gelber et al. (2018) study relies on the

Regression Kink Design smoothness assumptions, the current paper relies on the differences-in-

differences parallel trends assumptions. Gelber et al. (2018) study a group that is local to the

exempt amount, whereas the current paper's estimates apply both to those close to and farther

from the exempt amount--a broader group of significant policy relevance to evaluating the more

general employment effect of the AET.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section II describes the policy environment. Section III

describes a framework for interpreting our results. Section IV explains the empirical strategy.

Section V describes our data. Section VI proceeds to the results. Section VII discusses the results

and relates them to prior estimates and Section VIII concludes.

II. Policy environment

        OASI provides annuity income to older Americans and to survivors of deceased workers.

Individuals with sufficient years of eligible earnings can claim OASI benefits through their own

work history as early as age 62, the Early Entitlement Age (EEA). They can claim full benefits


3
 Because the policy environment, corresponding theoretical framework, data, and outcomes are similar to Gelber et
al. (2018), the corresponding sections of this paper have overlap with that previous paper.


                                                        5
once they reach the Normal Retirement Age (NRA), which is 65 for individuals in our sample.

The AET reduces current OASI benefits in proportion to earnings above an exempt amount. To

illustrate how the AET works, consider a 63-year-old earning $23,640 in 2019, receiving $1,000

in monthly benefits, and facing a $17,640 exempt amount and a 50 percent benefit reduction rate

(BRR). Her current annual benefits would be reduced by $3,000=($23,640-$17,640)×50%, equal

to 3 months of benefits. If that same worker instead earned $50,000, annual benefits would be

reduced by $12,000, rather than being reduced by $16,180=($50,000-$17,640)×50%, because

benefits are not reduced below zero.

           Both the exempt amount and the BRR have changed over time. In Figure 1 we show the

exempt amount for the years we study. For those whose age is at the NRA and over, the exempt

amount is substantially higher than for those below the NRA. Over the main years we study,

1994 to 2006, the exempt amount for those under NRA ranged from $11,830 to $13,499, while

the exempt amount for those NRA and over was on average around $13,500 higher than the

amount for those under NRA, with those older than the NRA no longer facing the AET after

2000. For those under the NRA but above the EEA--the main group that our empirical work

studies--the BRR was 50 percent throughout the period we study, 1994 to 2006. The AET

applied to earnings from ages 62 to 69 between 1994 and 2000, and from ages 62 to the NRA

(roughly age 65) between 2000 and 2006.4

           During the period we study, the AET rules for married couples imply that the couple's

total benefit is reduced at the rate of one dollar for every two dollars that each spouse's

individual current earnings exceed the exempt amount applying to each spouse. If both spouses

earn above the exempt amount, the reduction in the total of both spouses' benefits is equal to the



4   Starting in 2002, the NRA increased by 2 months per cohort, reaching 65 and 8 months in 2006.


                                                          6
sum of the reductions attributable to each spouse's earnings. For example, suppose the woman

above earning $23,640 in 2018 and receiving $12,000 in annual benefits is married to a man

earning $22,640 and receiving $15,000 in annual benefits. The AET would then reduce couple's

total of $27,000 (=$15,000+$12,000) in current annual benefits by $5,500=($23,640-

$17,640)×50%+($22,640-$17,640)×50%. We can interpret our estimates as the effect of the AET

applying to a given spouse's earnings on that spouse's employment.

       When current OASI benefits are lost to the AET, future scheduled benefits increase in

most cases. This is sometimes referred to as "benefit enhancement." The potential increase in

future benefits depends on one's age. For beneficiaries below the NRA in particular, the benefit

enhancement, known as the "actuarial adjustment," raises future benefits whenever a claimant

earns over the AET exempt amount (Social Security Administration Program Operations Manual

System 2019). Future benefits are raised by 0.55 percent per month of benefits withheld for the

first three years of AET assessment. In the budget set, this adjustment creates a notch in future

benefits as well as a kink in current benefits at the AET threshold. Returning to the example

above, consider the 63-year-old receiving $1,000 in monthly benefits due to the AET. Upon

reaching the NRA, her monthly benefits would increase by around $16.50 = 0.0055 x 3 x $1,000.

       On average, this adjustment is roughly actuarially fair when considering the timing of

claiming OASI (Diamond and Gruber, 1999). However, the data show no response to these

incentives. For those under NRA, Gelber, Jones and Sacks (2019) show that there is

disproportionate bunching under the exempt amount ­ the opposite of the pattern we would

expect if people reacted to the notch.

       Perhaps the reason for this lack of reaction is that the earnings test is widely viewed as a

pure tax. Most popular guides do not note the subsequent adjustment in benefits under the




                                                 7
earnings test (Gruber & Orzag (2003)). During the period that we study, the popular guide Your

Income Tax (J.K. Lasser Institute (1997)), for example, warned readers that if "you are under age

70, Social Security benefits are reduced by earned income," but did not note the subsequent

benefit adjustment. Consistent with this explanation, when we refer in this paper to "incentives"

created by the AET, we mean the perceived incentives.5

III. Framework for interpreting the empirical results

        This section sketches a basic framework for interpreting the empirical strategy and

results. We describe how the AET impacts an individual's decision of whether or not to have

positive earnings, i.e. the "employment" decision. The Appendix contains a more formal setup.

        Following previous literature (e.g. Friedberg, 1998; Friedberg, 2000), we model the AET

as creating a positive benefit reduction rate (BRR) for some individuals above the exempt

amount. For simplicity we suppose that separate from the AET a marginal tax rate 0 is imposed

on earnings. In the presence of the AET, the AET reduces benefits at the margin when earnings

increase above the exempt amount 1
                                 
                                   , until the point at which benefits have been phased out

entirely at earnings level 2
                           
                             . At the extensive margin, to capture the realistic pattern of potential

entry to or exit from non-trivial levels of earnings, we can assume a fixed cost of employment

(Cogan, 1981). Extensive margin decisions are then a function of the average net-of-benefit-

reduction rate (ANBRR), defined as the fraction of an individual's gross income that she keeps,

net of both taxes and benefits, if she is employed at earnings level z rather than earning zero.6




5
  Aside from the influence of misperceptions, individuals could correctly perceive the AET as penalizing current
earnings, for several potential reasons. For liquidity-constrained individuals, those whose expected lifespan is
shorter than average, or those who discount particularly quickly, the AET is more punitive--and such individuals
could also choose to reduce work or stop working in response to the AET.
6
  Gelber et al. (2018) give an extended discussion of employment decisions in the presence of a kinked budget set.


                                                         8
        Figure 2 illustrates the extensive margin incentives created by the AET. We plot the

ANBRR as a function of counterfactual earnings, meaning earnings conditional on working in

the counterfactual state where there is only a linear tax and no AET. We distinguish between

these earnings and realized earnings, z, which incorporate the extensive margin decision and can

be zero. In the absence of the AET, the ANBRR is constant at 1 - 0 . In the presence of the

AET, the ANBRR begins to decrease at the exempt amount as Social Security benefits are

phased out by the AET. However, after the Social Security benefit has been entirely phased out

due to the AET, the ANBRR begins to increase in counterfactual earnings as the importance of

the AET benefit reductions diminish relative to counterfactual earnings, and for large enough

counterfactual earnings the ANBRR asymptotes back to 1 - 0 .

        Figure 3 illustrates how the AET impacts extensive margin decisions. The dashed line of

Panel A represents a presumed smooth relationship between the employment rate in the absence

of the AET (y-axis) and counterfactual earnings (x-axis). The solid line shows that the AET

begins to reduce the employment rate around the exempt amount. This motivates our difference-

in-difference empirical strategy: people with desired earnings below the exempt amount are

essentially unaffected, but people with desired earnings above the exempt amount are. Around 2
                                                                                             


where Social Security benefits are phased out entirely, the ANBRR begins to increase again and

the difference between the two employment rates begins to decrease.7 Panel B shows the effect

of the AET on employment, defined as the difference between the employment rate in the dashed




7
 More precisely, if the marginal effect of the ANBRR on the employment rate does not depend on counterfactual
earnings, the magnitude of the effect of the AET on the employment rate should decrease beginning at the non-
convex kink. However, if the marginal effect of the ANBRR on the employment rate varies depending on
counterfactual earnings, then the effect of the AET on the employment rate may be maximized at a different
counterfactual earnings level. Regardless, the effect of the AET on employment follows a U-shaped pattern.



                                                       9
and solid lines from Panel A. The AET has a U-shaped effect on employment, where the
                                                              8
maximum reduction in employment due to the AET occurs around 2 .

B. Specific features of the policy setting

        Our policy setting has a number of specific features that can be incorporated into the

framework. First, individuals are subject to the AET only when they choose to claim OASI; this

mirrors other transfer programs that must be claimed to receive benefits. However, the results

should still be interpreted as reflecting an "observed" elasticity (in the terminology of Chetty

2012). Our observed elasticity remains of interest regardless of the effect on claiming, in the

sense that policy-makers are interested in the raw employment effects of changing the AET.

        Second, we considered a static setting in which individuals only consider the current

period's budget set and incentives. In a dynamic setting, we may observe individuals serially

facing a linear tax (corresponding to state 0), followed temporally by a tax that creates a convex

kink (corresponding to state 1); indeed, this is the case in our empirical application, in which

individuals are not subject to the AET initially and become subject later. In Gelber et al. (2018),

we present a fully dynamic, multi-period model with a joint decision over saving and earnings;

we show that under a set of empirically relevant assumptions our results still hold, and we

discuss the interpretation of our estimated results in a dynamic model. If agents act as if they do

not anticipate the change in an initial period--consistent with the empirical findings in Gelber et




8
 The discussion here focuses on the pattern of employment over a broad range of earnings. By contrast, Gelber et
al. (2018) focus on the patterns of employment in a small neighborhood around the exempt amount and develop
conditions under which the employment rate exhibits a discontinuous change in slope at the exempt amount.


                                                        10
al. (2013, 2018)--then we can interpret the results as reflecting the impact of an unanticipated

change in policy.

        Third, Gelber et al. (2018) also extend this basic dynamic model to tailor it to our

particular policy setting. They show that when reductions in current benefits due to the AET can

lead to increases in later benefits, this can still lead to reductions in current labor supply if the

benefit enhancement is not actuarially fair. Furthermore, if people do not understand or know

about benefit enhancement, then they will respond to the AET as a pure tax.

IV. Empirical strategy

A. Regression specification

        Our approach involves a difference-in-difference estimator of the effect of the AET on

employment. Specifically, we exploit the fact that the AET only affects those who would earn

above the exempt amount in a given year if they choose to work. Furthermore, the AET only

affects those who claim Social Security, which can be claimed as early as age 62. We therefore

compare those who would potentially earn above and below the exempt amount, before and after

turning 62. We define "potential" earnings as the earnings individuals would earn in the absence

of the incentives created by the AET (Gelber, Jones, and Sacks 2013; Gelber et al. 2018).

        Given positive earnings zai, for individual i at "base" age a, we examine the probability

that one continues to have positive earnings at age a + t, where t =3 or 4. Thus, an individual's

"base age" or "base year" refers to a period three to four years before their "age." We explain

below why we consider a minimum lead of 3. We denote the AET exempt amount by z* and




                                                   11
compare the difference in the probability of positive earnings for those with zia  z* to those with

zia < z* when a + t < 63 and when a + t  63.9

         Thus, our approach represents a differences-in-differences analysis. Our outcome is the

probability of having nonzero earnings t years in the future. Our treatment group is individuals

with earnings above the exempt amount at age a, and our control group is individuals with

earnings below the exempt amount at age a. Our pre-period (i.e. prior to the potential effect of

the AET) is when a + t < 63, and our post-period (i.e. after the potential effect of the AET) is

when a + t  63.10 We let  indicate  +   63 and  indicate     .

         In regression form, our difference-in-difference model is estimated using the following

specification:

                      ,+ = 1  + 2   + 3  + 4  

                                     +5  +  +  + ,+

                                                                                                                  (1)

where ,+ is a binary variable that equals one if an individual is employed  years after age .

We can estimate our main specification in equation (1) using ordinary least squares (OLS). The

key coefficient of interest is 2 , the difference-in-difference coefficient for the interaction of

"base earnings above exempt amount" and "base age + t above 63." It gives the average

difference in the probability of having positive earnings at age 63 or older, for those who would


9
  We treat age 63 as the "post period" because that is the first year one would expect to observe an extensive margin
effect of the AET. The AET first applies to claimants when they reach OASI eligibility at age 62, but it does not
make sense to examine the effect of the AET on whether an individual has positive earnings in the calendar year she
turns age 62. The reason is that we observe calendar year earnings. If an individual claims OASI at age 62, the AET
only applies to earnings in the months after the individual claims. If the claimant earns at all during this calendar
year--even during months prior to claiming OASI--then she will have positive earnings in this calendar year. Thus,
a person who is induced by the AET to stop earning after claiming would appear in the data with positive earnings
during this calendar year, and therefore would appear to have no measured response to the AET.
10
   Our strategy implicitly assumes that desired earnings change modestly from age 60 to age 63. Indeed, our results
show that for a large percentage of workers in a placebo sample three years apart (ages 57 and 60), there is little
change in real earnings.


                                                         12
earn above the exempt amount,   , relative to those who would earn below the exempt amount,

and relative to the pre-age 63 difference.

       In our preferred specifications, we include demographic controls in the form of a female

dummy variable, as well as fixed effects for age and year-of-birth (which implicitly control for

year as well). We further control for  , a time-invariant measure of benefits, which we interact

with the "post" indicator, 1{ +   63}. We control for benefits because employment decisions

may be sensitive to benefits (e.g. Coile and Gruber 2007), and because benefits, which depend

on lifetime earnings, are higher for people with base age earnings above the exempt amount. We

interact the benefit measure with the post dummy because we expect benefits to matter only once

people become eligible for to claim OASI benefits. To measure  , we do not use actual benefits,

as these are endogenous to earnings history. Rather, we impute benefits based on earnings

history up to the age when people enter our analysis sample. We provide more detail in the data

section. In implementation, we consider  = 3 or  = 4 as alternative robustness checks. We

cluster our standard errors at the individual level to account for intra-individual correlations, such

as those arising from serial correlation.

B. Validity and implementation of method

       Our method relies on two key assumptions. First, we make the "parallel trends"

assumption, common to all difference-in-difference estimators. That is, we assume that in the

absence of our key policy variation, i.e. the introduction of the AET, the difference in the

probability of positive earnings between those with earnings below and above the exempt

amount would remain constant across ages. Formally, we impose the restriction in equation (1)

that the parameter 1 is time-invariant. We cannot technically test this assumption directly, but

we can assess the merits of this assumption using data from ages younger than 63. Our



                                                 13
assumption implies that labor force participation during these ages follows a similar trend for

those earnings below versus above the exempt amount.

       Second, we assume that earnings at age  are a reasonable proxy for potential earnings at

age  + , conditional on earning a positive amount in the counterfactual scenario where the

AET is not in effect. We would ideally model the probability of positive earnings at age  +  as

a function of whether or not an individual is affected by the AET in that same year. However, we

cannot observe potential earnings at age  +  for those who do not work, and for those who do

work, earnings may decrease in response to the AET.

       Many other papers have grappled with the issue of how to proxy for earnings or wages if

individuals choose to work, and thus how to proxy for the incentive to work. Given that the

econometrician does not directly observe counterfactual earnings, there is no alternative to

making some assumption. One solution is a selection correction in the context of the effect of

wages on labor supply, which generally requires functional form assumptions (Heckman, 1979)

or very powerful instruments (Powell, 1994). Another solution is to use demographics to impute

earnings if an individual works (e.g. Meyer and Rosenbaum, 2001), which is more difficult in

settings such as ours with a limited number of demographic variables in our administrative data.

       To circumvent this problem of endogenous earnings decisions at the ages directly subject

to the AET, we will use lagged earnings as a proxy for potential earnings in the present period.

Instead, we will use a lagged measure of earnings from age , as a proxy for the earnings that

would be realized at age  + . This assumption will be violated if individuals tend to adjust their

earnings in anticipation of the AET. However, our prior research has indicated that during the

ages used in our analysis, there is little evidence of anticipatory adjustment to the AET (Gelber et

al. 2013, 2018).



                                                14
       To support the validity of using lagged earnings as a proxy for future desired earnings,

we show that desired earnings remain relatively stable across a "placebo" set of ages.

Specifically, we show that the distribution of real earnings growth from one period to a

subsequent period exhibits a spike at zero. Panel A of Figure 4 shows that from age 58 to age

59--a placebo set of ages during which our sample is not subject to the AET--a large mass of

real earnings growth does occur at or near zero percent growth. Examining three-year growth

rates in Panel B of the figure shows a considerable mass around zero, although these growth

rates are more diffuse than those in Panel A. Another way to understand the validity of our

measure is to consider how well treata predicts treata+3. We illustrate this relationship in Figure

5, which plots the average of +3 against age  earnings (relative to the exempt amount.

Overall, we see that those treated at  are 57 percentage points more likely to be treated at  + 3.

At very low earnings there is a low but positive probability of switching from untreated to

treated, about 20 percentage points. This increases rapidly to about 80 percentage points once

earnings reach about $20,000 above the exempt amount, and the probability levels off thereafter.

Thus, treata is highly predictive of treata+3, but not perfectly so. This creates measurement error

in our main regressor which, if anything, attenuates our estimates.

       Correcting for this measurement error would require an estimate of the signal-to-noise

ratio in our proxy. With classical measurement error, plus the assumption that the earnings

dynamics are stable from ages 55-61 to ages 59-64, the signal-to-noise ratio is 0.57 (i.e. the

difference in probability of +3 given  = 1 or  = 0), and correcting for

measurement error simply requires us to scale up our estimate by 1/0.57. However, we report

unadjusted estimates throughout the text, for two reasons. First, we err on the side of the

conservative, unadjusted estimate. Second, adjusting for measurement error requires




                                                 15
extrapolating the earnings dynamics to older ages, but the dynamics could be quite different at

those ages.

       While investigating a lead of t=4 as a robustness check, in the baseline we choose to use

a three-year gap between base age earnings and the employment outcome we investigate. We

have to use at least a two-year lag to look at the age 63 effect of the AET (because age 62

earnings could respond to the AET). We use a three-year lag to guard against the possibility of

anticipatory adjustment in age 61 earnings to the expected future imposition of the AET (and

demonstrate that there is no evidence of anticipatory adjustment at age 60). A further advantage

of using a 3-year lag (rather than 2) is that we can examine age 64 employment (which would be

impossible with a 2-year lag because age 62 earnings respond to the AET). As our baseline we

use the shortest lag possible, i.e. t=3, that satisfies these conditions. We avoid using a lag that is

greater than t=4 because this would involve examining employment outcomes at ages above 65,

when the exempt amount is much higher.

       Our differences-in-differences method will control for the possibility that high earners

have higher labor force attachment by removing the difference attributable to the constant effect

of being in the low- or high-earning group at age a. The method relies on the assumption that in

the absence of the AET, the difference in the probability of employment would be constant

between those earning above and below the exempt amount, before and after age 63. While we

cannot directly test this assumption, we can perform basic checks on its validity.

       First, a testable prediction is that we should see the difference in employment

probabilities between these two groups evolving similarly prior to age 63. Second, in our

differences-in-differences specification, we can add separate trends in age in the below-z* and




                                                  16
above-z* groups, to demonstrate that a significant difference occurs precisely around the time

when the AET is imposed, relative to this trend.

       Third, if those with prior earnings below the AET exempt amount have weaker labor

force attachment and hypothetically drop out of the labor force more when they reach retirement

age, then we would expect a larger decrease in the employment probability at retirement age

among those with earnings below the exempt amount than among those above the exempt

amount. This is the opposite of what we find in our results, namely a smaller decrease in the

employment probability at retirement age among those with earnings below the exempt amount

than among those above the exempt amount. Thus, if anything this hypothesis would push

against our finding of a large response.

V. Data

       To administer benefits, the Social Security Administration (SSA) collects earnings

histories on all Americans in the Master Earnings File (MEF). Every year since 1978, the MEF

records total pretax W-2 earnings as well as self-employment earnings for each Social Security

Number. As W-2s are mandatory information returns filed with the Internal Revenue Service for

each employee for whom the firm withholds taxes and/or to whom remuneration exceeds a

modest threshold, the MEF contains earnings information regardless of whether an individual

files taxes. SSA has made available two public-use datasets derived from the MEF: the Earnings

Public Use File (EPUF) and the Benefits and Earnings Public Use File (BEPUF). Both data sets

contain earnings histories and limited demographic information: year of birth and sex. They

differ in the years covered and sampling frame. The EPUF covers earnings histories for 1951-

2006, and it is a 1 percent sample of all Social Security Numbers ever issued as of 2006. The

BEPUF covers earnings for 1951-2003, and it is a 1 percent sample of all current claimants as of




                                               17
2004. Because the BEPUF conditions on claiming benefits and surviving to 2004, it is not

necessarily representative of older cohorts. We therefore implement our estimation strategy using

the EPUF. However, in Appendix E we show that we obtain very similar results in the BEPUF.11

         We limit the EPUF to relatively recent cohorts: those born 1931-1943. We end in 1943

because the last year of the EPUF is 2006, so this is the last cohort that we can observe respond

to the AET by age 63. Our choice to start in 1931 balances two considerations: more cohorts give

us more power, but at the same time we would like to retain a focus on more recent cohorts that

are of greater policy interest. We chose the 1931-1943 range because it represents the second

half of our data, as the earliest we could start is 1918.12, 13 We emphasize, however, that none of

our results depends on the specific set of cohorts studied, and we show in robustness tests that

using the full range of cohorts yields similar (in fact larger) responses.

         We classify each age in a given calendar year as the highest age an individual attains in

that calendar year. Individuals in our cohorts reach ages 63 to 64, the main ages at which we

investigate the effect of the AET, in 1994 to 2006. Because our identification strategy requires us

to observe base age earnings, we limit our estimation sample to people with positive earnings in

the base age. We limit the sample to base ages 55-61 when we look  = 3 years ahead and base

ages 55-60 when we look  = 4 years ahead (both corresponding to outcome ages 58-64). (We

begin the analysis sample at age 55 so that we can use earnings through age 54 to impute



11
   In an earlier version of this paper, we used the 1917-1923 birth cohorts in the MEF itself rather than public use
files. Although we have since lost access to those data, we show in Appendix E that the results are also similar in the
MEF and in the EPUF (when we look at the same range of cohorts).
12
   1918 is the earliest cohort we can start with because the AET applied to annual earnings only starting in 1978. As
our "treated" group at age 63 has their earnings measured (for determining treatment) in age 60, this means that
people turning 60 before 1978 will have potentially the wrong measure of treatment. This rules out earlier cohorts
than 1918.
13 We considered selecting the cohorts that are exposed to the current policy regime. However, the AET rules for
63-64 year olds have remained essentially unchanged since 1978, when the AET began applying to annual instead of
quarterly earnings, so this sample would include many earlier cohorts.


                                                          18
benefits, as described below.) Our estimation sample ends up with 3.58 million annual

observations on 240,181 people.

        We choose 64 as an oldest age at which to examine employment effects because age 60

earnings are a better proxy for desired earnings at ages 63 to 64 than for older ages. We cannot

use earnings at ages 62, 63, or older as a proxy for desired earnings at even older ages because of

potential intensive margin responses to the AET once individuals have reached EEA. Moreover,

at age 65 individuals with earnings near the under-NRA exempt amount are only exposed to this

exempt amount--as opposed to the much higher exempt amount applying to those at NRA and

above shown in Figure 1--for only part of the year. This consideration applies a fortiori to those

over 65.

        Several features of the data merit discussion. First, the underlying administrative data are

subject to little measurement error. However, the public use files degrade the data to prevent re-

identification: specifically, they randomly round earnings up or down to the nearest $100.

Second, earnings as measured in the dataset are not subject to manipulation through tax

deductions, credits, or exemptions, and they are subject to third-party reporting (among the non-

self-employed). Third, like most other administrative datasets, the data do not contain

information on hours worked, hourly wage rates, amenities at individuals' jobs, underground

earnings, assets, savings, or consumption. They also do not contain data on unearned income or

marital status.

        Fourth, we do not observe date of death, and in the years after an individual dies,

earnings and employment appear in the dataset as zeroes. However, we would not exclude

deceased individuals even if we observed date of death, because the AET could in principle

affect mortality, and we wish to avoid selecting the sample according to an outcome variable.




                                                 19
Some of an effect on employment could in principle be mediated through an effect on mortality.

Indeed, Fitzpatrick and Moore (2018) find that just after individuals become eligible for Social

Security at age 62 aggregate mortality rates rise by around 1.5 percent ­ a two percent increase

for males, and a one percent increase for females. However, SSA actuarial life tables show that

annual mortality rates at 62 (as well as 63 and 64) are around 1 percent; a back-of-the-envelope

calculation shows that an annual rise in the fraction of the population that dies on the order of 1.5

percent of 1 percent (i.e. 0.015%) should mechanically be associated with far smaller

employment effects than those we estimate. Such mortality effects would affect the

interpretation, but not the validity, of our results; in other words, some of the effect on

employment we estimate could be mediated through an effect on mortality, but the identification

strategy would still be valid. The effects we estimate are relevant to policy, in the sense that they

reflect the overall effect on employment.

        In our main specifications, we control for a measure of benefits, because benefits are

potentially correlated with treatment status, and benefits would confound our main estimates if

there is a liquidity or income effect of benefit receipt. As benefits are unobserved in the EPUF,

we must impute them.14 Specifically, we impute the benefits that an individual would receive if

she claimed benefits at age 62 and had no age 62 earnings. We focus on age 62 benefits because

we are interested in income effects among early claimers. One difficulty in controlling for

benefits is that they are mechanically endogenous to employment: people with positive earnings

at ages 55-61 will have higher imputed benefits (as well as actual benefits). To avoid the

resulting bias from conditioning on an intermediate outcome, we only use earnings through age

54. Specifically, we simulate earnings up to age 61 by fixing age 55-61 earnings at their age 54


14
  We use a benefit calculator provided by Social Security for this imputation. We downloaded the executable
version of the calculator available at https://www.ssa.gov/OACT/anypia/anypia.html.


                                                       20
earnings. This procedure introduces a small amount of measurement error in benefits. However,

using observed benefits in the BEPUF, we show in Appendix B that our imputed benefits are

very close to actual benefits among people who claim at age 62. 15 We show in robustness tests

that our results are very similar even if we instrument for simulated benefits, to correct the

limited remaining measurement error.

           Table 1 shows summary statistics for our sample. In the first column we report statistics

for all observations in our cohort range. Column (2) is limited to our estimation sample, and

columns (3) and (4) report statistics separately for our control and treatment groups, i.e. people

with base age earnings below or above the exempt amount, respectively. In our estimation

sample, the mean yearly employment rate among 55 to 64-year-olds, i.e. the percent of the

corresponding calendar years when the individual has positive earnings, is 74.11 percent. Mean

earnings (including zeroes) at these ages is $25,972 in our main sample. 53.38 percent of the

sample is female. For comparison we also show the full sample, not restricted to those with

positive base age earnings. Throughout the paper, all dollar figures are expressed in real 2010

dollars.


VI. Results

A. Initial results

           As an initial exercise, in Figure 6 we show the density of earnings at ages 60 and 62,

relative to the exempt amount. Figure 6 shows that the density of earnings at age 60 appears

smooth near the exempt amount, and that the amount of bunching, calculated using the method


15
  We do not simply use the benefits reported in BEPUF because these data report benefits as of 2004, so they
include cost-of-living adjustments, delayed retirement credits, and actuarial adjustment for early claiming. They do
not measure what we seek, benefits at age 62. However, we can still use the BEPUF to validate our measure: among
people who claimed at age 62 in 2004, actual and imputed benefit should coincide closely, and they do. See
Appendix B.


                                                        21
of Chetty, Friedman, Olsen, and Pistaferri (2011), is statistically insignificant. This supports the

validity of our identification strategy: if the density hypothetically showed evidence of a reaction

at age 60 to the future imposition of the AET, this could confound the validity of comparing

those under and over the exempt amount at age 60. For comparison, Figure 6 also shows the

earnings distribution at age 62, when claimants are subject to the AET. At age 62 we see a

markedly different pattern than at age 60, with a large, statistically significant spike in the age 62

earnings density near the exempt amount (as documented in Friedberg 2000 or Gelber, Jones,

and Sacks 2013).

B. Main results

        Figure 7 shows the main results graphically. On the x-axis is an individual's age in year

a+3, where a is the base age. The figure shows the difference in employment rates between the

treatment and control groups as a function of age, after adjusting for out controls.16 After

essentially remaining stable from outcome ages 53 to 62, the figure shows a sharp decrease from

62 to 63; age 63 is exactly when individuals will first be able to show an employment reaction to

the AET three years later, when they are age 63. This is followed by a further substantial

decrease from 63 to 64, consistent with a lagged adjustment to the AET (Gelber, Jones, and

Sacks 2013, 2018).

        Figure 7 shows that the trends in employment for those earning above and below  

during ages prior to 63 are very similar. Thus, we have reason to believe that anticipatory

adjustment to the AET is not a significant issue in our context, as those who are likely to not face

the AET have a similar trend in outcomes as those who are most likely to face the AET. Echoing



16
  The controls are sex, age and cohort fixed effects, imputed benefits, and benefits interacted with post.
To adjust for these controls, we regress a positive earnings at  + 3 dummy on demeaned values of these
controls, plus a set of fixed effects for age and age x treat. We plot the coefficients on age x treat.


                                                    22
these results, Appendix Figure 1 shows that for those with earnings above z* in the base year, the

probability of positive earnings falls sharply and substantially from ages 62 to 63, while for those

earning below z* in the base year, the probability of having positive earnings falls to a much

smaller extent between ages 62 and 63.

            Table 2 shows the regression results corresponding to regression (1) above. We begin

with uncontrolled DID estimates in columns (1) and (4), add the benefit controls in columns (2)

and (5), and further include demographic controls in columns (3) and (6). Our preferred

specification is in column (3), as it is the most tightly controlled and has the least distance

between the age at which treatment is measured and the age at which the outcome is measured.

In this specification, the DID coefficient is about -3, meaning the probability of positive earnings

falls by about 3 percentage points more for people with base age earnings above the exempt

amount than for people with lower base age earnings, relative to pre-age 63 trends and adjusting

for benefits, age, cohort, and sex. This estimate is not sensitive to the demographic controls, but

the benefit controls do matter; our estimate would be about 20% higher without these controls.

            To help gauge the magnitude of this coefficient, we transform it into a participation

elasticity with respect to the average net-of-tax rate. To do so, we assume that everyone faces a

marginal tax rate of 25 percent below the exempt amount and before claiming (corresponding to

state, federal, local, and payroll taxes), and a marginal tax rate of 75 percent above the exempt

amount. Ignoring actuarial adjustment and eventual benefit exhaustion, our estimates imply an

elasticity of about 0.1.17 We scale this elasticity up by 1/0.4 because only about 40% of people

claim before turning 63, so our baseline elasticity is 0.26. This participation elasticity is on the in

the middle of the extensive margin elasticities summarized in Chetty (2012), which range from


                                              
17
     We calculate this elasticity as             , where   is the DID estimate for X and   is the sample mean of X.
                                              



                                                           23
0.15 to 0.43, although those elasticities are generally for prime age women. Our baseline

elasticity does not account for benefit exhaustion or measurement error in the treatment variable.

Accounting for benefit exhaustion would raise our elasticity to 0.37 (using our benefit imputation

measure, which likely overstates exhaustion and hence overstates the elasticity). Accounting for

measurement error would raise the elasticity to 0.45. Accounting for both would raise the

elasticity to 0.64. Fully accounting for claiming, actuarial adjustment, and benefit exhaustion,

among other details, is beyond the scope of this paper, so we view this calculation as a useful

illustration rather than a definitive estimate of a structural parameter.

        The coefficient we estimate has implications for the effect of the AET on the overall

employment rate. Our baseline linear specification without controls shows that the AET reduces

the employment rate of those in our treatment group by 2.9 percentage points. However, this

does not mean that the AET reduces the overall employment rate at ages 63 to 64 by this amount,

for two reasons. First, at ages 60 and 61 averaged, 46 percent of individuals are not employed

and therefore are not in our sample. Second, among employed 60- to 61-year-olds in our sample,

25 percent of have earnings that are below the exempt amount, implying that they are not subject

to treatment. After deflating due to both of these factors, our estimates imply that the AET

reduces employment by 1.2 percentage points in the group we study at ages 63-64 (against a base

of 39 percentage points). If anything, this reflects a lower bound, for example because we

observe desired earnings with error.18 As we estimate a signal-to-noise ratio in the pre-period of

about 0.57, a less conservative estimate would entail scaling up our estimate by 1/.57, resulting

in a population-wide effect of 2.1 percentage points.




18
  One caveat is that our measure of employment may not count a shift from the formal labor market to "off-the-
books" employment (Christensen 1990).


                                                       24
        Figure 8 provides a further key piece of evidence that the AET has a strong effect on

employment. Figure 8 shows how the estimated treatment effect on employment at age  +

3 varies by distance to exempt amount. To construct the figure, we replace the "treat" dummy in

our main specification with a set of dummy variables for binned distance to the exempt amount.

(We omit the bin just below the exempt amount as a normalization.) Aside from the lowest two

bins (in which people have low earnings and little labor force attachment), there is no treatment

effect for bins below the exempt amount. The treatment effect initially increases in absolute

magnitude with distance to exempt amount. At higher distances above the exempt amount, the

treatment effect begins to fall in absolute magnitude. This is the U-shaped pattern we would

expect to see, as shown in Figure 3. Theory predicts that the effect of the AET will be greatest at

the point where benefits exhausted, the "nonconvex kink." We do not know where benefits are

exhausted (because we lack data on family structure and spousal benefits), but we can make a

crude approximation with some simple assumptions; we report in the figure the points where

imputed individual benefits would be exhausted on average, as well as where an estimate of

family benefits would be exhausted.19 We find that the treatment effect indeed appears to be

most negative in the range where benefits are exhausted, on average. We view this U-shaped

pattern as helpful confirmation that the employment effects we estimate are due to the effects of

the AET, which could be expected to generate exactly such a pattern of effects. It is arguably

difficult to construct alternative explanations for this U-shaped pattern.

C. Heterogeneity in responses to the earnings test



19
  To precisely determine where benefits are exhausted, we would need data on spousal benefits; as described above,
when one spouse is a dual or secondary beneficiary, the AET reduces the combined benefits of both spouses at the
BRR. Our data do not contain information on spousal benefits. The calculation in Figure 8 assumes that 95% of
claimants are married (Kreider, 2005), that each male beneficiary's spousal benefit is the average women's benefit,
and vice versa for women.


                                                        25
        The overall responses to the earnings documented in Table 2 mask at least two

dimensions of heterogeneity. In Table 3 we re-estimate our main DID models, but stratifying on

sex (in columns (1) and (2)) and permanent income (in columns (3) and (4)). Men and women

both respond to the earnings test, but women appear more responsive. Interestingly, people with

high permanent income appear to drive all the response that we observe. We define permanent

income as average income (when positive) at age 35-54, and high permanent income people as

people whose permanent income is above their sex-cohort median.20 (The "high permanent

income" group represents more than half the estimation sample because we use the full data set

to calculate median permanent income.) For high permanent income people, we estimate a DID

of -5.6, but for low permanent income people, the estimate is wrong signed, small, and

insignificant. Although low permanent income people have lower income at ages 55-61, and

hence they are less exposure to the AET (i.e. they face a smaller bite), this difference does not

account for their lower responsiveness, as the estimated elasticity is also much smaller (and

wrong signed when  = 3). We argue in Section 5.F below that these heterogeneous responses

are helpful for understanding the mechanisms behind the overall response to the AET.

D. Responses at older ages

        Our main analysis focuses on people younger than NRA, because that group is still

subject to the AET and because at older ages there is a greater gap between the timing when

treatment is measured and when outcomes are observed. People NRA and above face a higher

exempt amount under the AET. In 2000, the AET was eliminated for people over NRA.

Nonetheless in Table 4 we change our sample to include people at NRA and just above.



20
  We have also estimated models that define high permanent income based on the overall median rather than the
cohort and sex specific median. The results are nearly identical.



                                                       26
Specifically, in column (1) we look with a lead of  = 4 and look at base ages 55-61, so we

include up to age 65; in column (2) we look with a lead of  = 5 and so include up to age 66.21 In

the top panel we simply expand our sample to include these older ages. The point estimates are

larger, indicating a larger response at these ages. There are several reasons we might see a larger

response at these ages. First, employment at older ages may be more marginal and therefore

more sensitive to incentives. Second, individuals may take time to react to the Earnings Test,

consistent with the results in Gelber, Jones, and Sacks (2019). Third, as claiming increases with

age, more and more people's earnings are actually subject to the earnings test.

E. Robustness checks

        Our estimates are robust to several alternative specification choices. We present the

results of several robustness checks in Table 5. For comparison, the first column is our baseline,

corresponding to the results in columns (3) and (6) in Table 2. Our robustness tests begin in

column (2), where we consider an alternative measure of treat. Specifically, rather than use base

age earnings, we measure average earnings in the base age and the prior two years, and we now

define treat as having three-year average earnings over the exempt amount. The idea behind this

robustness test is that our baseline measure of treat is potentially measured with error, as

earnings vary from year to year. This alternative measure may reduce the noise in treat, albeit at

the cost of using earnings information that is more years behind the outcome age. This

alternative measure has very little effect on our estimates.

        In our main specification we use all earnings ranges, but a concern with this specification

is that the control group includes people earning just a few thousand dollars or less, while the


21
  The exempt amount differs between those below and above NRA, but the difference is not large for most of our
sample period; the greatest divergence happens post-2000 with the elimination of the AET for those older than
NRA. In Table 4 we continue to define  as an indicator for base age earnings above the pre-NRA exempt
amount.


                                                       27
treatment group includes people earning over $100,000. One might worry that such groups have

very different employment patterns in the older years. To address this possibility, in column (3)

we limit the sample to observations with base age earnings within $5,000 of the exempt amount,

and in column (4) we instead limit the sample to observations with base age earnings between

$5,000 and $50,000. In both specifications we estimate smaller DID coefficients than in the

baseline, around -1.3 with the bandwidth of $5,000 and -2 with the wider (but still restricted)

range. However, the reason for these smaller estimates is that the treatment is less intense for

treatment group. That is, for people with earnings relatively close to the exempt amount, the bite

of the earnings test is less severe. We therefore should expect a smaller treatment effect. We

should also expect, however, a fairly similar elasticity after we adjust for this smaller first stage,

and that is what we see: using the narrow bandwidth we have an elasticity of 0.42, and using the

wider range we have an elasticity of 0.18, both compare to our baseline of 0.23.

       In column (5) we show that our results are robust to using the full set of cohorts,

including people born as early as 1918. The point estimates in fact rise by about 50 percent, as

people born earlier respond more to the AET. Finally, in column (6) we attempt to correct for

measurement error in a control variable, imputed benefits. We believe this is a potentially

important control, but it is measured with error because as the imputation defining it holds

income fixed at age 54 level. Because we observe actual benefits in the BEPUF, we can use two-

sample two-stage least squares (TS2SLS) to correct for this measurement error. A limitation here

is that we only observe actual benefits for people born in 1942 and claiming at age 62, so we

cannot control for year-of-birth fixed effects. Correcting for measurement error does not

appreciably change our estimates.

F. Placebo tests




                                                  28
         We conduct two sets of placebo tests based on outcome ages younger than 63, and

therefore not subject to the AET for the full year. In the first, we consider a wide range of

possible exempt amounts. For a grid of exempt amounts between -7,000 and +7,000 (relative to

the true exempt amount), we re-estimate our main DID model, but with treatment defined

relative to the placebo exempt amount, the "post" period defined as outcome ages 60-61, and

looking only at outcome ages 58-61 (to avoid picking up true effects). We plot the results in

Figure 9. The placebo estimates are almost all positive (i.e. wrong-signed), small in magnitude,

and all but one is statistically insignificant. As this exercise somewhat arbitrarily sets the

treatment ages to 58 and 59, as a complementary placebo test, in Figure 10 we show the results

of re-estimating our main specification, but setting the treatment ages to each two year window

59-60, 60-61, 61-62, and 62-63 (and excluding people older than the maximum treatment age,

again to avoid picking up true effects). The placebo estimates are again positive at the younger

treatment ages. They turn negative at 62 but this treatment bin includes outcome age 63, which is

in fact treated. These placebo tests show that differential trends in retirement for lower earners,

relative to higher earners, do not explain our results.22

VII. Discussion
       Our finding of a substantial employment response to the AET complement those in

Gelber et al. (2018), who focus on patterns within $3,000 of the exempt amount, and therefore

leave open the questions of whether the results generalize to a broader group and what the

overall effect on employment is in this age range. Thus, the current study examines a broader




22
   In principle it is possible to construct placebo tests using the actual AET ages, but looking only at people with
income below the exempt amount and using placebo exempt amounts that are even lower. This approach would
therefore compare very low earners to people with income just below the exempt amount. A difficulty with this
approach is that people with income just below the exempt amount are in fact much more likely to end up treated at
 + 3 than are people with lower earnings; see Figure 5. This "placebo" test therefore runs the risk of picking up
true treatment effects.


                                                         29
group of interest to policy-makers, and indicates that the local estimates in Gelber et al. (2018)

appear to apply to a broader group, in the sense that in a broader sample we still estimate large

and highly significant effects of the AET. In the online Appendix, we briefly recapitulate some

of the key findings from Gelber et al. (2018), which bolster the credibility of the current results

further.

           There are several reasons we might expect the RKD and DID responses to differ. As

Gelber et al. (2018) note, the RKD strategy identifies a local effect around the exempt amount;

the treated group therefore includes people with only a fairly small change in ANTR due to the

AET. This would create a small overall treatment effect of the AET in the RKD analysis. On the

other hand, the population average treatment effect that we report here for the DID analysis

includes many people with zero earnings who bring down the average effect. In the end, the DID

estimates are fairly similar to the RKD estimates. The DID estimates imply a decrease in

aggregate employment of 1.2 percentage points, whereas the RKD of Gelber et al. (2018)

estimates imply a of 1.4 percentage points among people with earnings near the exempt amount.

Thus it turns out that the local response provides a reasonable approximation to the population-

wide response. We caution, however, that the estimator is not the only difference between the

approach here and in Gelber et al. (2018); that paper looked at earlier cohorts (1918-1923) and

excluded people with self-employment income. When we look at the same range of cohorts, we

get estimates that are roughly 25% higher than our main estimates, closely in line with Gelber et

al. (2018).

           Since the previous literature examined an older age group, it is difficult to formally

reconcile our results directly with those in previous literature, as the effect of the AET could

simply be larger in the group we examine than in the older age group. However, it is possible to




                                                    30
see a foreshadowing of our results in previous literature, assuming that the impact of the AET is

comparable in the older and younger groups. First, it has been widely noted that employment

rates for older Americans (particularly those over 65) increased substantially after the mid-1980s

(Goldin and Katz 2018); Song and Manchester (2007) note that employment rates did increase

more in their treatment group than in their control group, though it is difficult to tell this trend

apart from the relative rise in employment among those over 65 that pre-dated the year 2000.

Our results suggest that some of the rise in employment over age 65 in the post-2000 period is

due to the elimination of the AET, as opposed to being a continuation of pre-existing trends.

       Second, Friedberg and Webb (2009) found significant effects of the AET in the over-65

population in some specifications in the survey data of the Current Population Survey; it is

possible that with the greater sample size and precision of the EPUF, we are able to uncover

more robust impacts than those found in their setting. Third, the standard errors in previous

literature generally did not rule out substantial impacts of the AET on employment (and in some

cases did indicate some evidence of an impact, as discussed above). Overall, our results solidify

the case for a substantial impact of the AET on employment.

VIII. Conclusion

       We show that the AET plays a substantial role in determining older workers' labor force

participation decisions, reducing the employment rate of the workers we study by 1.2 percentage

points under conservative assumptions, or as much as 2.1 percentage points if we explicitly

adjust for measurement error. Our results are more generally consistent with the view that the

retirement decisions of older individuals are rather sensitive to perceived incentives (e.g. Laitner

and Silverman 2012).

       Our results also imply that the planned increases in the Normal Retirement Age, to 67 in




                                                  31
2026, may reduce labor force participation by exposing seniors to the Earnings Test for longer. If

individuals react to Social Security incentives only after learning about them (Gelber, Jones, and

Sacks 2013), then the impacts we find could increase over time at older ages as more individuals

learn about the Earnings Test over time after ages 63-64.

        This paper is complementary to Gelber et al. (2019), who find that individuals' response

to the AET is consistent with mis-perceptions of the AET. In particular, individuals

disproportionately "bunch" just below the exempt amount rather than just above it, and the

employment rate discontinuously drops just above the exempt amount relative to just below it.

Both patterns are consistent with individuals believing the AET applies to all earnings below the

exempt amount, rather than applying only to marginal earnings above the exempt amount;

individuals believe that the benefit reductions due to the AET are much more severe than they

are in reality. These misperceptions help to explain the large employment reactions to the AET

that we document in this paper.

        It is important to caution that our results do not necessarily imply that the AET policy is

undesirable. By lowering AET benefits earlier in an individual's period of claiming, and thus

raising later benefits through benefit adjustment, the AET on average shifts the profile of OASI

benefits later in the lifecycle. All else equal, this could lead to (1) welfare gains if the optimal

time profile of Social Security benefits slopes upward (Feldstein 1990); (2) more redistribution

in terms of yearly income--as older claimants on average have lower income and assets (as well

as worse health) than younger claimants; and (3) lower poverty rates among older Americans

(see Figinski and Neumark 2018 on older women). Nonetheless, the substantial employment

effects we have documented in our work represent an important input into a calculation of the

welfare effects of the AET, in particular by suggesting important distortions from the AET.




                                                  32
Evaluating the full welfare and redistributive consequences of the AET, including both the

employment and earnings impacts, as well as the impacts through the lifecycle profile of OASI

benefits, is an important topic left to future work.




                                                  33
References

Abraham, Katharine, and Melissa Kearney. 2017. "Explaining the Decline in the U.S.
        Employment-to-Population Ratio: A Review of the Evidence." NBER Working Paper
        24333.
Baker, Michael, and Dwayne A. Benjamin. 1999. "How do retirement tests affect the labor
        supply of older men?" Journal of Public Economics, 71, 27-51.
Brown, Jeffrey, Arie Kapteyn, Olivia Mitchell, and Teryn Mattox. 2013. "Framing the Social
        Security Earnings Test." Wharton Pension Research Council Working Paper.
Burtless, Gary, and Robert A. Moffitt. 1985. "The Joint Choice of Retirement Age and
        Postretirement Hours of Work." Journal of Labor Economics. 3: 209-236.
Chetty, Raj, John N. Friedman, Tore Olsen, and Luigi Pistaferri. 2011. "Adjustment Costs, Firm
        Responses, and Micro vs. Macro Labor Supply Elasticities: Evidence from Danish Tax
        Records." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 126(2): 749-804.
Chetty, Raj. 2012. "Bounds on Elasticities with Optimization Frictions." Econometrica, 80(3),
        969-1018.
Christensen, Kathleen. 1990. "Bridges Over Troubled Water: How Older Workers
        View the Labor Market." In Bridges to Retirement: Trends in the Labor Market for
        Older Workers (Peter B. Doeringer, ed.), 175-207. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press, Cornell
        University.
Cogan, John. 1981. "Fixed Costs and Labor Supply." Econometrica, 49, 945-963.
Coile, Courtney C. and Jonathan Gruber. "Future Social Security Entitlements and the
        Retirement Decision." The Review of Economics and Statistics 89(2):234-246, May 2007.
Diamond, Peter, and Jonathan Gruber. 1999. "Social Security and Retirement in the United
        States." In Social Security and Retirement Around the World (Jonathan Gruber and David
        A. Wise, eds), 437-473. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Disney, Richard, and Sarah Smith. 2002. "The labour supply effect of the abolition of the
        earnings rule for older workers in the United Kingdom." Economic Journal, 112, C136-
        C152.
Eissa, Nada, Henrik Kleven, and Claus Kreiner. 2008. "Evaluation of four tax reforms in the
        United States: Labor supply and welfare effects for single mothers." Journal of Public
        Economics, 92(3-4), 795-816.
Engelhardt, Gary, and Anil Kumar. 2009. "The Repeal of the Retirement Earnings Test and the
        Labor Supply of Older Men." Journal of Pension Economics and Finance 8(4), 429-450.
Engelhardt, Gary, and Anil Kumar. 2014. "Taxes and the Labor Supply of Older Americans:
        Recent Evidence from the Social Security Earnings Test." National Tax Journal 67(2):
        443-458.
Feldstein, Martin. 1990. "Imperfect Annuity Markets, Unintended Bequests, and the Optimal
        Age Structure of Social Security Benefits." Journal of Public Economics 41(4): 31-43.
Fetter, Daniel, and Lee Lockwood. "Government Old-Age Support and Labor Supply: Evidence
        from the Old Age Assistance Program." Forthcoming, American Economic Review.
Figinski, Theodore, David Neumark, 2018. "Does Eliminating the Earnings Test Increase the
        Incidence of Low Income Among Older Women?" Research on Aging, 40(1): 27-53.
Fitzpatrick, Maria, and Timothy Moore, 2018. "The Mortality Effects of Retirement: Evidence
        from Social Security Eligibility at Age 62." Journal of Public Economics, 157: 121-137.




                                              34
French, Eric. 2005. "The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labour Supply and
       Retirement Behaviour." The Review of Economic Studies 72: 395-427.
Friedberg, Leora. 1998. "The Social Security Earnings Test and Labor Supply of Older Men." In
       Tax Policy and the Economy (James M. Poterba, ed.), 121-150. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press.
Friedberg, Leora. 2000. "The Labor Supply Effects of the Social Security Earnings Test." The
       Review of Economics and Statistics. 82: 48-63.
Friedberg, Leora, and Anthony Webb. 2009. "New Evidence on the Labor Supply Effects of the
       Social Security Earnings Test." In Tax Policy and the Economy (Jeffrey R. Brown and
       James M. Poterba, eds.), 1-35. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gelber, Alexander, Damon Jones, and Daniel Sacks. 2013. "Earnings Adjustment Frictions:
       Evidence from the Social Security Earnings Test." NBER Working Paper No. 19491.
Gelber, Alexander, Damon Jones, Daniel Sacks, and Jae Song. 2018. "Using Kinked Budget Sets
       to Estimate Extensive Margin Responses: Evidence from the Social Security Earnings
       Test." NBER Working Paper 23362.
Gelber, Alexander, Damon Jones, and Daniel Sacks. 2019. "Left-Bunching at Kinks: Evidence
       and Implications." University of Chicago working paper.
Golden, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. 2018. Women Working Longer. Chicago: University of
       Chicago Press
Gruber, Jonathan, and Peter Orszag. 2003. "Does the Social Security Earnings Test Affect Labor
       Supply and Benefits Receipt?" National Tax Journal. 56: 755-773.
Gruber, Jonathan, and David Wise. 1999. "Introduction and Summary." In Gruber, Jonathan, and
       David Wise, eds., Social Security and Retirement Around the World (pp. 1-35). Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.
Gustman, Alan, and Steinmeier, Thomas. 1985. "The 1983 Social Security Reforms and Labor
       Supply Adjustment of Older Individuals in the Long Run." Journal of Labor Economics,
       3(2), 237-253.
Haider, Steven, and David Loughran. 2008. "The Effect of the Social Security Earnings Test on
       Male Labor Supply: New Evidence from Survey and Administrative Data." Journal of
       Human Resources. 43(1): 57-87.
Hausman, Jerry. 1981. "Labor Supply." In Aaron, Henry and Pechman, Joseph., eds., How Taxes
       Affect Economic Behavior (pp. 27-71). Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.
Heckman, James. 1979. "Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error." Econometrica, 47(1),
       153-161.
Kreider, Rose M. 2005. Number, Timing, and Duration of Marriages and Divorces: 2001.
       Current Population Reports, P70-97. U.S. Census Bureau, Washington, D.C.
Kleven, Henrik, and Mazhar Waseem. 2013. "Using Notches to Uncover Optimization Frcitions
       and Structural Elasticities: Theory and Evidence from Pakistan." Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 128(2), 669-723.
J.K. Lasser Institute. 1997. J.K. Lasser's Your Income Tax 1998. New York: MacMillan.
Laitner, John, and Dan Silverman. 2012. "Consumption, Retirement, and Social Security:
       Evaluating the Efficiency of Reform that Encourages Longer Careers." Journal of Public
       Economics, 96, 615-634.
Leonesio, Michael. 1990. "The Effects of the Social Security Earnings Test on the Labor-Market
       Activity of Older Americans: A Review of Empirical Evidence." Social Security Bulletin,
       53(5), 2-21.



                                             35
Liebman, Jeffrey B., and Erzo F.P. Luttmer. 2015. "Would People Behave Differently If They
       Better Understood Social Security? Evidence From a Field Experiment." American
       Economic Journal: Economic Policy 7(1): 275-299.
Meyer, Bruce, and Dan Rosenbaum. 2001. "Welfare, the Earned Income Tax Credit, and the
       Labor Supply of Single Mothers." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(3), 1063-1114.
Powell, James. 1994. "Estimation of Semiparametric Models." In Engle, R. F., and McFadden,
       D., eds., Handbook of Econometrics (pp. 2443-2521). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Reimers, Cordelia and Marjorie Honig. 1996. "Responses to Social Security by Men and
       Women: Myopic and Far-Sighted Behavior." Journal of Human Resources (1996): 359-
       382.
Rubin, Donald. 1974. "Estimating Causal Effects of Treatments in Randomized and
       Nonrandomized Studies." Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(5), 688-701.
Saez, Emmanuel. 2010. "Do Taxpayers Bunch at Kink Points?" American Economic Journal:
       Economic Policy, 2, 180-212.
Social Security Administration, 2019. Program Operations Manual System. Available at
       https://secure.ssa.gov/apps10/poms.nsf/lnx/0300615482.
Song, Jae G. 2003. "Evaluating the Initial Impact of Eliminating the Retiremetn Earnings Test."
       Social Security Bulletin (2003): 1-16.
Song, Jae G., and Joyce Manchester. 2007. "New evidence on earnings and benefit claims
       following changes in the retirement earnings test in 2000." Journal of Public Economics.
       91: 669-700.
Viscusi, W. Kip. 1979. Welfare of the Elderly: An Economic Analysis and Policy Prescription.
       New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Vroman, Wayne. 1985. "Some Economic Effects of the Retirement Test." In Ehrenberg, R., ed.,
       Research in Labor Economics (Vol. 7, pp. 31-89). Greenwich, CT: Jai Press, Inc.




                                              36
Figure 1. Earnings Test Real Exempt Amount, 1901 to 2005




Notes: The figure shows the real value of the exempt amount over time among those 62-64 years old
(labeled "Age<65" in the graph) and those 65 and above. The AET applied to earnings of claimants from
ages 62 to 71 from 1981 to 1982, but only to claimants aged 62 to 69 from 1983 to 1999, and only
claimants normal retirement age and younger from 2000 onward. For post-2000 we plot the exempt
amount that applies to workers who are younger than normal retirement age. All dollar figures are
expressed in real 2010 dollars.




                                                 37
Figure 2. Extensive Margin Incentives




Notes: The figure shows the ANBRR (y-axis) as a function of counterfactual gross income (x-axis). The
ANBRR is defined as the fraction of gross income an individual keeps, net of benefit reduction and taxes.
Incentives under a linear tax schedule in which the ANBRR is equal to 1 - 0 everywhere are
represented by the dashed line. Incentives under a kinked tax schedule ­ in which the AET is imposed on
earnings above 1  
                   and Social Security benefits are phased out entirely by 2  
                                                                               ­ are represented by the solid
line. For each individual, the earnings level 2 is a function of their Social Security benefit, as discussed
                                              

in the Appendix.




                                                     38
Figure 3. Extensive Margin Response by State 0 Counterfactual Earnings for a Kink




                    Panel A                                                  Panel B
Notes: The figure illustrates the extensive margin response to the imposition of a kink, by counterfactual
gross income. The x-axis shows desired gross income if employed on a linear budget set in the absence of
the AET, 0 . The y-axis shows a hypothetical probability of employment, under two scenarios: a linear
schedule in the absence of the AET (dashed line) and a kinked tax schedule in the presence of the AET
(solid line). The figure illustrates that the effect of the AET on employment grows as the AET reduces the
ANBRR above the convex kink, and shrinks above the non-convex kink, eventually asymptoting to zero.
If the marginal effect of the ANBRR on employment does not depend on counterfactual earnings, the
magnitude of the effect of the AET on the employment rate should decrease beginning at the non-convex
kink, which is the case shown in Figure 3. However, if the marginal effect of the ANBRR on employment
depends on counterfactual earnings, then the effect of the AET on the employment rate may be
maximized at a counterfactual earnings level other than the level associated with the non-convex kink. In
either case, the effect of the AET on employment follows a U-shaped pattern, as in Figure 3.




                                                   39
Figure 4. Histogram of Percent Real Earnings Growth




Notes: The figure shows the distribution of 1- and 3-year growth rates from base ages 55-58, among
observations with growth rates less than 50%. This histogram shows that there is a large mass at or near
zero percent real earnings growth across a "placebo" set of ages when individuals do not face the AET.
This indicates that a substantial mass of individuals have no growth in desired real earnings, consistent
with the assumptions necessary for our empirical strategy as described in the main text. Real earnings in
each year are calculated using the CPI-U.

Figure 5. Probability of being in the treatment group at  + 3, by age  earnings




Notes: Figure plots, for each $500 bin of base age distance to exempt amount, the fraction of observations that are
treated at  + 3, i.e. the fraction with age  + 3 earnings above the exempt amount. The sample is limited to people
in base ages 55-58, so that  + 3 is not subject to the earnings test, and further limited to observations with positive
earnings at  and  + 3 (so that observed earnings can proxy for desired earnings).




                                                          40
Figure 6. Earnings Distributions at Ages 60 and 62




Note: Figure shows the earnings distributions at ages 60 and 62. We also report the excess mass (relative
to the smoothed fit) within $3,000 of the exempt amount. We use the method of Chetty et al. (2011) to
calculate this excess mass, although we do not impose the constraint that the counterfactual density sums
to 1. The sample is drawn from the EPUF and consists of individuals with positive earnings at the
indicated age, born 1931-1943.




                                                   41
Figure 7. Difference between probability of positive earnings among those earning above and
below the exempt amount, by age




Notes: the figure shows (y-axis) the difference between those earning above z* and those earning below
z* at age a in the probability of positive earnings at age a+3, as a function of age a+3 (x-axis). To parallel
our main specification, we plot differences adjusting for our controls (female, age and cohort fixed
effects, imputed benefits, and imputed benefits interacted with post). The shaded area is the 95% confidence
region.




                                                     42
Figure 8. Effect of AET on Employment, by Base Age Distance to the Exempt Amount
                          by Base Age Distance to the Exempt Amount




Notes: the figure shows the treatment effect of the AET on employment, for each bin in base year
earnings relative to the exempt amount. We normalize the effect for the bin just below the exempt amount
to zero. We report two estimates of the location of the average nonconvex kink, i.e. the earnings level
where benefits are exhausted. The first location ignores family benefits and is based only on own imputed
benefits. The second location is calculated as follows. First, we assume that everyone has a 95% chance
of being married. We assume spousal benefits for men are the average female benefits in our sample, and
likewise for women. We calculate family benefits as own benefits plus spousal benefits if married .The
average nonconvex kink is the average distance at which family benefits are exhausted by the AET, i.e.
the annual family benefit divided by the benefit reduction rate. The error bars represent 95% confidence
intervals.




                                                   43
Figure 9. Placebo estimates at younger ages and varying the exempt amount




Notes: Each point in the figure is the estimate from a placebo regression in which the exempt amount is set as
indicated, we exclude people older than base age 58, and we define the post period as base age older than 57. The
shaded area is the 95% confidence region. The shaded area is the 95% confidence region.




                                                        44
Figure 10. Estimates at placebo treatment ages but the true exempt amount




Notes: Each point in the figure is the estimate from a DID regression in which treatment assumed to start at the
indicated age. The sample underlying each point includes base ages from 55 to the treatment age ­ 2 (so that the
"post" period lasts two years in all cases). The age 62 placebo includes one truly treated age (63) and the age 63
point corresponds to our main estimate. The shared area represents the 95% confidence region.




                                                         45
Table 1. Summary statistics: means (standard deviations) of main variables

 Sample                             All              Estimation               Control              Treatment
                                    (1)                  (2)                    (3)                   (4)

Positive earnings                   55.45                  74.11                 66.56                  80.49
dummy, ages 55-64                  (40.60)                (29.39)               (29.38)                (24.77)
Earnings, ages 55-64               19,290                25,972                  18,139               30,755
                                  (23,451)              (23,836)               (17,276)              (23,260)
Female                              52.04                  53.38                 51.68                  56.92
                                   (49.96)                (49.89)               (49.97)                (49.52)

Year of birth                      1937.36               1937.44                1937.30               1937.46
                                    (3.80)                (3.80)                 (3.78)                (3.80)
# Observations                   3,206,255              2,377,854             1,064,122              1,313,732
# People                          323,743                240,181               185,980                200,532
 Notes: Table reports the mean and (in parentheses) standard deviation of the indicated variable. The
 sample is drawn from the EPUF. "All" sample consists of people aged 55-61 and born 1931-1943.
 Estimation sample is further restricted to people with positive earnings. The treatment group is
 person-years with earnings above the exempt amount, and the control group is everyone else.


Table 2. Main estimates
                                   = 3 years ahead                                  = 4 years ahead
                             (1)        (2)         (3)                       (4)        (5)         (6)
DID coefficient             -3.7        -2.9       -2.9                      -4.0        -3.1       -3.0
                            (0.2)      (0.3)       (0.3)                     (0.3)      (0.3)       (0.3)

# Observations           1,351,688        1,351,688       1,351,688        1,181,301       1,181,301        1,181,301
# People                  240,181          240,181         240,181          237,839         237,839          237,839

Controls
Benefits                                   X               X                                X                X
Sex                                                        X                                                 X
Age FE                                                     X                                                 X
Cohort FE                                                  X                                                 X
 Notes: Table shows the DID coefficient. The outcome is a dummy for positive earnings (x100) in the indicated
 number of years ahead. The sample is drawn from the EPUF. The sample consists of people born 1931-1943 with
 positive base age earnings, and base age 55 to 64 - . All specifications control for main effects of post and treat.
 The benefit controls are imputed benefits plus their interaction with post. Standard errors (in parentheses) are
 clustered by individual.




                                                        46
Table 3. Heterogeneity in estimates by sex and permanent income


 Split                         Male                Female         High PI                       Low PI
                               (1)                   (2)              (3)                         (4)
                                                      A.    = 3 years ahead
  DID coefficient               -2.0                 -3.6            -5.6                          0.5
                               (0.4)                (0.4)           (0.4)                         (0.4)
  Elasticity                    0.18                 0.26            0.38                         -0.05
  # Observations              611,711              739,977         844,539                      507,149
  # People                    111,962              128,219         143,127                       97,054

                                                      B.    = 4 years ahead
  DID coefficient               -2.5                 -3.5            -5.4                          -0.1
                               (0.4)                (0.4)           (0.4)                         (0.4)
  Elasticity                    0.23                 0.26            0.38                         0.01
  # Observations              535,116              646,185         737,408                      443,893
  # People                    110,622              127,217         141,984                       95,855
 Notes: Table reports DID estimates for the indicated group. The outcome is a dummy for positive earnings the
 indicated number of years ahead (x100). The sample is drawn from the EPUF. The sample consists of people born
 1931-1943 with positive earnings in base ages 55 to 64 - . All columns include controls for treat, sex, age, and
 cohort fixed effects, plus imputed benefits interacted with post. High PI means high permanent income. Permanent
 income is defined as average real earnings across ages 35-55 (counting only ages with positive income. High PI
 people have permanent income above their sex-cohort median. The elasticity assumes a 40% OASI claiming rate.
 Robust standard errors, clustered on person, in parentheses.




                                                      47
Table 4. Estimates including outcome ages 65 and above

                                               = 4 years ahead                        = 5 years ahead
                                                    (1)                                    (2)

                                                   A. Include outcome ages 63-64
 DID coefficient                                      -4.0                        -5.0
                                                     (0.3)                        (0.3)
 # Observations                                    1,085,274                    1,070,751
 # People                                           193,494                      193,327

                                                     B. Exclude outcome ages 63-64
 DID coefficient                                      -5.9                       -6.8
                                                     (0.4)                       (0.3)
 # Observations                                     789,445                     763,214
 # People                                           191,589                     191,233
Notes: Table reports DID estimates. The outcome is a dummy for positive earnings the indicated number of years
ahead (x100). The sample is drawn from the EPUF. The sample consists of people born 1931-1943 with positive
earnings in base ages 55 to 61. Panel B excludes people with base age 63 -  and 64 -  . Additional controls
include controls for treat, sex, age, and cohort fixed effects, plus imputed benefits interacted with post. Robust
standard errors, clustered on person, in parentheses.




                                                       48
Table 5. Robustness checks

 Specification          Main          Different      BW =$5,000       Earnings in      All Cohorts       TS2SLS
                                       proxy                           [5k, 50k]
                          (1)            (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)


                                                            A.  = 3 years ahead
  DID coefficient        -2.9            -3.1            -1.3          -2.0                 -4.3           -2.8
                        (0.3)           (0.3)           (0.5)          (0.3)                 (0.2)        (0.2)
  Elasticity             0.23           0.28            0.432          0.18                  0.33          0.22
  # Observations      1,334,493         1,334,493      206,171       803,294              2,521,147     1,334,493
  # People             239,995            239,995      87,670        180,968               454,856       239,995

                                                            B.  = 4 years ahead
  DID coefficient        -3.0            -3.0            -1.2          -1.8                 -4.6           -3.9
                        (0.3)           (0.3)           (0.5)          (0.3)                 (0.2)        (0.3)
  Elasticity             0.25           0.29            0.41           0.17                  0.37          0.32
  # Observations      1,163,216         1,163,216      177,821       698,491              2,202,262     1,163,216
  # People             237,571            237,571      80,383        175,036               450,030       237,571
 Notes: Table reports DID estimates. The outcome is a dummy for positive earnings the indicated number of years
 ahead (x100). Column (1) reports ours main estimates, in which the sample (drawn from the EPUF) consists of
 people born 1931-1943 with positive base age earnings, and base ages 55 to 64 - . The controls in column (1)
 include controls for treat, sex, age, and cohort fixed effects, plus imputed benefits interacted with post. The
 remaining columns all involve one change relative to this baseline. In column (2) we define treat using average
 earnings (when positive) in the base age and the prior two years. In column (3) we limit the sample to people with
 base age earnings within $5,000 of the exempt amount. In column (4) we limit the sample to people with base age
 earnings between $5,000 and $50,000. In column (5) we expand the sample to include birth cohorts 1918-1943. In
 column (6) we use TS2SLS and BEPUF data (for age 62 claimants in the 1942 cohort only) to correct for
 measurement error in the benefits measure; this necessitates dropping the year-of-birth fixed effects. The elasticity
 assumes a 40% OASI claiming rate. For all specification we report robust standard errors, clustered on person, in
 parentheses.




                                                         49
Online Appendix

     A. Framework for interpreting the results

In this section, we sketch a basic framework that is helpful in interpreting the empirical strategy
and results. We model how the AET impacts an individual's decision of whether or not to have a
positive amount of earnings, which we refer to as the "employment" decision. Throughout, we
make use of a potential outcomes framework (Rubin, 1974). We index two potential states of the
world by j{0,1}.

To capture the real-world features of how OASI benefits, taxes, and the AET work, our
framework incorporates all three.23 Following previous literature (e.g. Friedberg, 1998;
Friedberg, 2000), we model the AET as creating a positive benefit reduction rate (BRR) for some
individuals above the exempt amount, consistent with the empirical finding in this previous
literature that some individuals bunch at the exempt amount. Individuals receive a level of
current benefits that is potentially a function of earnings, i.e.  (), where  () denotes their
current benefit in state j, and z denotes their pre-tax and pre-benefits earnings. The "pre-
reduction" level of benefits is b, which refers to the OASI benefits received before accounting
for the effects of the AET or taxes.24 Current benefits,  (), are determined both by b as well as
by any reductions in benefits due to the AET. Finally, there is a linear tax on earnings, i.e.
() = 0 , which does not vary by state.25 This tax, which reduces net earnings relative to gross
earnings, is separate from the AET, which only acts to reduce OASI benefits.26 Total post-tax
and post-benefit resources are therefore:

                                    - () +  () = (1 - 0 ) +  ().

In state 0, when there is no AET, the current benefit level is independent of earnings, i.e.
0 () = . Therefore, individuals face a flat net "benefit reduction rate." That is, as earnings
increase, the marginal reduction in post-tax and post-benefit resources is simply 0 . In state 1,
the AET BRR is  where the AET reduces benefits at the margin, i.e. for earnings above the
exempt amount but below the point at which benefits have been phased out entirely. The
presence of the AET introduces two changes in slope to the budget set, one at 1  
                                                                                   and another at
2 
   (), due to reductions in current benefits:


23
   It would alternatively be possible to model the effects of OASI benefits and taxes using a single function, but we
have modeled them separately to capture the reality of how the tax system and the AET operate separately. They are
administered by separate agencies: the Internal Revenue Service and the Social Security Administration,
respectively.
24
   For notational simplicity, we have made the benefit constant across individuals. In reality, each individual may
receive a different level of pre-reduction benefits. The main issue this affects for our purposes is the earnings level at
which the benefit is phased out entirely, which in reality can be different across individuals.
25
   We do not model taxes on Social Security benefits for simplicity; adding taxes on benefits would not change the
qualitative predictions of the framework. Social Security benefits were untaxed until 1984, so benefits escaped
taxation fully in most of our sample years (from 1978 to 1983). Starting in 1984, benefits were only taxed above an
income threshold that was well above the AET exempt amount, implying that most benefits still escaped taxation.
26
   Introducing non-linear taxes for each individual would not qualitatively affect the predictions of this section as
long as they are linear on average in the relevant range.


                                                           50
                                                             
                                                  for   1
                                                    )                
                          1 () = { -  ( - 1           for 1 <   2     ()
                                                        ()
                                                0 for 2     < 
The first change in slope occurs at the point at which the AET is imposed, 1  
                                                                               , while the second
change in slope occurs at the point where OASI benefits are phased out entirely, 2   
                                                                                      (). At the
higher amount, 2 (), the net benefit reduction rate returns to its lower level, creating a non-
                 

convex kink in the budget set. This second threshold is a function of OASI benefits, and is
defined as follows:
                                        2 ()
                                               = 1 
                                                    + / .
This second threshold varies at the individual level, based on the size of one's OASI annual
benefit.

Following previous literature, we assume individuals have a smooth distribution of "ability,"
which governs the tradeoff between leisure and consumption. In the presence of a linear tax, this
should result in a smooth distribution of earnings conditional on working (e.g. Hausman, 1981;
Saez, 2010; Kleven and Waseem, 2013). In the presence of the AET, a standard model predicts
an intensive margin response with excess mass in earnings, or "bunching," to be present at the
convex kink created at 1  
                            (Gelber et al. 2013). At the extensive margin, to capture the realistic
pattern of potential entry to or exit from non-trivial levels of earnings, we can assume a fixed
cost of employment (Cogan, 1981; Eissa et al., 2008). In this case, extensive margin decisions
are a function of the average net-of-benefit-reduction rate (ANBRR), defined as
                                         [(()­ ())­ ((0) - (0))]
                           1­                                              . 27
                                                         
The ANBRR reflects the fraction of an individual's gross income that she keeps, net of both
taxes and benefits, if she is employed at earnings level z rather than earning zero.

To demonstrate the impact of a kink on the decision to work in this context, we illustrate the
extensive margin incentives created by the AET in Figure 2. Here we plot the ANBRR as a
function of counterfactual earnings, that is, earnings conditional on working, in the
counterfactual state where there is only a linear tax. We denote these potential earnings as 0 .
We distinguish between these earnings and realized earnings, z, which incorporate the extensive
margin decision and can be zero. The ANBRR measures the share of pre-tax income that is kept
after taxes when working and earning z. In state 0, the ANBRR is constant at 1 - 0 . This is
represented by a dashed line. The solid line in Figure 2 shows that with the nonlinear budget set
created by the AET, the ANBRR is 1 - 0 below 1        
                                                       , but becomes 1 - 0 -  (0 - 1        )/
                                                                                               0
above 1 , and therefore begins to decrease in 0 . However, after the benefit has been entirely
         

phased out, the ANBRR becomes 1 - 0 - /0 at 2             ()
                                                             , begins to increase in 0 , and
eventually asymptotes back to 1 - 0 for large enough 0 .




27 Gelber et al. (2018) give an extended discussion of extensive margin earnings decisions in the presence of a
kinked budget set.


                                                         51
   B. Validating our Measure of Social Security Benefits

        A key control variable in our analysis is the monthly benefit amount. Because we are
interested in employment effects at ages 63 and 64, our interest is in what the benefit amounts
would be if a person claimed OASI benefits. Our goal, therefore, is to impute the benefits a
person would earn if she claimed at age 62. As d escribed in the text, we impute benefits using a
calculator provided by the Social Security Administration, applied to observed earnings histories,
but with earnings at ages 55-61 set equal to their age 55 level.
        This procedure creates two potential sources of measurement error in our imputation.
First, of course, we do not use actual earnings at ages 55-61. Second, we do not observe exact
earnings; instead there is a slight amount of random rounding in principle leads to errors in the
benefit imputation. To assess the severity of this measurement error, we use data from the
BEPUF, in which we observe actual monthly benefits as of 2004. For most people in the
BEPUF, benefits observed are not the object of interest, because most people are not 62 year-old
claimants in 2004. However, for people who were born in 1942 and claim OASI benefits as a
retired worker, actual benefits in the BEPUF are exactly the object of interest.
        We validate our measure by estimating the following regression
                                          = 0 + 1  +  ,
where  is our imputed benefit and  is the observed benefit, and We use data from the BEPUF
                                        

and we limit the sample to people born in 1942 and claiming at age 62. The slope coefficient in
this regression is the signal-to-noise ratio, and if  were measured perfectly, we would expect a
constant of 0 and a slope of 1. The results are in Appendix Table 1. The first column shows
results for everyone and the second for retired workers only (e.g., excluding disabled
beneficiaries). In the first column the slope is 0.844, close to 1 but clearly below it, and the
constant is $232. However, the sample in the first column includes people who claimed benefits
on a spouse's record or as a disabled beneficiary, and our imputation is likely inaccurate for
them. When we limit the sample to retired workers only in column (2), the slope coefficient rises
to 0.95 and the constant falls to $92. Only a small amount of measurement error remains. We
conclude that our imputation process measures age 62 benefits faithfully.




                                               52
     C. Discussion of appendix figures

    Appendix Figure 1 shows that for those with earnings above z* in year a, the probability of
positive earnings falls sharply and substantially from outcome ages 62 to 63, exactly the age
threshold we would expect if individuals respond to the AET by earning zero once they begin to
claim OASI and are subject to the AET. By contrast, for those initially earning below z* in year
a, the probability of having positive earnings at the outcome age falls to a much smaller extent,
both in percentage point terms (shown in the figure) and in percent terms, and much less sharply
(relative to the pre-trend) than for those initially earning above z* in age a.28 This is consistent
with the hypothesis that the AET reduces employment, as it has particular "bite" among those
with relatively high earnings who are disproportionately subject to the AET.
         Appendix Figure 1 shows that the trends in employment for those earning above and
below   during outcome ages prior to 63 are very similar. Thus, we have reason to believe that
anticipatory adjustment to the AET is not a significant issue in our context, as those who are
likely to not face the AET have a similar trend in outcomes as those who are most likely to face
the AET.
         Appendix Figure 2 presents our main Figure 7 in a different way. Figure 7 shows
treatment effects that are specific to bins of base age earnings. The treatment effect is the
differential change in the probability of positive earnings, relative to the pre-period change and
relative to the omitted bin. An alternative way to show this is to calculate, for each bin of base
age distance to exempt amount and for each base age , the probability of positive earnings at
 + 3, and then to difference out this probability relative to some pre-period age. In Appendix
Figure 2 we difference out the age 55 probabilities. The figure shows three important patterns.
First, holding fixed earnings, as age gets higher, the probability of positive earnings falls.
Second, at younger ages, the relationship between earnings and future employment is near zero,
but, third, at higher ages, it is u-shaped: at first flat, then decreasing, then increasing. This is the
basic pattern implied by our model.
         We also briefly recapitulate the key findings of in Gelber et al. (2018), which further help
to bolster the credibility of the results of the current paper. Paralleling the sharp change at the
exempt amount in the slope of the ANBRR shown in Figure 2, Gelber et al. show theoretically
that there should be a corresponding sharp change in slope of the employment rate as a function
of age 60 earnings if there are frictions at the intensive margin that prevent individuals from
adjusting to the AET by bunching at the exempt amount. This pattern does arise in the data: We
show in Appendix Figure 3 (from Gelber et al., 2018) that there is no visible change in the slope
of the employment rate at the exempt amount at ages 61 and 62--prior to the ages when we
should start to see an effect--but that we begin to observe a visible change in slope at ages 63
and 64. Using a Regression Kink Design (RKD), Gelber et al. (2018) show that there is no
statistically significant change in slope at the exempt amount at ages 61 or 62, but that the
change in slope becomes statistically significant at ages 63 and 64.
    We also show in Appendix Figure 4 that predetermined covariates do not noticeably change
in slope or level around the exempt amount, as the regressions in Gelber et al. (2018) confirm.
This is consistent with the assumptions necessary for the validity of the empirical design.

28
  It is not surprising that employment falls, albeit relatively smoothly, from ages 62 to 63 even for those initially
earning below z*; employment rates gradually fall at older ages (e.g. Maestas 2010). Moreover, pension programs
could have income effects on employment that reduce employment substantially (Fetter and Lockwood
forthcoming).


                                                          53
     D. Interpretation of the results in light of benefit enhancement

     One important question is whether the response to the AET is influenced by its impact on
future OASI benefits, given that benefits may be enhanced in the future after they are initially
reduced due to the AET. Several considerations point against the view that future benefits play a
significant role in mediating responses to the Earnings Test, as we discuss in detail in this
Appendix.
     First, responses to the AET do not appear to be larger for those who have relatively short
lifespans, for whom the Earnings Test is particularly punitive. As described above, literature has
established that individuals "bunch" at the Earnings Test exempt amount (Friedberg 1998;
Friedberg 2000; Gelber, Jones, and Sacks forthcoming). If expected future benefits matter for
responses to the Earnings Test, then we would expect these bunchers to be disproportionately
composed of those who have short average lifespans, for whom the Earnings Test is particularly
punitive. If so, expected lifespan should fall sharply as a function of earnings, in a radius within
approximately $3,000 of the exempt amount where individuals tend to bunch (as shown in
Gelber, Jones, and Sacks forthcoming). However, we do not see this pattern in the data.
Appendix Figures 5 and 6 show that the probability of living past 70 (Appendix Figure 5) and
average realized lifespan conditional on dying by the end of the sample (Appendix Figure 6), in a
one percent sample of the SSA data on the U.S. population that was used in Gelber, Jones, and
Sacks (forthcoming). Both graphs are essentially flat around the exempt amount, suggesting that
future benefits do not play a role in mediating these responses to the AET.29
     Second, the data show no response to the incentives created by future benefit enhancement.
Over time benefit enhancement has become more generous but, as we describe in greater detail
in Gelber, Jones, and Sacks (2019), for those over NRA there is no evidence of systematic
bunching reaction to changes in the DRC and little relationship between bunching and life
expectancy. For those under NRA, future benefits are enhanced substantially if current earnings
exceed the exempt amount by even a single dollar. This creates an upward notch in lifetime
income. Gelber, Jones and Sacks (2019) show however that there is disproportionate bunching
under the exempt amount ­ the opposite of the pattern we would expect if people reacted to the
full incentives created by benefit enhancement..
     Third, in Table 3 of the current paper, we show heterogeneity in the estimated effects with
respect to average lifetime income. Although income is not a perfect proxy for longevity, the two
variables are significantly correlated (and as shown in literature from Preston 1975 to Chetty et
al. 2016). Those with below-average income will on average have lower lifespan and, all else
equal, should therefore react more to the Earnings Test because it is more punitive. In fact, we
observe a smaller reaction among those with low average prior lifetime income.
         Fourth, Table 3 also shows heterogeneity with respect to sex. Men have shorter average
lifetimes than women, so we might expect to react more to the Earnings Test. In fact, women
respond more than men.
         Fifth, in Gelber, Jones, and Sacks (2019) we provide additional evidence that individuals
mis-perceive the Earnings Test as more punitive than it is. Perhaps the reason for this apparent
lack of reaction to variation in future benefits, is that the earnings test is widely mis-perceived as

29
   We lack data on lifespan in the EPUF, and therefore we are not able to analyze the relationship between lifespan
and extensive margin responses, given our current data constraints. However, the lack of a relationship between
lifespan and intensive margin responses is telling and strongly suggestive that responses to the Earnings Test are not
mediated by future benefits.


                                                         54
a pure tax. Most popular guides do not note the subsequent adjustment in benefits under the
earnings test (Gruber & Orszag (2003)). During the period that we study, the popular guide Your
Income Tax (J.K. Lasser Institute (1997)), for example, warned readers that if "you are under age
70, Social Security benefits are reduced by earned income," but did not note the subsequent
benefit adjustment. Many individuals also may not understand the AET benefit enhancement or
other aspects of OASI (Liebman and Luttmer 2015; Brown, Kapteyn, Mitchell, and Mattox
2013). Previous literature has found significant bunching responses to the AET (e.g. Friedberg
2000; Gelber, Jones, and Sacks 2013), implying that some individuals act as if the AET is
punitive.




                                               55
   E. Replication in the restricted-access data and in the BEPUF

         We began this project with access to data from the Master Earning's File. The sample
was a 25% random sample of people born 1918-1923. We limited that sample to people without
self-employment income. The main advantage of the restricted-access data is that it contains
exact earnings information, not top coded or rounded, and that it separates self-employment and
other income; otherwise it is similar to the public access data sets. An additional advantage of the
restricted data is its enormous size, although estimates with the public use files appear
reasonably precise anyway.
         Before we lost access to the restricted-access data, we estimated simple difference-in-
differences models without controls. We present those results in Appendix Table 2. The
coefficient when  = 3 is -7.1 and when  = 4 it is -9.4. These estimates are not comparable to
our main results because of differences in the cohorts (1918-1923 vs. 1931-1943) and differences
in the specifications. To make the estimates comparable, we present in Appendix Table 3
estimates from the EPUF that look at the same set of cohorts and, in columns (1) and (4), use the
same set of controls. The estimates are quite similar, -8.2 and -8.6 when  = 3 and  = 4.
         These results show very similar estimates in the restricted-access and public use files.
The results do raise a different question, namely, why does responsiveness seem so much higher
for the older cohorts? The answer is that the estimates in the restricted access data do not control
for the confounding effect of benefits. When we control for imputed benefits in columns (2) and
(5), the estimates fall dramatically and are now much closer to the estimates for later cohorts
(although still 25 percent larger). Further controlling for demographics in the public use files
does not much change the estimates. Thus we believe that we would obtain similar results in the
restricted-access data, were we able to estimate our main specifications in them.
         We also replicate our main results in the BEPUF. We follow our sample selection and
specification as closely as possible. However, the BEPUF only contains earnings information
through 2003, so we limit the sample to people born between 1931 and 1940 (rather than 1931 to
1943 in the EPUF, which runs through 2006), so that the last cohort in the BEPUF sample
reaches age 63 at the end of the data. Because the BEPUF is a random sample of Social Security
claimants, its sampling frame is quite different from the EPUF's. To make it more comparable,
we further limit the BEPUF sample to people with retired worker benefits (as of 2004, the date at
which benefits are recorded); otherwise the BEPUF would oversample disabled beneficiaries,
who likely have different patterns of labor force attachment.
         We present estimates from the BEPUF in Appendix Table 4. This table is exactly
analogous to our Table 2 of the main text, our main results. The results are also highly similar. In
our preferred specification, we estimate a DID coefficient of -2.5 when  = 3 and -2.8 when
 = 4. Although the BEPUF's sampling frame is different from the EPUF's, we find it reassuring
that both sets of estimates are within sampling error of each other. We conclude that our results
are not sensitive to the choice data set.




                                                56
Appendix References not cited in the main text
Chetty, Raj, Michael Stepner, Sarah Abraham, Shelby Lin, Benjamin Scuderi, Nicholas Turner,
       Augustin Bergeron, and David Cutler. 2016. "The Association Between Income and Life
       Expectancy in the United States, 2001-2014." JAMA, 315(16): 1750-1766.
Maestas, Nichole. 2010. "Back to Work: Expectations and Realizations of Work After
       Retirement." Journal of Human Resources, 45(3): 718-748.
Preston, Samuel H. 1975. "The Changing Relation between Mortality and Level of Economic
       Development." Population Studies, 29(2): 231-248.




                                            57
Appendix Figure 1. Probability of positive earnings by age and earnings relative to exempt
amount




Notes: We show the employment probability by age, for the below-z* (above-z*) group that earned below
(above) the exempt amount three years prior. To parallel our main specification, we plot means adjusting
for our controls (female, age and cohort fixed effects, imputed benefits, and imputed benefits interacted
with post). The shared area represents the 95% confidence region.




                                                   58
Appendix Figure 2 Differential probability of positive earnings at  + 3, relative to age 55, as
a function of base age and base age earnings




Notes: Figure plots, for each base age  and bin of earnings relative to the exempt amount, the difference in the
fraction of observations with positive earnings at  + 3, relative to the fraction in base age 55. The sample is drawn
from the EPUF and consists of people born 1931-1943, with positive earnings in the indicated base ages.




                                                         59
Appendix Figure 3. Probability of Positive Earnings by Single Year of Age, Ages 61 to 64




Notes: the source of the figure is Gelber et al. (2018). Each figure plots the mean annual employment
rate, i.e. the probability of positive earnings, for each single year of age from 61 to 64, as a function of the
distance to the exempt amount, which has been normalized to zero. The sample is individuals with
positive age 60 earnings and no age 60 self-employment income, born 1918 to 1923.




                                                      60
Appendix Figure 4. Predetermined covariates around the exempt amount




Notes: the source of the figure is Gelber et al. (2018). The figure shows the bin means of predetermined
covariates as a function of the distance to the age 60 exempt amount. The figure demonstrates that there
are no clear visual changes in slope in any of these covariates at the age 60 exempt amount, consistent
with the assumptions necessary for the validity of the regression kink design employed in Gelber et al.
(2018).




                                                   61
Appendix Figure 5. Probability of living to age 70 as a function of age 62-64 earnings




Notes: The sample consists of people aged 62-64 in 1990-1999 who claimed by age 65. The x-axis is earnings
relative to the exempt amount. The y-axis shows the fraction of people living to age 70 or greater in each $800 bin.
The shaded area is the 95% confidence interval. Source: SSA data.




                                                         62
Appendix Figure 6. Age at death as a function of age 62-64 earnings




Notes: The sample consists of people aged 62-64 in 1990-1999 who claimed by age 65. The x-axis is earnings
relative to the exempt amount. The y-axis shows the average age at death (conditional on dying) in each $800 bin.
The shaded area is the 95% confidence interval. Source: SSA data.




                                                        63
Appendix Table 1. Validating benefit imputation
 Sample                                               All                          Retired workers only
                                                       (1)                                  (2)
  Slope                                               0.844                                0.953
                                                     (0.005)                             (0.004)
  Constant                                           231.888                              91.679
                                                     (6.215)                             (4.848)
   2                                                   0.822                                0.934
  # Observations                                       8,504                                7,372
Notes: Table reports the estimates from a bivariate regression of monthly benefit amounts as reported in the BEPUF
against imputed benefit amounts. Sample is limited to people born in 1942 and claiming benefits at age 62 because
for this sample we observe actual benefits at age 62 in the BEPUF (i.e. the variable we impute). Robust standard
errors in parentheses.



Appendix Table 2. Results from restricted-access administrative data and specifications that do
not control for benefits
                                               = 3 years ahead                       = 4 years ahead
                                                     (1)                                   (2)
 DID coefficient                                    -7.1                                  -9.4
                                                   (0.05)                                (0.05)

 # Observations                                   48,580,452                            48,580,452
 # People                                          8,296,628                             8,296,628
  Notes: Table shows the DID coefficient. The outcome is a dummy for positive earnings (x100) in the indicated
  number of years ahead. The sample is a 25% random sample of people born 1918-1923 from the Master Earnings
  File. The sample is limited to observations with positive earnings and base age 55 to 61. Additional controls
  include post and treat. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by individual.




                                                       64
  Appendix Table 3. Limiting the EPUF sample to earlier cohorts to match SSA data
                                         = 3 years ahead                                   = 4 years ahead
                                  (1)             (2)               (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)
   DID Coefficient              -8.2            -3.8              -3.8           -8.6             -4.1             -4.1
                               (0.4)           (0.47)            (0.47)         (0.4)            (0.5)            (0.5)
   # Observations              542,581         542,581           542,581        475,796          475,796          475,796
   # People                    97,969          97,969            97,969         96,999           96,999           96,999

   Controls
   Benefits                                   X                X                               X               X
   Sex                                                         X                                               X
   Age FE                                                      X                                               X
   Cohort FE                                                   X                                               X
    Notes: Table shows the DID coefficient. The outcome is a dummy for positive earnings (x100) in the indicated
    number of years ahead. The sample is drawn from the EPUF. It consists of people born 1918-1923 with positive
    base age earnings, and base age 55 to 64 - . All specifications control for main effects of post and treat. The
    benefit controls are imputed benefits plus their interaction with post. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered
    by individual.

  Appendix Table 4. Replicating the main estimates in the BEPUF
                                   = 3 years ahead                                        = 4 years ahead
                              (1)          (2)                   (3)             (4)             (5)                (6)
DID Coefficient              -3.5         -2.4                  -2.5            -3.9            -2.7               -2.8
                            (0.3)        (0.3)                 (0.4)           (0.4)           (0.4)              (0.4)
Elasticity                  0.24          0.19                 0.19            0.27            0.22               0.22
# Observations            772.417          772.417          772.417           672,596          672,596          672,596
# People                  133,240          133,240          133,240           132,093          132,093          132,093

Controls
Benefits                                  X                X                                 X                X
Sex                                                        X                                                  X
Age FE                                                     X                                                  X
Cohort FE                                                  X                                                  X
  Notes: Table shows the DID coefficient. The outcome is a dummy for positive earnings (x100) in the indicated
  number of years ahead. The sample is drawn from the BEPUF. It consists of people born 1931-1940 with positive
  base age earnings, and base age 55 to 64 - . All specifications control for main effects of post and treat. The
  benefit controls are imputed benefits plus their interaction with post. The elasticity assumes a 40% OASI claiming
  rate. Standard errors (in parentheses) are clustered by individual.




                                                            65
