                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             DO ELECTIONS MAKE YOU SICK?

                                       Hung-Hao Chang
                                       Chad Meyerhoefer

                                      Working Paper 26697
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26697


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




The authors would like to thank the National Health Institute in Taiwan for providing access to
the individual health claim data. The authors also thank James Dearden and participants of the
2019 iHEA World Congress on Health Economics for valuable comments on an earlier version of
this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not reflect the policies of
National Health Institute, Central Election Commission, Control Yuan in Taiwan, or the National
Bureau of Economic Research. The authors share senior authorship and responsibility for any
errors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Hung-Hao Chang and Chad Meyerhoefer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Elections Make You Sick?
Hung-Hao Chang and Chad Meyerhoefer
NBER Working Paper No. 26697
January 2020
JEL No. H51,I18,P16

                                          ABSTRACT

Anecdotal reports and small-scale studies suggest that elections are stressful, and might lead to a
deterioration in voters' mental well-being. Nonetheless, researchers have yet to establish whether
elections actually make people sick, and if so, why. By applying a regression discontinuity design
to administrative health care claims from Taiwan, we determine that elections increased health
care use and expense only during legally specified campaign periods by as much as 19%. Overall,
the treatment cost of illness caused by elections exceeded publicly reported levels of campaign
expenditure, and accounted for 2% of total national health care costs during the campaign period.


Hung-Hao Chang
Department of Agricultural Economics
National Taiwan University
No 1, Roosevelt Rd, Sec 4
Taipei 10617
Taiwan
hunghaochang@ntu.edu.tw

Chad Meyerhoefer
Rauch Business Center
Lehigh University
621 Taylor Street
Bethlehem, PA 18015
and NBER
chm308@lehigh.edu




An appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26697
1. Introduction
One defining characteristic of a democratic society is free and fair elections where
candidates with different political views compete to hold public office. Because each
candidate must convince voters that their views and proposed policies are superior to
their opponents', election campaigns necessarily create societal conflict. This a
natural consequence of the fact that supporters of the candidate, who grow in number
as the campaign progresses, advocate for the candidate's views in their interactions
with both uncommitted voters and supporters of the opposing candidates. They also
band together with as many as tens of thousands of other supporters at rallies intended
to promote the candidate and project political strength (Paget 2019; Al Jazeera 2019;
Shaheen 2018; Szwarcberg 2012; de la Torre and Conaghan 2009).
     Although elections heighten dominant opposing views among segments of the
electorate, the transfer of political power through elections typically reduces conflict
and violence relative to authoritarian societies. This is one reason why citizens of
democratic societies live longer, healthier lives than their counterparts in autocracies
(Bollyky et al. 2019). Nonetheless, there is always concern that the societal conflicts
arising during an election will escalate to the point of more serious social strife. In
order to keep the electoral process fair and orderly, most countries have rules
governing political advertising, the organization of rallies, and the operation of voting
centers (ACE Electoral Knowledge Network, 2019). These and other regulations,
such as minimum mandated campaign periods, facilitate the democratic process by
ensuring that all candidates have equal access to the electorate and sufficient time to
educate voters of their policy positions so that they can make informed choices
(Arceneaux 2005).
     Recently, numerous articles and analyses in the global media as well as some
formal research studies have documented the effects of elections and election
campaigns on psychological well-being (Williams and Medlock 2017; Hagan et al.
2018; Krupenin et al. 2019; Seigel 2018; Kritz 2018; Faridz, Hollingsworth and John
2019; Ganesan 2018; Smith, Hibbing and Hibbing 2019). News outlets and other
organizations have provided anecdotal evidence that the political conflict caused by
elections is associated with elevated levels of stress and psychological distress. For
example, results from the Stress in America Survey conducted around the time of the
2016 U.S. presidential election revealed that over half of all Americans found the
election to be a "very" or "somewhat" significant source of stress in their lives
(American Psychological Association, 2017). Likewise, an article in the overseas
edition of the People's Daily (a prominent Chinese Communist Party newspaper)
claimed that the incidence of "sleeplessness, headaches, faintness, loss of appetite,
anger and violent tendencies" increased during the 2016 Taiwanese presidential
                                            3
election (Tatlow 2016). Other articles have documented the emergence of election
stress disorders in India and Taiwan and the high incidence of morbidity and mortality
among campaign workers in Indonesia from overexertion (Ming-Hsiang and Xie
2019; Ganesan 2018; Faridz, Hollingsworth and John 2019).
     Similar phenomenon have been found in the U.S. For example, Hoyt et al.
(2018) provides evidence to support adverse effects of the 2016 presidential election.
Specifically, the authors document negative emotions and elevated cortisol levels (a
hormone released by the body in response to stress) among young adults in the two
days leading up to the election night, especially among those supporting the losing
candidate (i.e. women and racial/ethnic minorities). Similarly, Hagan et al (2018)
provides survey-based evidence of clinically significant stress among 25 percent of
769 college students attending a large public university. DeJonckheere, Fisher and
Chang (2018) describes feelings of stress and anxiety, particularly among young
women, during and after the 2016 presidential election.
      These findings are consistent with earlier studies of the 2008 U.S. presidential
election, which detected elevated levels of cortisol and depressed testosterone
secretion among supporters of the losing party immediately after the election (Stanton
et al. 2009; Stanton et al. 2010). Likewise, male voters exhibited elevated cortisol
levels during the 2009 national election in Israel (Waismel-Manro, Ifergane and
Cohen 2011). Numerous studies demonstrate that changes in both testosterone and
cortisol affect aggression, low mood, anxiety and anxious depression (Terburg,
Morgan and Van Honk 2009; Van Honk et al. 2003; Brown et al 1996; Bohus, De
Kloet and Veldhuis 1982). It is therefore not surprising that 26.4% of individuals in a
representative survey of U.S. adults became depressed after their preferred candidate
lost an election; 4.1% even reported suicidal thoughts (Smith, Hibbing and Hibbing
2019). The possibility that election stress could trigger an acute deterioration in
mental health is not confined to the U.S. Psychiatrists in Taiwan reported a 30
percent increase in anxiety attacks and related disorders in some hospitals during an
election period (The Telegraph 2012).
      Nearly all studies on the link between elections and health focus on how
elections increase stress, anxiety and other measures of psychological well-being. Yet,
there is the potential for stressful social events like elections to affect physical as well
as mental health. For example, Smith, Hibbing and Hibbing (2019) reports that 12%
of survey respondents agreed that politics adversely affected their physical health.
Furthermore, in a review of the literature Schwartz et al. (2012) concludes that
stressful social events and natural disasters, such as earthquakes, blizzards, sporting
events, and holidays can trigger life-threatening or fatal cardiovascular illness. We
expand this literature by investigating whether elections and political campaigns
                                             4
negatively affect physical health. We also bring a more rigorous approach to the study
of elections and health by applying causal methods to high-quality data on health care
use and expenditure. Prior studies report correlations that could be subject to selection
bias if individuals with higher levels of participation in election events have better or
worse health.
      Our research design makes use of unique administrative health care claims data
from Taiwan, drawn from over 900 thousand insurants. Health claims have two
distinct advantages over measures of self-reported health. First, they provide both a
way to verify that the condition in question required formal medical treatment and a
measure of treatment intensity. Second, they contain the cost of medical treatment,
which is often of interest to policy makers. We also collected information on vote
counts for two local mayoral elections and two presidential elections from
administrative election profiles. In order to determine whether elections cause
changes in health, we use a regression discontinuity design. Because election
campaigns target eligible voters, those of legal voting age should be most affected by
election-related events. We therefore analyze the sharp jump in health care use during
the election period that occurs for those of the legal voting age relative to those too
young to vote. Importantly, the voting age of 20 in Taiwan does not correspond to
other important age-based milestones, such as the legal age for drinking or smoking,
or the year at which individuals go to college or enter military service.1 Furthermore,
Taiwan's national health care system limits the potential for differences in access to
care to result in selection bias. The large size of our sample also allows us to identify
the specific medical conditions affected by election campaigns.
     Our results suggest that campaigns during national presidential elections
increased health care use and expenditure by 17 ­ 19%, and campaigns for local
mayors increased use and expenditure by 7 ­ 8% among young adults. Elevated health
care use occurred only during the campaign period and did not persist after the
election. Nonetheless, the excess costs from campaigns were sizable, accounting for
2% of nationwide health care costs during presidential campaigns. We find that
campaigns increased the incidence of acute respiratory infections, gastrointensinal
conditions, and injuries. This is consistent with the negative effects of participating in
rallies and other organized campaign events. Although our identification strategy
targets the physical health effects of elections, we provide suggestive evidence that
the elections in question did not increase the use of mental health services.
      Our study relates to the broader literature on the effects of election campaigns.


1
  The legal age for drinking and smoking is 18. Adolescents usual enter college or university at age 18
and complete their mandatory military service after they graduate (usually age 21). Adolescents who do
not go to college typically enter military service at age 18.
                                                  5
Numerous studies investigate the how campaigns influence election outcomes, voter
turnout, trust in government, and other factors (Jacobson 2015; Lau, Sigelman and
Rovner 2007). However, no prior research considers the health care cost of election
campaigns. If campaign spending has a negligible effect on election outcomes, as
some studies suggest, then significant negative health care costs of election campaigns
could provide an economic justification for laws that limit campaign spending (Levitt
1994; 1995; Palda and Palda 1998).


2. Politics and Elections in Taiwan
On October 25, 1945 Chiang Kai-shek moved the Government of the Republic of
China to Taiwan, and for the next forty years Taiwan was ruled by a single political
party called Koumintang (KMT). In 1986 a second political party was established, the
Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), and in 1996 direct presidential elections were
introduced under the two-party system (Lay, Yap and Chen 2008). Elections for the
president, members of the unicameral legislature, and mayors of municipalities,
counties and townships are held every four years, but not all at the same time. After
1996, national elections for the president and legislature were held in 2000, 2004,
2008, 2012, and 2016, while district elections for municipalities, counties and
townships were held in 2001, 2005, 2009, 2013, and 2017. Because of the president's
ability to appoint and remove many other officials from the government, including the
premier, the president is considered the single most powerful elected official in
Taiwan.
      Our analysis is based on the national presidential elections in 2008 and 2012 and
the local township mayoral elections in 2005 and 2009. Citizens aged 20 and older
were eligible to vote in these elections, and the DPP and KMT parties nominated the
majority of competing candidates. Core supporters of these parties come from
different social strata in Taiwan. KMT supporters are largely white-collar workers and
government employees, whereas DPP supporters tend to be blue-collar workers,
younger and pro-independence voters. The KMT party prevailed in both presidential
elections, but by a different margin. In the March 22, 2008 presidential election the
KMT candidate received 58% of the vote, winning by a 2.2 million vote margin over
the DPP candidate, who received 42% of the vote. In the January 14, 2012 election
this margin narrowed, with the KMT candidate receiving 50% of the vote and DPP
candidate 45% (a third party candidate received the remainder of the vote). The KMT
party was also dominant in the 2005 and 2009 township mayoral elections: 173 of the
319 mayors elected on December 3, 2005 (54%) were from the KMT party, while 35
mayors (11%) belonged to the DPP. Among the winners elected on December 5, 2009,
57% and 16% were from the KMT party and the DPP, respectively.
                                           6
     The main reasons why we analyze data from both presidential and township
mayoral elections are that: (1) we wish to determine whether the scale of the election
matters to voter health and; (2) we seek to compare health care spending before,
during, and after election campaign periods. The mandated campaign period for
presidential elections is four weeks, whereas township mayor campaigns may occur
only one week prior to the election date. Analyzing these two campaign periods will
provide insight into whether increases in health care use result from election
campaigns or from election outcomes.


3. Data
In order to identify the causal effect of elections and political campaigns on health
care utilization we use data from several different sources. These include unique
administrative health care records, hand-collected data on election outcomes and
campaign spending, and control data from several government agencies in Taiwan.


3.1 Health claim profiles from the National Health Insurance Program
     We obtained information on health care use and expenditure from the
administrative health claims profiles of Taiwan's National Health Insurance Program
(NHI; Chiang 1997; Wu et al. 2010). The NHI is a government-sponsored health
insurance system that provides 98% of Taiwanese residents with comprehensive
coverage for inpatient and outpatient medical services and prescription drugs. We
base our analysis on a 5% random sub-sample of NHI enrollees maintained by
National Health Institute in Taiwan (NHIT). These data are nationally representative
and afford a sample of approximately one million individuals in each year. We created
analytical files by sub-setting the NHIT data to health claims surrounding the national
presidential and district-level election years of 2005, 2008, 2009 and 2012.
     Because our empirical strategy exploits the jump in health care use that occurs
when individuals become eligible to vote at age 20, we limited the sample to ages 15-
25 using information on year and month of birth in the claim profiles. We also limited
the sample to health care claims that occurred close to the election period. The most
expansive period we used to analyze the national presidential election includes one
week before the start of presidential campaigns, the four-week campaign period, and
two weeks following the election.2 We also constructed a more limited sample that
includes only the four-week campaign period of 798,760 person-week observations.
Likewise, our most expansive sample surrounding the township mayoral elections


2
  We analyze only two weeks before and one week after the 2012 presidential election because the
election date in this case was between the Western New Year and Chinese New Year holidays. The
inclusion of weeks that include these two holidays could produce misleading results.
                                                 7
includes one week prior to the campaign period, the one-week campaign period and
two weeks following the campaign. A more restricted sample covering just the one-
week campaign period includes 133,369 person-week observations.
     Outcome variables in our model include binary indicators for any health care use
as well as separate indicators for the use of outpatient services and prescription drugs.
We also constructed measures of combined and service-specific health care
expenditure, normalized to 2005 new Taiwan dollars (NT$), that encompass all third
party and out-of-pocket payments. As part of our investigation of mechanisms that
underlie our findings, we used the ICD-9 codes on each medical claim to construct
use and expenditure measures for specific conditions, including mental disorders,
injuries and poisoning, infections and parasitic diseases, and disorders of the
circulatory, respiratory and digestive systems.
     The NHI health claim profiles contain information that we used to control for
several individual characteristics. Specifically, we created a binary indicator for
gender, indicators for the four employment categories corresponding to different
versions of NHI insurance (labor insurance for general hired and self-employed
workers, government employee insurance, farmer insurance and other insurance
programs predominantly for the unemployed and the military)3, and 358 indicators for
township of residence (i.e. township fixed effects).4 We also controlled for the
monthly earned income of the insurant using binary indicators for different income
levels defined by the NHIT.5


3.2 Election and campaign data
Administrative data on voting in the 2008 and 2012 national presidential election and
the 2005 and 2009 local township mayoral election are from the Central Election
Commission of Taiwan. These data include the number of eligible voters and the
number of votes cast for each candidate in every township as well as the political
party of the candidate. We created three variables to measure voter turnout, the level
of competition between candidates and campaign expenditure. The first variable is the
voter turnout rate, which we defined as the number of votes cast in a township to the
number of eligible voters in that township. The next two variables are based on
studies by Simonovits (2012), and Fauvelle-Aymar and Francois (2006). The
closeness index is one minus the difference between the number of votes cast for the


3
  These four main insurance programs differ in insurance premiums and contribution rates. See, for
example, Chang and Meyerhoefer (2019). We defined the occupation of the NHI insurants based on
their specific type of NHI social insurance.
4
  In the NHI, dependents are assigned the same insurance category as the primary wage earner.
5
  NHI earned income is equal to approximately 90% of the wage income reported elsewhere (Lien
(2011).
                                                  8
top two candidates divided by the total number of votes cast for these candidates in
each township.6 Higher values of this index, which we normalized to the unit
interval, indicate a narrower margin of victory by the elected candidate. Our other
measure of election competitiveness is one minus the Herfindahl-Hirschman index
(HHI)7, where the HHI is based on the average share of votes to each candidate in
every township.
     In order to measure political campaign expenditure we used administrative data
from the Control Yuan in Taiwan (the government's official auditor). Following an
election, political candidates must report their total campaign expenditures to the
Control Yuan. From these data we created a variable measuring the total campaign
expenditure by all candidates in a township. Unfortunately, we could not create an
analogous variable for presidential campaigns because presidential candidates report
campaign expenditures at the national level, making it impossible to determine the
amount of spending in different geographic areas. We merged all of the election
variables to the individual health care claim profiles using township geocodes.


3.2. Local area characteristics
     In order to control for the supply of health care providers in each area we used
data from the Taiwanese Ministry of Health and Welfare. From these data we
constructed the following three township-level variables and merged them to our main
dataset using township geocodes: the number of hospitals and clinics, the number of
hospital beds, and the total number of medical personnel.
      Another important characteristic of local environment during election periods is
the level of atmospheric pollution, which numerous studies find to reduce health
(World Health Organization 2016). Using data from the Taiwanese Environmental
Protection Administration, we created three variables to measure the weekly average
level of particulate matter for CO, NO, and PM during the week of the election in
each township. Finally, we added township population to our main dataset. We report
the definition and sample statistics of the selected variables in Table 1.




                                                          vote(1)  vote(2)
6
    Formally, the closeness index is constructed as 1                      , where vote(1) and vote(2)
                                                          vote(1)  vote(2)
indicate the votes cast to the winning candidate and runner up, respectively.
              K
7   HHI j   sk2 , where j indicates township, K is the total number of candidates in each township,
             k 1
and sk is ratio of the vote for the kth candidate in township j.
                                                      9
4. Econometric analysis
We identify the effect of political campaigns and voting on health care use and
expenditure using a regression discontinuity design (RD). This approach allows us to
exploit the jump in an election's influence on the individual when he or she becomes
eligible to vote at age 20. Because our data contain the month of birth we applied the
sharp version of the RD design, specified as:

    (1)    yijt    Voteijt  f (age)  Voteijt  f (age)   ' X ijt  t year  tweek  v j   ijt ,

where yijt is the health care utilization measure for the ith individual in township j at
time t (measured by year and month). The dummy variable Vote equals one if the
enrollee is aged >= 20 (determined using birth month), and equals zero otherwise. The
variable age is the running variable used in the sharp RD design, which measures the
month of birth of the individual. In our primary specification we included individuals
aged 15 - 25, so the value age ranges between +60 and -60 months. In sensitivity
analyses we used a narrower age range and obtained similar results. f(age) is the
polynomial function that captures the nonlinear effects of individual age on health
care use and expense.8 X is a vector of variables that contains the individual- and
township-specific control variables listed in Table 1. The variables tyear and tweek are
fixed effects for election year and the week before and after the election date, and vj is
the township fixed effect. The parameter  captures the effect of the voter eligibility
rule on health care use and expense.
    Although we can estimate equation (1) using Ordinary Least Square (OLS), this
approach fails to account for the mass point at zero health care expenditure and for the
right-skewness of positive expenditure values. Following a sizable literature on health
care expenditure modeling, we used a two-part model (TPM) to estimate the health
care use and expense equations in two different parts (Jones 2000). The first part of
the TPM accounts for a mass point at zero in the expenditure distribution resulting
from the failure by some to purchase health care, and the second part of the model
accounts for right-skewness in the distribution of expenditure among health care
users.
     We used a probit model to capture the probability that an individual uses a health
care service in the first part of the TPM. This is specified as:

(2) Pr( Dijt1)    Voteijt  f (age)  Voteijt  f (age)   ' X ijt  t year  tweek  v j

where Dijt is a dummy variable that is equal to 1 if the individual uses health care, and

8
  We conducted the specification test suggested in Lee and Lemieux (2010) to determine the best
functional specification for f(age). The test indicated that a third order polynomial adequately captures
the trend in age, and we use this specification in our main model. However, sensitivity analyses
indicate that our results are not sensitive to the functional specification of f(age).
                                                   10
is equal to 0 otherwise.
     The second part of the TPM is the log of health care expenditure for the sample
of individuals with use and is specified as:

(3) log( yijt | Dijt  1)    Voteijt  f (age)  Voteijt  f (age)   ' X ijt  t year  tweek  v j   ijt

We clustered the standard errors of the parameters in the TPM at level of the running
variable (birth month).
     By combining equations (2) and (3), one can construct the unconditional mean of
health care expenditure as follows:

(4)         E ( yijt )  Pr( Dijt  1)  exp( yijt | Dijt  1)  

where  =E(exp(ijt)) is the smearing factor used to transform the estimates from the
log scale back to the dollar scale. We used Duan's nonparametric estimator for the
smearing factor (Duan et al. 1983) and calculated the standard errors of the
unconditional marginal effects for the key variable vote using the block bootstrap
method defined over birth month. Because of the inclusion of fixed effects in our
specification, we prefer the log OLS version of the TPM, but we tested the sensitivity
of our main result using alternative versions of the TPM that employed a generalized
linear model (GLM) in the second part of the model.9


5. Results
In Table 2 we report the average level of health care use and daily health care
expenditure of individuals above and below the legal voting age of 20 for each of the
analysis samples.10 The probability of using any health care during the election
campaign periods was similar across different samples, ranging from 13.5% before
the township mayoral election to 14.8% during the presidential campaigns. Likewise,
daily total health care expenditure was similar across samples, ranging from 28.5 -
35.3 NT$/day. Both the likelihood of prescription drug use and expenditure on drugs
were less than the analogous outpatient service measures. Health care use and
expenditure were greater for the voting age population than those not yet eligible to
vote. In order to see how the level of these outcomes varies by birth month (the
running variable) around the voting threshold, we provide plots over the range of birth
month in Figure 1 (all health care services) and in Appendix Figures A1-A2


9
   Specifically, we found that a Poisson GLM with a log link produced a TPM marginal effect estimate
similar to the log OLS version of the model, and that a Gamma GLM with log link generated an
estimate that was 63% as large as the log OLS estimate. Estimates are available from the authors upon
request.
10
    The data include the four-week campaign period preceding the presidential election, and the one-
week campaign preceding the township mayoral election.
                                                 11
(outpatient services and prescription drugs). The third order polynomial lines of
central tendency indicate a discontinuity at the legal voting age of 20, with some
difference in trends before and after the cutoff.


5.1 Estimates by week and campaign period
     We report marginal effect estimates from the first part of the TPM on the
probability of health care use and estimates from the full TPM for health care
expenditure by week before and after the election date in Table 3. The campaigns of
presidential candidates are legally restricted to the four weeks preceding the election,
while mayor candidates in local elections may only campaign during the week
preceding the election. The pattern of estimates for the combined sample of
presidential and mayoral elections (left columns) and for the sample of just
presidential elections (middle columns) are the same, and reflect the mandated
presidential campaign period. In particular, eligibility to vote only has a statistically
significant impact on health care use and expenditure in the fourth weeks preceding
the election date. The magnitude of the marginal effect estimates is nontrivial
indicating an increase in the probability of health care use of 9.1% - 19.8% and a
9.2% - 18.0% increase in health care expenditure during the presidential campaign
period. It is notable that we fail to find any impact of voter eligibility in the two weeks
following the presidential election date. When the sample is sub-set to only the local
mayoral election we likewise find that voter eligibility increases health care use and
expenditure during the legally mandated one-week campaign period, but not before
the campaign or in the two weeks following the election. Because of these findings,
we restrict to the sample to the presidential and mayoral campaign periods in all
subsequent analyses.
      We report marginal effect estimates for models of total health care use and
expenditure, outpatient care, and prescription drugs in Table 4 (We report full
regression results for the all health care models in Appendix Table A1). Eligibility to
vote increased the probability of any health care use by 2.0 percentage points (14.1%
relative to the mean) and total health care expenditures by NT$ 3.97 per day (15.3%)
in the combined sample of national and local election campaign periods. The
magnitudes of these effects are essentially the same when we use outpatient services
as the outcome, but are slightly larger in the model for prescription drugs. In
particular, eligibility to vote increased the use of prescription drugs and drug
expenditure by 16.8%.
      When we sub-set the combined sample to urban and rural areas, we find that
election campaigns had a larger impact on health care use in the latter. For example,
total health care expenditure for eligible voters increased by NT$ 4.78 per day
                                            12
(18.4%) during the campaign periods in rural areas, but only by NT$ 3.20 per day
(12.9%) in urban areas. The discrepancy between outpatient service use and
expenditure in rural and urban areas is similar to total health care use, but prescription
drug expenditure is only 0.9 percentage points higher in rural areas.
     The bottom two sections of Table 4 contain separate estimates for the national
presidential and local mayoral election campaigns. As expected, the magnitudes of the
effects are much larger for the presidential election campaigns, which determine the
composition of the national government. During presidential elections, there was a 2.5
percentage point (17.4%) increase in health care use, whereas health care use
increased by only a 0.9 percentage point (6.9%) during a local elections. Likewise,
health care expenditure for eligible voters increased by 19.0% during presidential
campaigns, but only by 7.7% during local mayoral campaigns.


5.2 Heterogeneity across election and individual characteristics
     Next, we consider whether the average marginal effects reported above vary
across different election and voter characteristics. Estimates in Table 5 are derived
from the combined sample of national and local election campaign periods (with the
exception of the last two rows), and show marginal effects for total health use and
expense stratified by whether a given election characteristic was in the first (lowest)
quartile of the respective distribution or the fourth (highest) quartile. Both health care
use and expenditure increased more in close elections where the margin of the vote
between the top two candidates was narrower. Health care expenditure was 14.9%
higher for eligible voters when the election was in the top quartile of the closeness
index, but was only 8.9% higher when the election was in the lowest quartile. We find
the same pattern when we consider the competitiveness of the election, as measured
by our competition index and the voter turnout rate. The marginal effect for the
probability of health care use is 1.5 percentage points (10.9%) when the election was
in the top quartile of the turnout rate distribution, but smaller and imprecisely
estimated when voter turnout was low. Finally, for local mayoral elections only, we
report differences in health care use and expenditure by campaign expenditure. Health
care use was 17.0% higher and expenditure 16.5% higher among eligible voters
during campaigns in the highest quartile of the campaign expenditure distribution, but
only 0.5% and 3.2% higher, respectively, during the lowest spending election
campaigns.
     Table 6 contains similar marginal effect estimates, stratified by voter
characteristics. Both the likelihood of health care use and health care expenditure
were higher for men during the election campaigns than for women. In fact, the
marginal effect for expenditure is more than twice as large for men. Stratifying the
                                            13
estimates by income quartile reveals that health care utilization was only elevated
during election campaigns for eligible voters in the middle two income quartiles. This
range of the income distribution roughly applies to blue-collar workers.


5.2 Estimates by medical condition
      An important question is how exactly election campaigns increased medical care
utilization. The prior literature indicates that psychological stress might be an
important driver, but the dearth of studies on elections and health suggests there could
be numerous undetected mechanisms. In order to uncover possible pathways, we
estimated models by the specific medical conditions most likely affected by campaign
activities (Table 7). We find that election campaigns had a significant impact on acute
respiratory infections, gastrointestinal disorders, and injuries. The largest effects are
on disorders of the esophagus, stomach and duodenum, where medical care use
increased by 20.6%.
      Notably, estimates from the models for mental disorders are small and not
statistically significant. Identification in our models comes from the jump in medical
care utilization that occurs when individuals gain voting eligibility, making it difficult
to estimate the impact of elections on mental health conditions. This is because those
who are close to voting age may experience similar levels of stress during the election
as those just old enough to vote. In order to gain a better understanding of the mental
health consequences of elections we estimate an ordinary TPM of mental health
expenditure separately for those too young to vote and eligible voters using data from
the five weeks before and one week after the presidential elections. In Appendix Table
A2 we report marginal effect estimates for the variables indicating week before or
after the election. For the voting eligible population there are offsetting effects in the
third and fourth weeks prior to the election and no statistically significant effects in
any other week. In the non-eligible population, there are statistically significant
increases in mental health care expenditure one and two weeks before the election, but
the magnitudes are very small. In particular, expenditure in these weeks was only
1.4% higher than in the fifth week prior to the election. Although these estimates
reflect associations, they suggest a lack any significant upward trend in mental health
expenditure among young adults before and after the election.


5.2 Specification tests and robustness checks
     We conduct several specification and falsification tests in order to demonstrate
the robustness of our results. First, we check the sensitivity of the results from the
models of total health care use and expense to the magnitude of the age bandwidth
used in the RD model. Overall, the estimates in Appendix Table A3 are qualitatively
                                            14
similar for narrower bandwidths. The magnitude of the marginal effect for health care
expenditure decreases as the bandwidth narrows, but there is no similar trend in the
marginal effects for health care use. Next, we re-estimate the model with different
specifications for the polynomial of the running variable, age. The estimates of the
marginal effects in Table A4 are virtually unchanged when we use a second or first
order polynomial as opposed to a third order polynomial.
     It is common in RD models to demonstrate that demographic control variables
are smooth around the cutoff point in order to ensure that the model is not capturing
the shift in a demographic trend that occurs at the same point of the running variable
as the event in question. In our case the only individual-level demographic control
variables are insurance type and income level. We affirm the smoothness of these
variables around the cutoff by using each as the outcome in the RD model. The
coefficient estimate corresponding to voter eligibility is small and statistically
insignificant in both models.11
     We also subjected the RD model to several falsification tests. Table A5 reports
the marginal effect estimates using different cutoff points for age other than the legal
voting age of 20. Irrespective of whether the age cutoff is increased or decreased, the
resulting estimates are not statistically distinguishable from zero. In Table A6 we
report the results of a model intended to demonstrate that the election campaigns do
not have spill-over effects on the non-eligible voting population using a different
approach than in Table A5. In this case we sub-set the sample to the 2008 presidential
election period and estimate models using the four weeks prior to the campaign period
and the four week campaign. The marginal effect estimate of a binary variable for the
election campaign period is only large and precisely estimated for the voting eligible
population and not those less than age 20. Our final falsification test, reported in Table
A7, involves the estimation of our RD model on the set of townships that did not have
local mayoral elections at the same time as the townships in our analysis sample that
did have elections. In support of our identification strategy, we do not find a
statistically significant effect of voter eligibility on health care use or expenditure in
the townships without elections.


6. Discussion and Conclusion
Using a regression discontinuity design that leverages the exogenous change in age-
based voter eligibility, we found that election campaigns resulted in sizable increases
in health care utilization during the campaign period of as much as 19%. Health care
expenditure was most strongly associated with the treatment of acute respiratory


11
     Estimates are available upon request.
                                             15
infections, gastrointestinal illness, and injuries. We did not find any increase in mental
health expenditure, but this could be due to similar levels of stress and anxiety among
those eligible and not yet eligible to vote. Nonetheless, in a supplementary analysis
we failed to observe any significant increasing trend in mental health care expenditure
around the election period among the voting-eligible population.
     It is important to note that our inability to find any effects on mental health care,
does not mean that the elevated levels of stress documented in previous studies did
not occur in Taiwan, or have serious consequences. It is possible that stress
experienced by potential voters caused fatigue and weakened immunity, making
eligible voters more susceptible to viral infections and gastrointestinal conditions
(Segerstrom and Miller 2004). However, we did not find evidence that the stress
induced by elections caused physical health effects as serious as the fatal
cardiovascular events reported by Schwartz et al. (2012) for occurrences such as
earthquakes or high-level sporting events. Another important discrepancy between our
findings and the earlier literature concerns the timing of health effects. While we
found that physical health was negatively impacted only during legally mandated
campaign periods, several studies document elevated levels of stress, anxiety, and
unfavorable changes in biomarkers both before and after the election (DeJonckheere,
Fisher and Chang 2018; Stanton et al. 2009; Stanton et al. 2010). One possible reason
for the discrepancy is that ours is the first study to use administrative health care
claims. It is possible that the changes in biomarkers or self-reported health measured
in previous studies did not lead to any subsequent increase in health care utilization
after the election.
      The prior literature fails to documents any effects of election campaigns on
physical health, but many earlier studies use data from the U.S. where campaign
periods are much longer, and individual campaign events are less intense, than in
Taiwan; prior studies of elections in Israel also reflect longer campaign periods
(Hebrew Wikiquote 2019). Taiwan has achieved notoriety as the "Island of Elections"
due to the high-level of participation in campaign rallies that are particularly
impassioned (Chao and Myers 2000). Also, the fact that election campaigns affect the
health of men more than women is presumably because men are more likely to
participate in the rallies. The effects we find are perhaps most similar to reports by
Faridz, Hollingsworth and John (2019) that 300 campaign workers in Indonesian died
from fatigue-related stress during recent presidential and legislative elections.12
     Our analysis provides information that is useful for health care workers and
public health officials. We found that increases in health care use are concentrated

12
  This is the only case that we know of for which there must have been a nontrivial level of associated
health care use.
                                                  16
during campaign periods making higher demand for health care services during
election periods predictable. We also show that the need for health care services is
greatest during more competitive elections with high voter turnout. Likewise, areas
with more competitive local elections where campaign spending is highest demand
more health care services than areas with less competitive local elections and lower
campaign spending. In both local and national elections, eligible voters in rural areas,
where the public health infrastructure is most limited, use more health care services
than urban voters. Last, our results indicate that the adverse health effects of
campaigns are concentrated among lower to middle income blue-collar men, who
were core supporters of the opposition political party during the 2008 and 2012
presidential elections.13 Public health officials seeking to reduce the adverse health
consequences of election campaigns may therefore wish to target low-income men
living in rural areas for intervention.
     While the health care costs of election campaigns are high in percentage terms,
the length of exposure to campaign activities is relatively short. In order to determine
whether interventions to reduce health care expenditure could be cost-effective, it is
useful to know the level of aggregate costs for all eligible voters. We approximated
these costs for the working population aged 20-64 using data from the 2008
presidential election under the assumption that the costs identified in our models also
apply to older individuals. First, we multiplied the predicted medical expenditure for
those aged 15-20 by the marginal effect estimated in our model for total health care
use. After multiplying the result by the number of eligible voters aged 20-64, we find
that excess medical care costs from the 2008 presidential election were
$1,272,711,330 or $118 per person, in 2005 NT$ over the 28 day campaign period.
This represents approximately 2% of all health expenditure in Taiwan during the
campaign period, and 119% of the total reported campaign expenditure by
presidential candidates participating in the election. While it is widely believed that
campaign expenditures are under-reported in Taiwan, the medical care costs
associated with campaign events are clearly sizable (Wang and Fan 2010).
      Our estimate of the negative health cost of election campaigns provides policy
makers new information to consider when setting limits on campaign length and
activities. Of course, the reason for high costs would need to be determined in order
formulate specific policy proposals. One possibility is that the concentration of
election campaigns within a short period increases the intensity of campaign events in
a way that is harmful to health. Longer campaigns, such as those in the U.S., could
moderate campaign activities and reduce health care costs. However, no studies have


13
     The winning candidate in both elections was from the KMT party.
                                                  17
investigated the tradeoffs from varying the length of election campaigns.
Unfortunately, we cannot estimate the benefits of longer campaigns in Taiwan
because all of the presidential (or mayoral) campaigns in our sample were the same
length.14 Nonetheless, we see this as a useful area of future research.
     Alternatively, policy makers could internalize the medical care costs of election
campaigns through a tax on campaign expenditures. The tax would need to target the
privately funded events responsible for spreading illness and causing injuries.
Although our estimates by medical condition suggest that campaign rallies and public
meetings are most likely responsible for elevated levels of sickness, health care cost
estimates for specific campaign events are necessary to construct targeted tax
instruments.
    Finally, our findings are consistent with prior research suggesting that limits on
campaign spending could increase social welfare. In particular, Levitt (1994)
concludes that campaign spending by both challengers and incumbents is socially
wasteful because it has little effect on election outcomes. We uncover another
downside of high campaign spending in the form of greater health care costs.
However, information on both the costs and benefits is necessary to formulate policy
on spending limits. While we are not aware of any studies that quantify benefits, Kam
(2006) provides evidence that campaigns promote open-minded thinking.
     Our research has some limitations. Although we can identify the specific health
conditions caused or exacerbated by election campaigns, we have no way of linking
the affected conditions directly to different campaign events. There is anecdotal
evidence that the spirited campaign rallies in Taiwan may account for elevated health
care costs. Furthermore, half of eligible voters either attended a campaign event or
watched a debate on television, based on responses to a random survey of 2,000
individuals during the 2008 presidential election (Yu 2010). However, we are unable
to link existing surveys of voter behavior to our health care claims data at the
individual level. In addition, although we have determined that higher campaign
spending in local elections leads to greater health care use we have no way measuring
differences in health care use across geographic areas associated with higher spending
by presidential candidates. This is because presidential campaigns are only required to
report spending at the national level. Last, our estimates pertain to eligible voters aged
20-25, and it is not clear whether the health effects for older voters are greater than or
less than the effects we identify in younger voters.



14
    Furthermore, comparing the one-week campaign periods in local elections to the four week national
election campaigns is not helpful due to the much higher level of voter interest and participation in the
latter.
                                                   18
     Despite these limitations, we believe that our study provides valuable insight into
the consequences of election campaigns for health and health care expenditure using
unique administrative data. Contrary to small-scale studies and media reports, the
negative health effects we identify are for physical health conditions. Furthermore, we
provide information public health officials can use to target initiatives designed to
mitigate the significant negative externalities of election campaigns for health.




                                          19
References
ACE Electoral Knowledge Network. 2019. ACE Encyclopedia. Accessed on August
     25, 2019 at: http://aceproject.org/ace-en.
Al Jazeera. 2019. Half a million attend opposition rally to remove India's Modi.
     January 19. https://www.aljazeera.com/news/southasia/2019/01/million-attend-
     opposition-rally-remove-india-modi-190119131553417.html.
American Psychological Association. 2017. Stress in America: coping with change.
     Stress in America Survey.
Arcenaux, K. 2005. Do campaigns help voters learn? A cross-national analysis.
     British Journal of Political Science. 36: 159-173.
Bohus, B., De Kloet, E., Veldhuis, H. 1982. In D. Ganten & D. Pfaff (Eds.), Adrenal
    steroids and behavioral adaptation: Relationships to brain corticoid receptors.
    Progress in Neuroendocrinology, Vol. 2 (pp. 107-148). Berlin: Springer­Verlag.
Bollyky, T., Templin, T., Cohen, M., Schoder, D., Dieleman, J. L., Wigely, S. 2019.
     The relationships between democratic experience, adult health, and cause-
     specific mortality in 170 countries between 1980 and 2016: an observational
     analysis. Lancet 393: 1628-40.
Brown, L. L., Tomarken, A. J., Orth, D. N., Loosen, P. T., Kalin, N. H., Davidson, R.
      J. 1996. Individual differences in repressive-defensiveness predict basal salivary
      cortisol levels. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 70(2): 362-371.
Chang, H-H, Meyerhoefer, C. D. 2019. Inter-brand competition in the convenience
     store industry, store density and healthcare utilization. Journal of Health
     Economics 65:117-132.
Chao, L., Myers, R. 2000. How elections promoted democracy in Taiwan under
     martial law. The China Quarterly 162: 387-409.
Chiang, T. 1997. Taiwan's 1996 healthcare reform. Health Policy 39(3): 225-239.
DeJonckheere, M., Fisher, A., Chang, T. 2018. How has the presidential election
     affected young Americans? Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health
     12(8): 1-4.
de la Torre, C., Catherine C. 2009. The hybrid campaign: tradition and modernity in
      Ecuador's 2006 presidential election. The International Journal of Press/
      Politics 14(3): 335­52.
Duan, N. 1983. Smearing estimate: A nonparametric retransformation method.
      Journal of the American Statistical Association 78(383): 605-610.
Faridz, D., Hollingsworth, J., John, T. 2019. More than 300 workers dead after
     Indonesian election. CNN. April 29.
     https://www.cnn.com/2019/04/28/asia/indonesia-election-death-intl/index.html
                                          20
Fauvelle-Aymar, C., Francois, A. 2006. The impact of closeness on turnout: An
    empirical relation based on a study of two-round ballot. Public Choice 127: 469-
    491.
Ganesan, R. 2018. How politics is making us sick. Literally. An in-depth look at the
    Election Stress Disorder (ESD) that's hitting India. DailyO. November 30.
    https://www.dailyo.in/politics/elections-2019-election-stress-disorder-narendra-
    modi-donald-trump-stress-anxiety/story/1/28070.html
Hagan, M. J., Sladek, M. R., Luecken, L. J., Doane, L. D. 2018. Event-related clinical
    distress in college students: responses to the 2016 U.S. Presidential election.
    Journal of American College Health. First published on Oct 22, 2018. doi:
    10.1080/07448481.2018.1515763.
Hebrew Wikiquote. 2019. 1959­ ,) (  
    November 15. https://he.wikisource.org/wiki/__(_).
Hoyt, L., Zeiders, K., Chaku, N., Toomey, R., Nair, R. 2018. Young adults'
    psychological and physiological reactions to the 2016 U.S. presidential election.
    Psychoneuroendocrinilogy 92: 162-169.
Jacobson, G. C. 2015. How do campaigns matter? Annual Review of Political Science
     18: 31-47.
Jones, A. 2000. Health Econometrics. In Culyer, A. J. and Newhouse, J. P., editors,
     Handbook of Health Economics, volume 1, chapter 6, pages 265-344. 1 edition.
Kam, C. D. 2006. Political campaigns and open-minded thinking. The Journal of
      Politics 68(4): 931-945.
Kritz, F. 2018. Mental health experts warn of midterm election stress in young people.
      Everyday Health. November 5. https://www.everydayhealth.com/stress/mental-
      health-experts-warn-midterm-election-stress-young-people/
Krupenkin, M., Rothschild, D., Hill, S., Yom-Tove, E., 2019. President Trump stress
      disorder: partisanship, ethnicity, and expressive reporting of mental distress and
      the 2016 election. SAGE Open January-March: 1-14,
      https://doi.org/10.1177/2158244019830865
Lau, R. R., Sigelman, L., Rovner, I. B. 2007. The effects of negative political
      campaign: a meta-analytic reassessment. The Journal of Politics 69(4): 1176-
      1209.
Lay, J-G., Yap, K-H., Chen Y-W. 2008. The transition of Taiwan's political geography.
      Asian Survey 48(5): 773-793.
Lee, D.S., Lemieux, T. 2010. Regression discontinuity designs in economics. Journal
      of Economic Literature 48(2): 281-355.
Levitt, S. D. 1994. Using repeat challengers to estimate the effect of campaign
      spending on election outcomes in the U.S. house. Journal of Political Economy
                                          21
     102(4): 777-798.
Levitt, S. D. 1995. Policy watch: congressional campaign finance reform. The Journal
      of Economic Perspectives 9(1): 183-193.
Lien, H. 2011. How to Construct Social-Economic Variables from National Health
      Insurance Data. Journal of Social Sciences and Philosophy 23(3): 371-398.
Ming-Hsiang, C., Xie, D. 2019. 2020 Elections: Psychiatrist urges caution on
      `election stress syndrome'. Taipei Times. November 25.
      http://www.taipeitimes.com/News/taiwan/archives/2019/11/25/2003726457
Paget, D. 2019. The rally-intensive campaign: a distinct for of electioneering in Sub-
      Saharan Africa and beyond. The International Journal of Press/Politics. First
      published on May 9, 2019. Available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/1940161219847952.
Palda, F., Palda, K. 1998. The impact of campaign expenditures on political
     competition in the French legislative elections of 1993. Public Choice 94: 157-
     174.
Schwartz, B. G., French, W. J., Mayeda, G. S., Burstein, S., Economides, C.,
     Bhandari, A. K., Cannom, D. S., Kloner, R. A. 2012. Emotional stressors trigger
     cardiovascular events. International Journal of Clinical Practice 66(7): 631-
     639.
Segerstrom, S. C., Miller, G. E. 2004. Psychological stress and the human immune
    system: a meta-analytic study of 20 years of inquiry. Psychological Bulletin
    130(4): 601-630.
Shaheen, K. 2018. Voters rally behind Erdoan's rival as Turkey goes to the polls. The
     Guardian. June 24. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/jun/24/turkey-
     elections -muharrem-ince-threat-to-president-erdogan.
Siegel, M., 2018. Doctor: election emotions are intense but don't let them damage
     your health. November 7.
     https://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2018/11/07/election-results-can-hurt-
     your-health-let-go-anger-doctor-column/1911208002/.
Simonovits, G. 2012. Competition and turnout revisited: the importance of measuring
     expected closeness accurately. Electoral Studies 31: 364-371.
Smith, K. B., Hibbing, M. V., Hibbing, J.R. 2019. Friends, relatives, sanity, and
     health: The costs of politics. PLoS ONE 14(9): e0221870.
Stanton, S. J., Beehner, J. C., Saini, E., Kuhn, C. M., LaBar, K. S. 2009. Dominance,
     politics, and physiology: voters' testosterone changes on the night of the 2008
     United States presidential election. PLoS ONE 4(10): e7543.
Stanton, S. J., LaBar, K. S., Saini, E., K., Kuhn, C. M., Beehner, J. C. 2010. Stressful
     politics: voters' cortisol responses to the outcome of the 2008 United States
     presidential election. Psychoneuroendocrinology 35: 768-774.
                                           22
Szwarcberg, M. 2012. Uncertainty, political clientelism, and voter turnout in Latin
     America: why parties conduct rallies in Argentina. Comparative Politics 45(1):
     88­106.
Tatlow, D.K., 2016. As Taiwan election nears, mainland media plays down politics.
     The New York Times, January 15.
     https://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/16/world/asia/taiwan-election-china-
     mainland.html
Terburg, D., Morgan, B., Van Honk, J. 2009. The testosterone-cortisol ratio: A
     hormonal marker for proneness to social aggression. International Journal of
     Law and Psychiatry 32: 216-223.
The Telegraph. 2012. Psychiatrists busy with Taiwan `election syndrome'. The
    Telegraph, January 15.
    https://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/asia/taiwan/9016074/Psychiatrists-
    busy-with-Taiwan-election-syndrome.html
Van Honk, J., Kessels, R. P. C., Putman, P., Jager, G., Koppeschaar, H. P. F., Postma,
    A. 2003. Attentionally modulated effects of cortisol and mood on memory for
    emotional faces in males. Psychoneuroendocrinology 28: 941-948.Waismel-
    Manor, I., Ifergane, G., Cohen, H. 2011. When endocrinology and democracy
    collide: emotions, cortisol and voting at national elections. European
    Neuropsychopharmacology 21: 789-795.
Wang, D., Fan, E. 2010. The effect of campaign spending on electoral results: An
    assessment of Jacobson's theory on the 2008 legislative election in Taiwan.
    Taiwan Political Journal 14(2): 3-35.
Williams, D., Medlock, M. 2017. Health effects of dramatic societal events-
    Ramifications for the recent presidential election. The New England Journal of
    Medicine 376:23, 2295-2299.
World Health Organization (WHO). 2016. Ambient air pollution: a global assessment
    of exposure and burden of disease. WHO: Geneva, Switzerland.
Wu, T., Majeed, A., Kuo, K. 2010. An overview of the healthcare system in Taiwan.
    London Journal of Primary Care 3(2): 115-119.
Yu, C, 2010. Taiwan's Election and Democratization Study, 2005-2008 (IV): The
Presidential Election, 2008.




                                          23
Table 1. Sample statistics for outcomes and explanatory variables by vote eligibility.
                                                                           Combined       Eligible     Not eligible
                                                                          (Age 15-25) (Age 20-25) (Age 15-19)
N*T                                                                         932,129       456,808       475,321
Variable         Definition                                               Mean S.D. Mean S.D. Mean S.D.
Outcome variables
Any use          If any health care use (=1).                             0.14   0.35    0.15   0.35   0.14   0.34
Total exp.       Health care expenditure on all services (NT$/day).       25.92 441.25 29.48 467.78 22.50 414.12
Outpatient use   If outpatient service use (=1).                          0.14   0.35    0.15   0.35   0.14   0.34
Outpatient exp. Expenditure on outpatient services (NT$/day).             17.66 175.49 19.42 171.52 15.96 179.21
Drug use         If prescription drug use (=1).                           0.09   0.28    0.09   0.29   0.09   0.28
Drug exp.        Expenditure on prescription drugs (NT$/day).             3.11 152.53 3.44 145.43 2.79 159.05
Explanatory variables
Vote             If eligible to vote (=1).                                0.49   0.50     1      0      0      0
Male             If a male insured (=1).                                  0.48   0.50    0.45   0.50   0.51   0.50
Gov. insurance If government employee insurance (=1).                     0.00   0.07    0.01   0.09   0.00   0.02
Farmer
                 If farmer insurance (=1).                                0.00   0.07    0.01   0.10   0.00   0.02
insurance
Worker
                 If private worker insurance (=1).                        0.27   0.44    0.45   0.50   0.09   0.28
insurance
Income level 1 If insured is low income (=1).                             0.63   0.48    0.39   0.49   0.87   0.34
Income level 2 If insured is low-middle income (=1).                      0.21   0.41    0.32   0.47   0.11   0.31
Income level 3 If insured is middle income (=1).                          0.09   0.28    0.15   0.36   0.02   0.15
Income level 4 If insured is high-middle income (=1).                     0.04   0.18    0.07   0.25   0.00   0.06
Income level 5 If insured is high income (=1).                            0.03   0.18    0.06   0.25   0.00   0.03
Hospitals        Number of hospitals in a township.                       0.25   0.23    0.25   0.22   0.25   0.23
Clinics          Number of clinics in a township.                         9.83   5.09    9.99   5.12   9.68   5.06
Beds             Number of hospital beds in a township.                   77.75 76.43 78.31 76.25 77.21 76.61
Personnel        Number of medical personnel in a township.               121.3 112.1 123.7 112.9 118.9 111.3
Population       Population in a township (100,000 person).               1.77   1.31    1.81   1.30   1.72   1.32
CO               Weekly CO concentration index (1,000 ppm).               0.00   0.01    0.00   0.01   0.00   0.01
NO2              Weekly NO2 concentration index (1,000 ppb).              0.04   0.01    0.04   0.01   0.04   0.01
                                                                  3
PM               Weekly PM2.5 concentration index (1,000 ug/m ).          0.07   0.02    0.07   0.02   0.07   0.02
Urban            If living in an urban area (=1).                         0.80   0.16    0.80   0.16   0.81   0.16
Closeness        Closeness of the election. The higher the more intense. 0.48    0.07    0.48   0.07   0.48   0.07
Competition      1-HHI index. The higher the more competitive.            0.75   0.05    0.75   0.05   0.74   0.05
Turnout rate     Number of voters to all eligible voters in a township.   0.86   0.35    0.86   0.35   0.86   0.35
Notes: All monetary variables are in 2005 NT$.

                                                     24
Table 1. Sample statistics for outcomes and explanatory variables by vote eligibility, continued.
                                                                             Combined         Eligible     Not eligible
                                                                            (Age 15-25) (Age 20-25) (Age 15-19)
N*T                                                                            932,129        456,808       475,321
Variable          Definition                                                Mean S.D. Mean S.D. Mean S.D.
Expense#          Campaign expense per voter in a township (NT$ 100). 0.86          0.63     0.87   0.63   0.86   0.64
Year 2005         If 2005 local township mayoral election (=1).             0.10    0.30     0.10   0.30   0.09   0.29
Year 2008         If 2008 national president election (=1).                 0.57    0.49     0.57   0.49   0.57   0.49
Year 2009         If 2009 local township mayoral election (=1).             0.05    0.21     0.04   0.20   0.05   0.22
Year 2012         If 2012 national president election (=1).                 0.28    0.45     0.28   0.45   0.29   0.45
Notes: All monetary variables are in 2005 NT$. #: Only defined for local mayoral elections




                                                    25
Table 2. Sample statistics for medical care use and expense by voter eligibility and subsample.
                                                         Health care use (0/1)
                              All health care            Outpatient services        Prescription drugs
Sample                   Age  20 Age < 20             Age  20 Age < 20           Age  20 Age < 20
Combined                   0.146       0.137    ***      0.146    0.137    ***     0.091       0.087   ***
Urban                      0.147       0.138    ***      0.146    0.138    ***     0.091       0.089   ***
Rural                      0.146       0.135    ***      0.145    0.135    ***     0.091       0.086   ***
Presidential election      0.148       0.139    ***      0.148    0.139    ***     0.093       0.090   ***
Mayoral election           0.135       0.121    ***      0.134    0.121    ***     0.079       0.070   ***
                                     Average daily health care expenditure (2005 NT$/day)
Combined                   29.48       22.50    ***      19.42    15.96    ***     3.44         2.79   **
Urban                      28.93       21.69    ***      19.36    15.88    ***     3.45         2.60   **
Rural                      30.14       23.32    ***      19.50    16.04    ***     3.42         2.99
Presidential election      28.50       21.76    ***      19.37    15.67    ***     3.40         2.49   ***
Mayoral election           35.28       26.94    ***      19.74    17.74            3.66         4.66
Notes: Sample statistics were calculated using 932,129 person-week specific observations from the
NHI health claim profile. A two-sample t-test is used to test the difference in means. *** and **
indicate statistical significance at the 1% and 5% level.




                                                    26
Table 3. Marginal effect estimates for health care utilization models by week before or after the election date.

                                              Combined sample                                     National presidential election                         Local township mayoral election

                                  Use (0/1)               Expense (NT$/day)                   Use (0/1)               Expense (NT$/day)                  Use (0/1)             Expense (NT$/day)

Week to election date Mar. Eff.        S.E.      %      Mar. Eff.     S.E.     %      Mar. Eff.     S.E.    %      Mar. Eff.    S.E.      %     Mar. Eff. S.E.         %     Mar. Eff. S.E.        %

Fifth week before         0.009        0.007 5.6% 0.802             1.612 3.1% 0.009              0.007 5.6% 0.802             1.612 3.1%

Fourth week before        0.029 *** 0.006 19.8% 4.133 **            1.525 15.7% 0.027 *** 0.007 17.9% 3.189                    1.258 11.2%

Third week before         0.014 **     0.007 9.7% 4.389 **          1.745 18.0% 0.021 **          0.008 13.4% 4.061 ** 1.742 16.2%

Second week before        0.019 *** 0.005 12.7% 3.560 *** 1.235 15.2% 0.022 *** 0.006 15.0% 4.172 *** 1.218 18.4%                                0.008       0.008 5.7%       1.524      2.076 6.1%

First week before         0.012 **     0.005 9.1% 2.531 **          1.152 9.2% 0.022 *** 0.006 16.6% 4.993 ** 1.788 19.4%                        0.008 *     0.005 6.5%       2.527 * 1.239 8.1%

First week after          0.005        0.005 3.1% 0.528             1.562 1.9% 0.009              0.006 5.4% 1.396             1.324 4.9% -0.004             0.008 -2.6% -1.537          2.769 -5.5%

Second week after         0.009        0.006 7.0% 1.983             1.746 8.0% 0.007              0.008 5.8% 1.623             1.481 6.7%        0.011       0.008 7.9%       1.965      1.942 7.8%

Notes: Standard errors are cluster-corrected at the birth month level. The unconditional marginal effects for health care expenditure are reported in 2005 NT$. Marginal effects in percentage

terms are calculated using the sample mean of the dependent variable. All models include year and township fixed-effects and the set of control variables reported in Table 1. ***,**,* indicate

statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level.




                                                                                               27
Table 4. Marginal effect estimates for health care utilization models.
                                    All health care                                               Outpatient services                                              Prescription drugs
                                                                                         Combined sample (all elections)
                        Use (0/1)                Expense (NT$/day)                     Use (0/1)                Expense (NT$/day)                      Use (0/1)                Expense (NT$/day)
              Mar. Eff.     S.E.      %       Mar. Eff.     S.E.      %      Mar. Eff.     S.E.       %      Mar. Eff.     S.E.      %       Mar. Eff.     S.E.       %      Mar. Eff.     S.E.   %
Vote          0.020 *** 0.006 14.1% 3.967 *** 1.109 15.3% 0.020 *** 0.006 14.2% 2.704 *** 0.754 15.3% 0.015 *** 0.004 16.8% 0.523 *** 0.141 16.8%
N*T                     932,129                         131,919                        932,129                          131,431                        932,129                          83,081
                                                                                            Urban sample (all elections)
Vote          0.016 **     0.006 11.5% 3.196 **             1.282 12.9% 0.017 *** 0.006 11.7% 2.377 *** 0.874 13.7% 0.012 *** 0.004 13.3% 0.499 *** 0.170 16.7%
N*T                     487,446                          70,009                        487,446                          69,778                         487,446                          42,996
                                                                                            Rural sample (all elections)
Vote          0.024 *** 0.006 16.6% 4.780 *** 1.397 18.4% 0.023 *** 0.006 16.6% 2.989 *** 0.900 17.6% 0.016 *** 0.005 18.2% 0.544 *** 0.195 17.6%
N*T                     444,683                          62,950                        444,683                          62,697                         444,683                          38,862
                                                                                         Local township mayoral election
Vote          0.009 *      0.005     6.9%     2.407 *       1.437   7.7%     0.008 *       0.004    6.2%     1.353 *      0.678     7.2%     0.007 *      0.004      9.2%    0.302        0.508 7.3%
N*T                     133,369                          17,098                        133,369                          17,000                         133,369                           9,945
                                                                                           National presidential election
Vote          0.025 *** 0.006 17.4% 4.761 *** 1.120 19.0% 0.025 *** 0.006 17.4% 3.134 *** 0.770 17.9% 0.017 *** 0.004 18.5% 0.535 *** 0.150 18.2%
N*T                     798,760                         114,821                        798,760                          114,431                        798,760                          73,136
Notes: Standard errors are cluster-corrected at the birth month level. The unconditional marginal effects for health care expenditure are reported in 2005 NT$. Marginal effects in percentage

terms are calculated using the sample mean of the dependent variable. All models include year, week and township fixed-effects and the set of control variables reported in Table 1. ***,**,*

indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level.



                                                                                               28
Table 5. Marginal effect estimates for health care utilization models by election characteristics.
                                                                            Use                      Expense
                                                                            (0/1)                   (NT$/day)
                                                                     Mar. Eff. S.E.        %     Mar. Eff. S.E.        %
Closeness of election  25% (all elections)                          0.016 *         0.008 12.1% 2.272 *     1.614 8.9%
Closeness of election  75% (all elections)                          0.023 ** 0.004 16.1% 3.900 ** 1.953 14.9%
Competition index (1-HHI)  25% (all elections)                      0.011 *         0.006 7.7% 2.819 *      1.531 11.0%
Competition index (1-HHI)  75% (all elections)                      0.021 ** 0.008 15.2% 4.173 ** 1.892 16.3%
Turnout rate  25% (all elections)                                   0.006           0.006 4.2% 1.876        1.404 6.8%
Turnout rate  75% (all elections)                                   0.015 ** 0.007 10.9% 3.470 ** 1.389 13.2%
Campaign expenditure  25% (township mayor election) 0.001                           0.008 0.5% 0.917        0.922 3.2%
Campaign expenditure  75% (township mayor election) 0.024 ** 0.010 17.0% 4.210 ** 1.913 16.5%
Notes: Standard errors are cluster-corrected at the birth month level. The unconditional marginal effects for health

care expenditure are reported in 2005 NT$. Marginal effects in percentage terms are calculated using the sample

mean of the dependent variable. All models include year, week and township fixed-effects and the set of control

variables reported in Table 1. ***,**,* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level.




                                                         29
Table 6. Marginal effect estimates of health care utilization models by gender and income level.
                                                     Use (0/1)                            Expense (NT$/day)
                                         Mar. Eff.         S.E.         %            Mar. Eff.           S.E.      %
Panel A. By gender
   Men                                    0.019 ***       0.006       15.6%           4.834 ***          1.485   19.1%
   Women                                  0.015 ***       0.003        9.3%           2.104 ***          0.752   7.9%
Panel B. By income level
   Income level 1                         0.009           0.008        6.0%           2.854              1.958   9.9%
   Income level 2                         0.021 ***       0.009       13.5%           5.579 ***          1.689   18.4%
   Income level 3                         0.020 *         0.011       12.9%           2.099 *            1.069   8.3%
   Income level 4                        -0.052           0.050      -35.3%          -1.647              9.023   -7.5%
Notes: Standard errors are cluster-corrected at the birth month level. The unconditional marginal effects for health

care expenditure are reported in 2005 NT$. Marginal effects in percentage terms are calculated using the sample

mean of the dependent variable. All models include year, week and township fixed-effects and the set of control
variables reported in Table 1. ***,**,* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level.




                                                         30
Table 7. Marginal effect estimates of health care utilization models by type of illness.
                                                                         Use (0/1)                Expense (NT$/day)
ICD-9 category                                                 Mar. Eff      S.E       %         Mar. Eff     S.E      %
A. Mental disorders                                           0.0001       0.0004 2.6% 0.025                 0.050 4.4%
B. Circulatory system disorders                               0.0001       0.0002 13.1% 0.012                0.012 7.9%
C. Respiratory system disorders                               0.0065 ** 0.0032 13.0% 0.489 **                0.203 15.6%
   C1. Acute Respiratory infections                           0.0064 ** 0.0030 15.3% 0.465 **                0.227 16.4%
D. Digestive system disorders                                 0.0051 *** 0.0016 17.8% 0.854 ***              0.263 17.0%
   D1. Oral cavity, salivary glands and jaws                  0.0037 *** 0.0011 18.7% 0.733 **               0.322 18.1%
   D2. Esophagus, stomach and duodenum                        0.0008 *** 0.0002 20.6% 0.084 ***              0.020 18.7%
E. Injury and poisoning                                       0.0012 *     0.0007 10.3% 0.232                0.292 12.9%
   E1. Fractures, wounds and burns                            0.0013 ** 0.0005 11.1% 0.002                   0.003 14.2%
F. Infection, parasitic diseases, neoplasms, and
                                                              0.0005       0.0007 9.7% 0.035                 0.027 2.4%
   congenital anomalies
Notes: Standard errors are cluster-corrected at the birth month level. The unconditional marginal effects for health

care expenditure are reported in 2005 NT$. Marginal effects in percentage terms are calculated using the sample

mean of the dependent variable. All models include year, week and township fixed-effects and the set of control

variables reported in Table 1. ***,**,* indicate statistical significance at the 1%, 5% and 10% level.




                                                         31
Figure 1. RD plots for total health care use and expenditure.


                             Health care use (0/1)
 . 17
 . 16
 . 15
 . 14
 . 13
 . 12




            -50                             0                         50
                         Sample average              Polynomial fit




           Log of total health care expenditure among users
 4.7
 4. 6
 4.5
 4.4




            -50                            0                          50
                        Sample average              Polynomial fit




                                          32
