                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 EFFECTS OF THE MINIMUM WAGE ON CHILD HEALTH

                                        George Wehby
                                        Robert Kaestner
                                           Wei Lyu
                                        Dhaval M. Dave

                                      Working Paper 26691
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26691


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                          January 2020, Revised December 2020




The study was funded by a Policies-For-Action (P4A) grant from the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation (RWJF). The authors thank Jason Fletcher, David Simon, Hope Corman, and seminar
participants at the RWJF P4A research webinar, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston (New
England Studies Group), University of Chicago, and at Hunter College, City University of New
York for providing helpful comments on the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by George Wehby, Robert Kaestner, Wei Lyu, and Dhaval M. Dave. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of the Minimum Wage on Child Health
George Wehby, Robert Kaestner, Wei Lyu, and Dhaval M. Dave
NBER Working Paper No. 26691
January 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. I1,I14,I28,J20,J3

                                         ABSTRACT

Effects of the minimum wage on labor market outcomes have been extensively debated and
analyzed. Less studied, however, are other consequences of the minimum wage that stem from
changes in a household's income and labor supply. We examine the effects of the minimum wage
on child health. To obtain estimates, we use data from the National Survey of Children's Health
in conjunction with a difference-in-differences research design. We find that an increase in the
minimum wage throughout childhood is associated with a significant improvement in child
health. A particularly interesting finding is that much of the benefits of a higher minimum wage
are associated with the period between birth and age five.


George Wehby                                   Wei Lyu
Department of Health Management and Policy     University of Iowa
College of Public Health                       lyu-wei@uiowa.edu
University of Iowa
145 N. Riverside Dr.                           Dhaval M. Dave
100 College of Public Health Bldg.             Bentley University
Iowa City, IA 52242                            Department of Economics
and NBER                                       175 Forest Street, AAC 195
george-wehby@uiowa.edu                         Waltham, MA 02452-4705
                                               and IZA
Robert Kaestner                                and also NBER
Harris School of Public Policy                 ddave@bentley.edu
University of Chicago
1307 East 60th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
kaestner@uchicago.edu
1.     Introduction

       The effects of the minimum wage on employment, wages, and income in the United

States have been extensively investigated. While these consequences of the minimum wage

are of obvious importance, the minimum wage may have other impacts that extend beyond

the labor market. One potentially important consequence of the minimum wage is its effect

on child health stemming from the effect of the minimum wage on family income and time

allocation. Some evidence that the minimum wage has such effects comes from research on

the effects of the minimum wage on birth weight. Results from studies by Komro,

Livingston, Markowitz, and Wagenaar (2016) and Wehby, Dave, and Kaestner (2019)

indicate that increases in the minimum wage had beneficial, although modest, effects on

birth weight. Whether the beneficial effects of a higher minimum wage extend to post-birth

child health is unknown, however, as no prior research has investigated this question.

       In this study, we provide the first analysis of the effect of the minimum wage on

children's health using nationally representative data and quasi-experimental methods. An

important contribution of our study is that we assess whether the effects of the minimum

wage differ by when such changes occur during the child's life. In other words, we

investigate if there are certain stages of childhood that are more or less sensitive to changes

in household circumstances (e.g., income) associated with changes in minimum wages.

       Our analysis uses data from three waves of the National Survey of Children's Health

in conjunction with a continuous-treatment, difference-in-differences research design that

compares the health of children in the same state "exposed" to different minimum wages

over different periods of childhood. Results indicate that a higher minimum wage in

childhood leads to statistically significant improvements in health. For children aged 6 to


                                                                                              24
12, our estimates indicate that a $1 increase in the minimum wage on average over the

child's life (for example, a$1 increase each year) is associated with approximately a 10%

increase in the probability that the child is in excellent health; a 29% decrease in the

probability of being in poor health, as measured by three indicators of whether a child's

health requires greater use of medication and medical care than peers and reduces the

child's ability to engage in normal activities; and a 26% decrease in missed school days due

to illness or injury. Among children ages 13 to 17, we also find positive and significant

effects of an increase in the minimum wage over the child's life course on their health,

although estimates are less precise and confidence intervals wider due to more limited

variation in the minimum wage for these birth cohorts (see Figure 1). For these children, a

$1 increase in the minimum wage in each year of the child's life is associated with an 11%

increase in the probability that the child is in excellent health; a 57% decrease in the

probability of being in poor health, as measured by three indicators noted earlier; and a

42% decrease in missed school days due to illness or injury. Notably, for both cohorts of

children, a large share of the cumulative effect of the minimum wage on child health is from

changes in the minimum wage during the first five years of life, which suggests that

resources during this period are particularly important to children's health.

        An important contribution of our study is to the literature on the effects of income on

child health. While there is a well-documented association between family income and child

health,1 there is much less evidence that this association represents a causal effect (Cooper



1
 Some recent studies that document the income gradient for health throughout childhood are: Case et al. (2002);
Currie and Stabile (2003); Currie et al. (2007), Codliffe and Link (2008); Murasko (2008); and Allin and Stabile
(2012). However, there is a voluminous literature documenting a positive association between income (poverty) and
child outcomes. Some reviews include: Mayer (1997); Aber et al. (1998). Mayer (2002); Duncan et al. (2014);
McEwan and Stewart (2014); Pilas et al. (2014).
                                                                                                                24
and Stewart, 2013; Cooper and Stewart, 2017). In their comprehensive review, Cooper and

Stewart (2017) reported that among 15 quasi-experimental studies of the effect of income

on child health, findings were decidedly mixed: eight reported evidence of no association

between income and child health and 13 reported evidence of a positive association.2

Moreover, almost all the positive associations pertain to birthweight or child height and

weight.3 There were very few studies of the effect of income on general health or measures

of health other than height and weight, and in these, results generally indicated no

relationship between income and child health.

        The paucity of causal evidence about the role of family income in determining child

health has important implications for both theory and policy. From a theoretical point-of-

view, child health is likely to be a normal good and, therefore, higher income should be

positively associated with child health. However, the magnitude of the effect of family

income on child health depends on the relative importance of other drivers of child health,

some of which are less amenable to greater investments (e.g., preventive care) from more

income, such as genetic factors and exogenous health shocks (e.g., trauma). Evidence

consistent with this possibility is found in Currie and Stabile (2003) who showed that lower

income children in Canada have a greater number of chronic conditions than high-income

Canadian children, but that these conditions have similar long-run effects on health across

income groups. While the study was not a causal analysis, the results suggest that income is

primarily associated with the presence of chronic conditions and not the consequences of

health shocks. From a policy perspective, the lack of causal evidence linking family income



2
 The studies examined multiple outcomes and that is why the total is more than 15.
3
 These findings are consistent with the evidence on the effect of the minimum wage on birth weight (Komro et al.,
2016; Wehby et al., 2019).
                                                                                                                    24
to child health weakens the case for income support programs, although these programs

may be justified on the basis of other evidence.4

         Our analysis contributes to this literature because the minimum wage affects income.

Thus, our finding that a higher minimum wage is associated with better child health may be

interpreted as indirect evidence of a causal effect of income on child health. While effects on

employment have often taken center stage in the debate over the efficacy of the minimum

wage, it is widely acknowledged that an increase in the minimum wage will substantially

increase wages for many low-skilled workers (Belman, Wolfson, & Nawakitphaitoon, 2015).

We acknowledge that there may be dis-employment effects of the minimum wage that could

moderate the positive income gains of minimum wage increases, and these labor supply

effects may also directly affect child health. However, we do not find any evidence of this in

our analysis and other evidence suggests small to no dis-employment effects of the

minimum wage.5 Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the primary effect of the

minimum wage on health that we observe is through income.6

2. Related Literature

2.a. Effects of the Minimum Wage on Employment and Earnings

         There is a large literature examining the effects of the minimum wage on

employment and earnings. We will not review that literature here, as there are many good

reviews (Belman & Wolfson, 2014; Congressional Budget Office, 2014, 2019; Neumark,

2019). While debate on the issue continues, conclusions from almost all reviews of the


4
  There is substantial evidence that higher family income is a cause of better child developmental outcomes related to
cognition such as measures based on school test scores (see Cooper sand Stewart (2013) for a thorough review).
5
  The data we use do not have exact income information to conduct an analysis of the effect of the minimum wage on
family income. We discuss this more later in the article.
6
  In this sense, our study is similar to studies of the effect of the EITC on child health (Hoynes et al. 2015; Braga et
al. 2019).
                                                                                                                     24
evidence coalesce around a consensus that, on average, there seem to be small effects of the

minimum wage on employment, and, for those most likely adversely affected, somewhat

larger dis-employment effects. 7 In contrast to the mixed evidence on the employment

effects of the minimum wage, there is consistent evidence that a higher minimum wage

raises wages (Aaronson, Agarwal, & French, 2012; Belman et al., 2015; David, Manning, &

Smith, 2016; Dube, 2018). A recent Congressional Budget Office (2019) analysis concluded

that an increase in the minimum wage to $12 would increase wages for as many as 11

million workers. 8

        Overall, the evidence on the labor market effects of the minimum wage, at least over

the range of increases occurring in the last 20 to 30 years, indicates that a higher minimum

wage will raise wages and income among many low-skilled persons, though some of these

gains may be partly offset by modest dis-employment effects.9 The important implication of

this literature for child health is that an increase in the minimum wage and, in turn, family

income may have improved child health. However, we cannot definitively rule out other

pathways (e.g., labor supply) that link the minimum wage to child health.




7
  The "new" minimum wage literature, comprising studies over the past two decades since Card and Krueger (1995),
has mostly found small to no effects of moderate increases in the minimum wage on employment (though see
Neumark and Wascher (2007) and Neumark (2019) for a critique of some of the methods underlying these
conclusions). Belman and Wolfson (2014) provide a survey of this literature and a meta-analysis, with the median
and modal employment elasticity ranging between 0 and -0.1. However, there may be larger dis-employment effects
for certain groups and the potential for large increases in the minimum wage, or increases beyond some threshold, to
lead to larger dis-employment effects (Gorry & Jackson, 2017).
8
  We note that research on the effects of the minimum wage on poverty lack power to detect small to moderate effect
sizes. For example, estimates in Burkhauser and Sabia (2007) cannot reject an elasticity of poverty with respect to
minimum wage <0.25 in absolute value). Similarly, Neumark and Wascher (2002) cannot reject a change in poverty
<5 percentage points (absolute value) with respect to a $1 (20%) increase in minimum wage, which is a large effect
given that that over half of families in poverty in the sample do not have anyone who works, and therefore are
unlikely to be affected by minimum wage.
9
  Schmitt (2013) provides a good discussion of other adjustment mechanisms that may absorb the effects of a higher
minimum wage, thereby relieving the pressure on the employment margin. There also may be changes in the
intensive margin of hours of work.
                                                                                                                  24
2.b. Previous Evidence of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Child Health

         Studies examining the relationship between the minimum wage and health are

sparse, and the few studies that have been conducted have largely focused on the health of

adults and workers. Here, we focus on studies related to children. Two recent studies

explore how the minimum wage impacts infant health. Both Komro et al. (2016) and Wehby

et al. (2019) find evidence that a higher minimum wage is associated with small increases in

birth weight. And Wehby et al. (2019) show that the increase in birth weight is driven by an

improvement in the fetal growth rate and gestational age, consistent with improved

nutrition and maternal behaviors during pregnancy.

         Averett, Smith, and Wang (2017) examine the effects of the minimum wage on

working teenagers using the Current Population Surveys from 1996 to 2014. Analyses are

stratified by race/ethnicity and gender. The authors report that the minimum wage is

positively associated with self-reported health among white females and negatively related

to self-rated health for Hispanic males. For other racial/ethnic and gender groups the

minimum wage was not significantly associated with health.10

         There have also been a couple of studies of the effect of the Earned Income Tax Credit

(EITC) on child health, which, like the minimum wage also affects income and labor supply

of low-income families, although the labor supply effects of the EITC are much larger than

they are for the minimum wage. Results from these studies find positive effects of the EITC

on infant health (Hoynes, Miller, & Simon, 2015) and improved general health and reduction

in obesity among young adults (Braga, Blavin, & Gangopadhyaya, 2019).11


10
   The disparate set of findings in this study are difficult to reconcile with a behavioral model because almost all
groups experienced an increase in earnings. To generate both negative and positive effects, minimum wage related
increase in earnings must have had very different effects on behavior.
11
   See Dench and Joyce (2019) for countervailing evidence of the effect of the EITC on infant health.
                                                                                                                       24
2.c. Contributions

       The literature on the effects of the minimum wage on non-labor market domains is

still emerging, and the relatively little research that has assessed effects on health mostly

pertains to adult populations (see, Lenhart, 2016; Lenhart, 2017; Reeves, McKee et al.,

2017). No study has examined how minimum wage changes impact child health. This is an

important research question because of the known disadvantages in terms of health,

education, and socio-emotional development of children in low-income families who are

most likely to gain from an increase in minimum wages. If the minimum wage has

significant, positive effects on child health, then it would be an important, and currently

unrecognized, benefit of a higher minimum wage and important evidence in support of such

a policy. We provide the first analysis of how minimum wage changes during childhood

impact health outcomes for children.

       A particularly important contribution of our research is that we examine whether the

timing of the minimum wage increase matters (Cunha and Heckman 2007; Braga et al.

2019). Health is a cumulative outcome and the effect of past investments likely matters to

current child health. Therefore, our assessment of how changes in the minimum wage at

different points over the child's life course affect current child health provides evidence that

is central to the human capital theory and important to policymakers.

3. Mechanisms Linking Minimum Wage to Child Health

3.a. Overview

       As noted, there is substantial evidence that an increase in the minimum wage

increases wages of low-skilled employed persons and may have a small disemployment

effect (extensive margin). It is also apparent from prior evidence that the minimum wage


                                                                                                24
increased income and had relatively little effect on the intensive margin of hours of work.12

Thus, the primary effect of an increase in the minimum wage is to raise income, although

there may be some changes in time allocation (e.g., employment and hours of work).

        Greater family income can affect child health through multiple channels. The most

direct pathway is the increase in consumption of goods and services, such as better

nutrition, a better physical environment, and more use of health care that are beneficial to

the child.13 More income can also affect residential and employment stability because of a

greater ability to smooth consumption through both savings and access to credit. Finally,

greater earnings are likely to reduce financial stress, which may lead to improved mental

health of all family members and reduce unhealthy behaviors that are caused by stress, for

example, tobacco and alcohol use of adults.

        Evidence on the causal effects of income on various mechanisms (mediating factors)

linking income to child health is sparse (Stewart and Cooper, 2017). There is limited

evidence that greater income is associated with better nutrition (Gennetian and Miller,

2002; Riccio et al., 2010; Milligan and Stabile, 2011) and more consistent evidence that

greater income is associated with improved maternal mental health (Gennetian and Miller,

2002; Evans and Garthwaite, 2010; Milligan and Stabile, 2011). Income is also likely causally

related to the use of medical care, although income is unlikely to have a significant causal

effect on the use of health care among a population with health insurance, particularly

Medicaid that has almost no cost-sharing. The lack of evidence on the mediating effects of


12
   Studies of the effect of minimum wage on hours of work (intensive margin) include: Stewart and Swaffield (2008);
Metcalf (2008); Couch and Wittenburg (2001); Neumark and Wascher (2007); Neumark and Wascher (2008);
Belman, Wolfson, and Nawakitphaitoon (2015); Neumark, Schweitzer, and Wascher (2004); Zavodny (2000);
Skedinger (2015); Dolton, Bondibene, and Wadsworth (2010).
13
   Alternatively, an increase in income may increase unhealthy consumption, but this would be primarily among
adults (e.g. smoking, alcohol) and its link to child health would be second order.
                                                                                                                24
income on child health is, first, due to the paucity of experimental and quasi-experimental

studies examining the effect of income on child health. Second, data availability often

hinders such analyses because of the absence of good measures of the mediating factors,

such as nutrition, physical environment, and residential mobility.

       A second issue we want to highlight is the possibility that there may be periods in the

child's life during which the (income) effects of the minimum wage are particularly

important (Cunha and Heckman, 2007). To do so, we use a human capital model of child

health and focus on the child health production function central to this model (Grossman,

1972; Todd & Wolpin, 2003). The production function relates child health to cumulative

investments in children. The production function embeds the effects of the minimum wage

because one likely consequence of a higher minimum wage is greater income, which will

increase investments in child health. The production function measures the effects of these

investments.

3.b. A Model of Child Health Production

       One version of a child health (H) production function is the following, which we

present for a child age seven, but the model can be adapted to any age:

           (1) 7 = 0 (1 - 0 ). . . (1 - 6 ) + 0 0 (1 - 1 ). . . (1 - 6 )+. . . +6 6

In equation (1), the health of a child age seven (H7) depends on her initial health (H0) and all

investments (I) in health from birth (age 0) to age seven. The productivity (effects) of

investments is measured by the coefficients i. The depreciation of the child's health is

denoted by  i . Depreciation is time-varying and, for children, may be quite small. Note that

the productivity of investments will differ by age and this reflects the possibility that child

health may be particularly affected by investments at certain ages.

                                                                                                  24
        Consider the prenatal period, Investment in medical care and maternal nutrition may

be particularly important because of the dramatic biological changes that occur during the

9-month prenatal period. Similarly, well-child visits during the first three years of life, which

is a period of very rapid and continuous physical and neurodevelopmental growth, may be

especially important in identifying and remedying risks and promoting health than later

visits. We also note that, while we indicate only one type of investment (I) in equation (1), in

reality, there are many, such as nutrition, medical care, and exercise.

        The minimum wage raises wages and income (net of dis-employment), and this

increase in income is likely to increase investment (below, we show that MW is the only

determinant of investment for simplicity; I(MW)).14 If so, then the effect of the minimum

wage on child health at age seven is given by:

     (2) 7 = 0 (1 - 0 ). . . (1 - 6 ) + 0 0 (0 )(1 - 1 ). . . (1 - 6 )+. . . +(6) 6 (6 )

                                                                                                 
     (3) 7
           = 0
               (1 - 0 ). . . (1 - 6 ) + 0 0
                                            (1 - 1 ). . . (1 - 6 )+. . . +6 6
                      -1                                    0                                        6


As indicated in equation (3), minimum wages throughout the child's life (including prenatal

period here indicated by age subscript -1 may affect health at a particular age, in this case,

age seven. It is also the case that a change in the minimum wage at different stages of a

child's life may have different effects and not just because of the greater or less depreciation

of the investments at that age, but because of differences in the productivity of investments

at different ages (i  j). Finally, the minimum wage may have different effects at different

stages of a child's life because it may have a different effect on the quantity of investments at

                                       (-1)
different stages of life (                     ). For example, parents may focus more on
                                     (-1)



14
 There may be a decrease in time inputs in child health production if the minimum wage causes some people to
work more hours, but evidence (see footnote 7) suggests that this is unlikely to be significant.
                                                                                                               24
nutritional investments during pregnancy and earlier in the child's life, but more on

educational or physical activity investments later in childhood.

        The last point merits elaboration. Equation (1) is a production function and not a

behavioral model--it is best viewed as an accounting relationship. However, it embeds the

choices of a behavioral model as manifested by the quantity of investment at each age. Like

any economic model, the quantity of investment at each age will depend on the costs and

benefits of the investment. The benefits of investment at any age will depend on the

productivity of those investments (i) and the value (utility) of improved child health. This

reasoning suggests that an increase in the minimum wage at ages when the productivity of

                                                                               
investment is relatively high will result in a greater change in investment (
                                                                              >
                                                                                  


 (-1)
           > (-1) ) than when the productivity of investment is relatively lower, ceteris
(-1)


paribus. This complementarity between the quantity and productivity of investment

underscores why there may be particular times in the child's life when the minimum wage

will have particularly large effects. Holding constant the productivity of current investment,

the investment will also be higher when the value of additions to child health are relatively

larger. The value of greater child health may differ because of differences in the level of

health (i.e., diminishing marginal utility of child health), for example, because of higher

initial health or because of prior investments.

3.c. Implications

        There are two insights for an empirical analysis of this discussion of the child health

production function. The first is that analyses of the effect of the minimum wage on child

health need to be concerned with the timing of minimum wage changes throughout the


                                                                                              24
child's life. The minimum wage may not have the same effect at all ages and past minimum

wages can affect child health along with the contemporaneous minimum wage. Second, the

minimum wage may also have different effects on the quantity of investment at different

ages, and because past investments affect the level of current investments through the stock

of health, past minimum wages may affect current investments.15 We return to these issues

in the empirical methods section below.

4. Methods

4.a. Data

         We employ data from 2003, 2007, and 2011/12 waves of the National Survey of

Child's Health (NSCH). The NSCH is in some ways well suited to study the effect of the

minimum wage on child health. The NSCH has a relatively large sample size, includes

detailed information on the family, and spans a sample period during which many state-

level changes in the minimum wage occurred.

         The NSCH is a nationally representative, cross-sectional telephone survey of children

aged 0-17 years in the U.S. For each wave, a sample was selected by a random-digit-dial

(RDD) of landline telephone numbers and cell phone numbers, from the 50 states and D.C. A

key strength of the NSCH is that samples, in addition to being nationally-representative, are

also representative within each state. In order to ensure adequate state-specific sample

sizes, even for the smaller states, the NSCH sampled an equal number of children from each

state for each wave. Weights reflecting the probability of selection and response are




15
   One possibility is that a higher minimum wage in one period that leads to a higher health stock at later ages may
cause parents to invest less at older ages (for example due to diminishing marginal utility of health). Alternatively, a
higher minimum wage in one period that leads to a higher health stock at later ages may cause parents to invest more
at older ages if a higher prior health stock raises the returns to current investments (complementarity).
                                                                                                                      24
provided. The NSCH collected information on children's health through parental or

caregiver interviews.16

         In order to focus on children most likely affected by the minimum wage, we select a

sample of children in low-educated families. A family is defined as low-educated when the

highest level of education attained by anyone in the household is high school or less. We

limit the sample to children aged 6 to 17 years. We do so for two reasons. First, one of the

primary outcomes we examine, missed school days due to illness/injury, is only measured

for children age 6 and older. Second, there is a trend of health "worsening" by age until

about age 6, which clearly does not reflect biological declines, but almost surely parents

becoming more aware of children's health problems during early childhood (see Appendix

Figure 1). 17

         We estimate effects separately for children aged 6-12, which is considered

developmentally as the middle childhood phase (US Department of Health Human Services,

2010), and for adolescent children (aged 13-17). This is consistent with the theoretical

production function approach we use and the conceptual model that the effects of

investments are age-specific. Sample sizes prevent more detailed stratification by age. We

also limit the sample to children whose survey respondent was a parent (not another

caregiver) to reduce measurement error (parents were respondents for 90% of surveyed



16
   The survey was initially conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics. Beginning in 2016, the NSCH
became an annual survey conducted by the Census Bureau using a different sampling approach and weighting. The
Census Bureau recommends against combining the earlier waves of the NSCH with the 2016 and later waves (U.S.
Census Bureau, 2017). For this reason, we do not include the more recent data, currently available for 2016 and
2017.
17
   The objective is to measure child health and how the minimum wage affects health. The growth in the prevalence
of illness in early childhood likely stems from the increasing probability of diagnosis with age. The minimum wage
may affect this probability and therefore, the effects of the minimum wage would be measuring the effect on the
probability of diagnosis and on health directly. We are interested in the latter effect. This issue is less likely at older
ages but may persist somewhat.
                                                                                                                          24
children). In addition, we exclude children who are home-schooled since parents may learn

about their children's health from school health assessments and teacher observation (1.8%

of children are homeschooled). Combining the three waves of the NSCH, the sample includes

over 45,000 children aged 6-17 years.

       Ideally, we would estimate equation (2), the health production function, and to do so

we would use measures of the stock of health at a particular age. One limitation of the NSCH

(and most data sets) is that there are few such measures like this. Also, several health

indicators capture specific illnesses that may have a large genetic influence and unclear

links to family investments and income changes (e.g., autism, attention-deficit/hyperactivity

disorder). After reviewing available information, we chose four measures of child health

that we consider broad enough to capture the child's health stock. The first is the child's

general health rated by the parent on a five-category scale (excellent to poor), which we

examine as an ordinal variable (from 1 to 5) and as two binary indicators, one for excellent

or very good health versus less (good, fair, and poor), and another for poor or fair health

versus better (good, very good, and excellent). The second is a measure of what we call poor

health that is constructed from responses to the following three questions: 1- Does the child

need medication because of a medical or health condition?; 2- Does the child use more

medical care than other children of the same age?; and 3- Is the child limited in ability to do

things because of a medical or health condition?. We use a dichotomous version of this

variable that equals one if the respondent replies affirmatively to any of the three questions.

There are also versions of these questions that add a qualifier indicating that the cause is a

chronic condition. The third measure of child health we examine is Body Mass Index (BMI),

which is only available for children ages 10 and older; therefore, we only include this


                                                                                              24
measure for the second age group of 13 to 17. The NSCH provides BMI grouped into

categories based on distribution percentiles. We use a dichotomous version indicating

whether BMI is greater than 85th (overweight) or 95th (obesity) percentiles of the BMI

distribution. The last measure of child health examined is the number of missed school days

in the past 12 months due to illness or injury. The general health and missing school

outcomes are moderately correlated.18

        Compelling measures of investment in child health in the NSCH are few. As noted

earlier, the minimum wage is likely to affect child health through better nutrition, less

stress, a healthier living environment, and greater use of medical care. Few measures

relating to these mechanisms are available in the data. We selected several possible

candidates. First, we examined outcomes directly or indirectly related to employment and

income: whether anyone in the household is employed, whether the family is impoverished

(<100% Federal Poverty Level), whether the family received food stamps, and whether the

child was covered by health insurance. We also examined whether a child had a preventive

health care visit or had any unmet health care needs. However, it merits noting that despite

limiting the sample to low-educated households, the sample of children is relatively well-

insured--approximately 85% of the sample is covered by health insurance with about half

covered by Medicaid. In addition, 75% of the sample had a preventive health care visit and

only about 7% of the sample had unmet health care needs. These figures suggest that there

is a somewhat limited scope for the minimum wage to affect child health through greater

use of medical care. Though, more granular measures of care, such as the quality and



18
   The weighted mean of missed school days declines from 10.6 days among children with poor-rated health to 3.1
days among children with excellent-rated health, and the correlation coefficient between the five-category health
status measure and missed school days is -0.20 (p<0.01).
                                                                                                                    24
continuity of care, which are not observed in the data, may still be a possible path of

influence. Finally, we examined maternal mental health.

       Information on the monthly minimum wage at the state and federal level were

obtained from publicly available data by Vaghul and Zipperer (2016), compiled from

multiple sources including state legislation and resolutions, the Bureau of Labor Statistics,

and state agencies and labor departments. The effective minimum wage of a state is the

higher of state legislated minimum wage or federal minimum wage.

3.b. Empirical Model of Child Health

       As discussed earlier, an increase in income over a child's lifetime, as a result of a

higher minimum wage, may affect child health through changes in investments in health.

And the timing of changes in the minimum wage during childhood may matter. Changes in

the minimum wage during pregnancy and in early childhood may have different effects than

changes at later ages. Therefore, it is important to distinguish between the effects of

minimum wage changes early in life from more recent changes. We incorporate this notion

into our empirical model.

       Ideally, we would like to estimate equation (1), but investments in child health are

not available in the data. Instead, we estimate the effect of the minimum wage on child

health using a reduced-form specification separately for children aged 6-12 and adolescents

13-17. For ages 6-12 years, the specification is as follows:

                                             iskt + 3 MW_6_s
            (4) Hiskt =  +  + 1 MW_Piskt + 2 MW_0_5   iskt +   +

                                            +  .

Hiskt denotes the health outcome of child i, at age k, in state s at survey year t. MW_Piskt is the

real minimum wage (adjusted for inflation and converted to 2016 dollars) in the pregnancy


                                                                                                24
year,19 which we include as a separate period given the fundamentally different types of

investments in pregnancy and their importance for child health, as well as prior evidence of

effects of the minimum wage during pregnancy on infant health (Wehby et al, 2019).

MW_0_5iskt is the real minimum wage averaged over birth year and each year up to age 5,

and computed as follows:

                                                                     5
                                                                  1
                                             (5) _0_5 =               .
                                                                  6
                                                                    =0

For each calendar year, the effective real minimum wage is averaged over 12 months before

averaging across years. MW_6_siskt is the real minimum wage at survey year t for children

aged 6 years or minimum wage averaged over the years from age 6 until the child's age (k)

at survey year for children older than 6 as follows:
                                                                survey year
                                                                        sk    MW
                                      (6)                 k=Age 6
                                          MW_6_s = (survey year-year at age 6)+1 .

In this model, 1 captures the effects of minimum wage changes during pregnancy and 2

captures effects of minimum wage changes after birth and during early childhood. In

contrast, 3 captures the effects of minimum wage changes later in childhood. Note that the

coefficients on the MW variables in each period embed two effects, as per the model of child


19
   The NSCH does not provide data on the child's birth year and month (and it does not provide individual-level data
on interview month), which generates measurement error in the pregnancy and birth year for some children and in the
average minimum wage over specific ages. The 2003 NSCH survey was completed between January 2003 and July
2004 (87% in 2003 and 13% in 2004), the 2007 NSCH survey was completed between April 2007 and July 2008
(79% in 2007 and 21% in 2008), and the 2011/2012 survey was completed between June 2011 and February 2012
(interview rates by year are not available); therefore, we assign 2003, 2007 and 2011 as the survey year to all
participants in each NSCH wave. The NSCH documentation provided information about the number of interviews by
month in the 2003 and 2007 NSCH waves. By assuming a 9-month pregnancy and equal probability of birth in each
month, we estimate that the pregnancy year and the birth year might be inaccurately assigned for 26% and 35% of
children in the 2003 survey, respectively; similarly, pregnancy year and birth year might be inaccurately assigned for
17% and 31% of children in the 2007 survey, respectively. Proportions of interview by month and year were not
reported in the documentation of the 2011 NSCH survey, and so we could not estimate these errors. Any such
misclassification of the pregnancy year would attenuate the effect sizes; the degree of attenuation, however, is likely
to be minimal because of: 1- lagged effects the minimum wage on birth outcomes (Wehby et al. 2019); and 2- high
correlation in the minimum wage within states over time.
                                                                                                                    24
health production discussed earlier: the effect of the minimum wage on the quantity of

investments (and thus health) in that period and the effect of the change in health stock in

that period on future investment (i.e. at a later period). The second effect occurs because an

increase in health stock at an earlier age raises the stock of health in future periods and,

therefore, may affect the quantity and productivity of future investments.

         Equation (4) can be interpreted as a reduced form model in which we have

substituted for investments with the minimum wage. The model also includes state fixed

effects (), and birth year (cohort) fixed effects (). Also included in E are state-level time-

varying policy measures including state income eligibility thresholds for child coverage in

Medicaid, state EITC credits as a percent of federal EITC (including 0 if a state has no EITC

program), and cigarette taxes. These measures are calculated for each period and child's age

and included in the model in a similar manner to the minimum wage measures. The vector X

contains child demographic measures including race/ethnicity, gender, and dummies for

child age (year by year).

         Conditional on other covariates in the model, we assume that the minimum wage is

exogenous--uncorrelated with missing investments and initial health shown in equation

(1). The exogeneity of the minimum wage is based on the difference-in-differences research

design of equation (4) that compares children in the same state who were "exposed" to

different minimum wages at specific periods of their childhood while accounting for state,

birth cohort, and age at interview effects.20




20
  Because of the cross-sectional nature of the data, we do not observe the same child at different points of their life.
However, based on the child's age at the survey, we are able to calculate an average minimum wage acros s years
between pregnancy and survey year.
                                                                                                                     24
       The specification of the minimum wage variable in equation (4) represents one

approach to allowing the effects of the minimum wage to differ across the child's life course.

In this case, we allow there to be three periods when combining children aged 6 through 12.

Our choice represents a compromise between estimating a fully unrestricted specification

where we include the minimum wage in each year of the child's life for a given age and

simply averaging the minimum wage over the child's life. The former approach is not

practical because the minimum wage does not vary on an annual basis and is often constant

for several years. This introduces a substantial collinearity problem. Also, it requires

estimating separate models for each specific age which is impractical given available sample

sizes. The latter approach restricts the effect of the minimum wage to be the same at each

age, which is inconsistent with the possibilities highlighted by the conceptual model. In

addition to estimating and testing the minimum wage effects in specific periods, we also

calculate and test the significance of the sum of the minimum wage effects from all stages.

       We also estimate models for adolescents ages 13-17 years. In this case, the model is

specified as follows:

         (7) Hiskt =  +  + 1 MW_Piskt + 2 MW_0_5iskt

                        + 3                iskt +   +    + 
                           MW_6_12iskt + 4 MW_13_s

MW_6_12iskt is the real minimum wage averaged over ages 6 through 12 as follows:

                                                 12
                                                = 6 
                              (8) _6_12 =                        .
                                                       7
iskt is the real minimum wage at survey year t for children aged 13 years or
MW_13_s

minimum wage averaged from age 13 until child's age (k) at survey year for children older

than 13 as follows:


                                                                                              24
                                                     survey year
                                                                   MWsk
                                   =
                              (9) MW_13_s         k=Age 13
                                                                            .
                                          (survey      year-year at age 13)+1


       As noted earlier, the NSCH sampled an equal number of children from each state for

each wave in order to make the data nationally and state representative. We estimate

weighted regression models that apply the NSCH sampling probability weights in order to

approximate as best as possible the average partial treatment effect of the minimum wage,

and in supplementary analyses also present estimates from unweighted models for

comparison. The NSCH provides a final sampling weight that accounts for sample selection

and non-response. We estimate all models using OLS and construct standard errors allowing

for correlation of observations within the state (i.e., robust-cluster standard errors).

5. Main Results

5.a. Variation in Minimum Wages over Child's Life

       Before discussing estimates of the effects of a higher minimum wage on child health,

we present descriptive information about the extent of minimum wage changes in our

sample period. Specifically, for each measure of the minimum wage (pregnancy, ages 0 to 5,

ages 6 to current age, ages 6 to 12, and ages 13 to current age), we calculated the residuals

from regressions of each minimum wage measure on all covariates included in the

regression models of children's health.

       Figure 1 shows the distribution of these residuals by age group. There are two points

to note in Figure 1. First, there is significant variation in minimum wages in the sample

period. Changes in the (average) minimum wage of $0.5 are not atypical. Second, changes in

minimum wages tend to be larger for the younger cohort and larger during later periods in

the child's life. Both of these observations reflect the fact that there have been more state

changes in minimum wages in the later years (e.g., post 2000) that affect the younger cohort
                                                                                                24
more than the older cohort. As noted in the Introduction, the smaller variation in minimum

wages over the life of the older cohort of children results in less precise, but still

informative, estimates of the effect of the minimum wage for this cohort.

5.b. Effects of Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 6-12

       Table 1 reports the effects of the average minimum wage during pregnancy, ages 0-5,

and age 6 to current age for children between ages 6 and 12 on parent-rated general child

health, the index of poor health and missed school days due to illness or injury, based on

equation (4).

       Most estimates in Table 1 pertaining to the effect of the minimum wage during

pregnancy are small and not statistically significant. The exception is for fair/poor rated

health. For this outcome, a $1 increase in the minimum wage during pregnancy is associated

with a 1.6 percentage point (24%) decrease in the likelihood of fair/poor rated health.

       For minimum wage changes during ages 0-5 years, estimates are more consistently

indicative of a beneficial effect. A $1 increase in the minimum wage in each of these five

years is associated with a 0.11 (2.7%) improvement in general health (on the five-category

scale) and a 6.2 percentage point (8.7%) increase in the probability of very good or excellent

rated health. A $1 increase in the minimum wage at each of these ages is also associated

with a 3.8 percentage point (14%) decrease in the 3-question index measure of poor health

and a 0.57 (15.6%) decrease in missed school days. Note that these are estimated

treatment effects associated with an average increase of $1 in the minimum wage over the

child's early life course, between the ages of 0 to 5, not that of a one-time increase at a single

year of age.




                                                                                                24
       Changes in the minimum wage between ages 6 and the child's current age are

generally not statistically significant or clinically important. The exception is the estimate of

the effect of the minimum wage at these ages on the 3-question index of poor health; a $1

increase in the average minimum wage during each of these ages is associated with a 3.3

percentage point (12%) decrease.

       Finally, we calculated the sum of the coefficients on the minimum wage variables

across all ages. These estimates are presented in the last column of Table 1. These estimates

measure the cumulative effect of a $1 change in the minimum wage in each year of the

child's life: pregnancy, ages 0 to 5, and ages 6 to child's current age, not a one year only

increase by $1. A $1 increase in the minimum wage throughout a child's life is associated

with a 0.18 unit (4.4%) improvement in general health; a 7 percentage point (10%) increase

in the probability of very good or excellent rated health; an 8.3 percentage point (30%)

decrease in the 3-question index of poor health; and 0.95 (26%) fewer missed school days.

All of these estimates are statistically significant. Finally, if we apply a Holm-Bonferroni

correction for multiple testing bias, all significant estimates remain statistically significant.

5.c. Effects of Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 13-17

       In Table 2, we present estimates of the effect of the minimum wage for adolescents

aged 13-17. Here we also find evidence of improvement in child health with increases in the

minimum wage during childhood. An increase in the minimum wage during pregnancy is

associated with a 6 percentage points (21%) decrease in the 3-question index of poor

health. Other estimates of the effect of the minimum wage during pregnancy are not

statistically significant and relatively small.




                                                                                                24
       An increase in the minimum wage during ages 0 to 5 is associated with improved

health of adolescents. A $1 increase in the minimum wage in every year between ages 0 to 5

is associated with an approximately 11% increase in the probability of excellent/very good

rated health and a 90% decrease in the probability of poor/fair rated health. A $1 increase

in the minimum wage at these ages is also associated with an 8.2 percentage point (42%)

decrease in the 3-question index of poor health. These larger effects are consistent with a

cumulative and compounded response of the quantity and productivity of investments in

child health that are undertaken during early life course, though again, we note that

estimates for the older children are less precise and have relatively large confidence

intervals. Therefore, the large relative effect reported for fair/poor health needs to be

placed in that context.

       Few estimates of the effect of the minimum wage during ages 6 to age 12 are

statistically significant. There is some evidence that an increase in the minimum wage

between ages 6 and 12 decreased the likelihood of the 3-question index poor health (on the

order of about 20%), but there are few other notable effects. Similarly, estimates for

minimum wage changes between age 13 and current age are small and statistically

insignificant. As with the younger group, the largest and most significant effects of the

minimum wage were those that occurred during the earliest course of the child's life,

between the ages of 0 and 5.

       The last column of Table 2 presents the cumulative effect of an average $1 increase in

the minimum wage in every year of childhood. These estimates indicate improvements in

child health, although only two estimates are statistically significant. A $1 increase in the

minimum wage throughout childhood is associated with a 57% decrease in the 3-question


                                                                                                24
index of poor health and a 42% decline in missed school days. As noted before, this is the

effect of a $1 increase in the average minimum wage over the child's life course, and not a

one-time (or one-year) increase by $1. Other estimates of the cumulative effect of the

minimum wage on child health, while not significant, also suggest improved health except

for the case of BMI. Here too, a Holm-Bonferroni correction would not affect the statistical

significance of our estimates.

6. Sensitivity Analyses

6.a. Including Leads of Minimum Wage

       We test the validity of the research design by adding 2-year and 4-year leads of the

minimum wage to the models used to obtain estimates in Tables 1 and 2. The leads

represent the minimum wage values in future years, specifically at 2 and 4 years from the

survey year. If our research design is valid, estimates of the effects of the leads of minimum

wages should be zero (statistically speaking) because future minimum wages should not

affect past child health. We present estimates from these models in Tables 3 and 4 for

children ages 6 to 12 and 13 to 17, respectively. As can be observed, only one of the

estimates associated with the lead variables across both tables is statistically significant. In

Table 3 (ages 6-12), the 2-year lead of the minimum wage is positively and significantly

related to the 3-question index of poor health. It is also the case that estimates of the effects

of non-lead measures of minimum wages in Tables 3 and 4 are similar to those in Tables 1

and 2. Overall, the statistical insignificance of all but one of the estimates associated with the

lead measures of minimum wages and the robustness of the estimates of interest to the

addition of these lead effects suggest that the research design is plausibly valid.




                                                                                               24
6.b. Effects of Minimum Wage on Child Health in Two-Parent High-Educated Families

          As another assessment of the validity of the research design, we examine the effect of

the minimum wage on the health of children in two-parent, higher-educated households.

These are households where the highest attained education is greater than high school. The

information in the NSCH related to educational attainment combines any education above

high school in one category and reports the highest attained education in the household (not

separately for each parent). Therefore, it is not possible to only include college graduates

and so we include households with a parent with educational attainment greater than high

school. For this sample, the minimum wage should have smaller or no effects on children's

health because these families are largely unaffected by the minimum wage.

          Estimates of the effects of the minimum wage using this sample are presented in

Tables 5 (ages 6-12) and 6 (ages 13-17). As expected, there are almost no statistically

significant estimates in either table and the few estimates that are significant are much

smaller than those found for families more likely to be affected. Even for the few instances

when an estimate is statistically significant, there is also no consistent pattern across

childhood, as was found in the analysis of more affected families. For example, a higher

minimum wage during pregnancy is associated with an increase in the probability of

poor/fair rated health at ages 13 to 17. However, all other estimates of the effects of the

minimum wage during other periods of childhood on this outcome are negative (and very

small).

6.c. Adding Demographic and Maternal Health Control Variables

          In the model used to obtain estimates in Tables 1 and 2, we only include variables

that are clearly exogenous. However, we assess the sensitivity of the estimates to adding


                                                                                               24
several household demographic variables that are measured across all NSCH waves: an

indicator that the highest household education is less than high school (versus high school),

parental marital status, and the number of children in the household. We also add

indicators for maternal general health and mental health ratings (on five-category scales) to

account for a potential source of variation in reporting child health. We report the results in

Appendix Tables 2 and 3. As shown in those tables, estimates from the model that includes

an extended set of covariates are very similar to those reported earlier.

6.d. Unweighted estimates

       Given the sampling design of the NSCH, wherein equal numbers of children from

each state are sampled for each wave, our preferred estimates discussed above are derived

from models that apply the NSCH-provided sampling weights. Weighted estimates

approximate the treatment effect for the average child in the U.S., whereas unweighted

estimates would approximate the treatment effect in the average state (given equal samples

for all states). In the absence of endogenous sampling, the two may differ if there is

treatment effect heterogeneity across the treated states (Solon et al. 2016). The unweighted

results, which are reported in Appendix Tables 4 and 5, largely show similar patterns

though some of the effects (most notably for missed school days) are moderated and

become statistically insignificant.

7. Mechanisms

       As discussed above, several causal channels underlie the link from the minimum

wage to children's health, many of which remain unmeasured in the NSCH data. To assess

some possible mechanisms linking the minimum wage to child health, we examined the

contemporaneous effect of the minimum wage on whether a child has any insurance


                                                                                             24
coverage, whether anyone in the household is employed, whether the household income

was below 100% of the FPL and whether the family received food stamps. These four

outcomes relate to the labor market, are the proximate pathways linking the minimum wage

to investments in child health, and are the best measures available in the NSCH to assess

whether the minimum wage affected labor supply (insurance and employment) and income

through labor supply (poverty and food stamps).21 We also examined two healthcare

measures: whether the child had a preventive medical care visit or any unmet health care

need. These two outcomes are more closely related to the conceptual model's investments

in health, although the sample is relatively well-insured and their health care use will be less

dependent on income. We also examined maternal mental health rated on a scale from 1-5

(poor to excellent), which might be an indicator of stress in the household.

           Estimates of the effect of the contemporaneous minimum wage on these outcomes

are shown in Table 7. The contemporaneous minimum wage is defined as the average

minimum wage from age 6 to current age for children ages 6 to 12, and age 13 to the current

age for children ages 13 to 17. Most of these estimates are not statistically significant and

small in magnitude. In the case of having health insurance and employment, these estimates

provide some evidence consistent with the view that the minimum wage does not affect

employment and that the effects of the minimum wage on child health observed in Tables 1

and 2 are mainly through income. For adolescents (ages 13 to 17), there is some indication

of a significant improvement in maternal mental health associated with a higher minimum

wage which may be translated into more productive parenting, and a suggestive decrease in

the likelihood that a household is poor.


21
     As noted in footnote 8, there may be little power to detect an effect of the minimum wage on poverty.
                                                                                                             24
8. Conclusions

       Increases in the minimum wage have been shown to raise wages and income of low-

skilled workers with only small, if any, negative effects on employment. While the effects of

minimum wages on these labor market outcomes continue to be a focus of interest

surrounding the use of this policy, the minimum wage may have other consequences that

are important. In this study, we have assessed the effect of the minimum wage on child

health. Ours is the first paper to investigate this issue. We paid particular attention to the

fact that child health is the result of investments throughout childhood and that minimum

wages throughout childhood may have cumulative effects on child health.

       Our findings are noteworthy because they suggest that higher minimum wages

throughout childhood have significant effects on child health. Consequently, the debate over

the value of minimum wage increases needs to incorporate this evidence, and consider

other potential non-labor market effects that the minimum wage may have.

       An interesting finding in this study is that much of the beneficial effects of the

minimum wage are associated with minimum wage increases during ages 0 to 5. This

finding is similar to a recent study for EITC, showing that the effect of EITC during childhood

on self-reported general health (reporting excellent or very good health) of young adults is

largest during their first five years of life (Braga et al., 2019). It is also the case that

increases in the minimum wage during other periods are associated with improvements in

health, but are mostly not statistically significant and smaller. However, when we calculate

the cumulative effect of a $1 increase in the minimum wage throughout childhood--in every

year of a child's life--the beneficial effects of the minimum wage at other ages besides ages




                                                                                                 24
0 to 5 are non-trivial, for example, accounting for 40% to 60% of the cumulative effect of the

minimum wage on missed school days due to illness or injury.

       Overall, our findings demonstrate that consequences beyond the labor market should

be considered when assessing the use of the minimum wage to improve the welfare of low-

skilled and low-income families. The increases in income associated with the minimum

wage may have wide ranging and meaningful impacts particularly for children in low-

income families. Additional research is needed to identify these potential consequences, for

example, on school performance.




                                                                                            24
References

Aaronson, D., Agarwal, S., & French, E. (2012). The spending and debt response to
      minimum wage hikes. American Economic Review, 102(7), 3111-3139.
Aber, J. L., Bennett, N. G., Conley, D. C., & Li, J. (1997). The effects of poverty on child health
        and development. Annual review of public health, 18(1), 463-483.
Allin, S., & Stabile, M. (2012). Socioeconomic status and child health: what is the role of
        health care, health conditions, injuries and maternal health?. Health Economics,
        Policy and Law, 7(2), 227-242.
Averett, S. L., Smith, J. K., & Wang, Y. (2017). The effects of minimum wages on the health of
      working teenagers. Applied Economics Letters, 24(16), 1127-1130.
Belman, D., Wolfson, P., & Nawakitphaitoon, K. (2015). Who is affected by the minimum
      wage? Industrial Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 54(4), 582-621.
Belman, D., & Wolfson, P. J. (2014). What does the minimum wage do? : WE Upjohn Institute.
Braga, B., Blavin, F., & Gangopadhyaya, A. (2020). The long-term effects of childhood
       exposure to the earned income tax credit on health outcomes. Journal of Public
       Economics, 190, 104249.
Card, D., & Krueger, A. B. (1995). Time-Series Minimum-Wage Studies: A Meta-analysis. The
       American economic review, 85(2), 238-243.
Case, A., Lubotsky, D., & Paxson, C. (2002). Economic status and health in childhood: The
       origins of the gradient. American Economic Review, 92(5), 1308-1334.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012). 2011-2012 National Survey of
      Children's Health Questionnaire. Retrieved from:
      https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/slaits/2011NSCHQuestionnaire.pdf
Condliffe, S., & Link, C. R. (2008). The relationship between economic status and child
       health: evidence from the United States. American Economic Review, 98(4), 1605-18.
Congressional Budget Office. (2014). The effects of a minimumwage increase on
      employment and family income. In: Government Printing Office Washington.
Congressional Budget Office. (2019). The Effects on Employment and Family Income of
      Increasing the Federal Minimum Wage. Retrieved from
      https://www.cbo.gov/publication/44995
Cooper, K. and Stewart, K. (2013) Does money affect children's outcomes? A systematic
      review. Joseph Rowntree Foundation
Cooper, K. and Stewart, K. (2017) Does money affect children's outcomes? An Update,
      Centre for Analysis of Social Exclusion, London School of Economics Houghton
      Street London WC2A 2AE, http://sticerd.lse.ac.uk/dps/case/cp/casepaper203.pdf




                                                                                                  24
Couch, K. A., & Wittenburg, D. C. (2001). The response of hours of work to increases in the
       minimum wage. Southern Economic Journal, 171-177.
Cunha, F., & Heckman, J. (2007). The technology of skill formation. American Economic
      Review, 97(2), 31-47.
Currie, J., & Stabile, M. (2003). Socioeconomic status and child health: why is the
       relationship stronger for older children?. American Economic Review, 93(5), 1813-
       1823.
Currie, A., Shields, M. A., Wheatley Price, S., 2007. The child health/family income gradient:
       Evidence from England. Journal of Health Economics 26, 213-232.
Dahl, G. B., & Lochner, L. (2012). The impact of family income on child achievement:
       Evidence from the earned income tax credit. The American economic review, 102(5),
       1927-1956.
David, H., Manning, A., & Smith, C. L. (2016). The contribution of the minimum wage to US
       wage inequality over three decades: a reassessment. American Economic Journal:
       Applied Economics, 8(1), 58-99.
Dench, D., & Joyce, T. (2019). The earned income tax credit and infant health revisited.
      Health economics.
Dolton, P., Bondibene, C. R., & Wadsworth, J. (2010). The UK national minimum wage in
       retrospect. Fiscal Studies, 31(4), 509-534.
Dube, A. (2018). Minimum Wages and the Distribution of Family Incomes. National Bureau
       of Economic Research Working Paper Series, No. 25240. doi:10.3386/w25240
Duncan, G. J., Magnuson, K., & Votruba-Drzal, E. (2014). Boosting family income to promote
      child development. The Future of Children, 99-120.
Duncan, G. J., ZiolGuest, K. M., & Kalil, A. (2011). Earlychildhood poverty and adult
      attainment, behavior, and health. Child Development, 81(1), 306-325.
Fletcher, J., & Wolfe, B. (2014). Increasing our understanding of the healthincome gradient
       in children. Health economics, 23(4), 473-486.
Gorry, A., & Jackson, J. J. (2017). A note on the nonlinear effect of minimum wage increases.
       Contemporary Economic Policy, 35(1), 53-61.
Grossman, M. (1972). On the concept of health capital and the demand for health. Journal of
      Political Economy, 80(2), 223-255.
Hoynes, H., Miller, D., & Simon, D. (2015). Income, the earned income tax credit, and infant
      health. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(1), 172-211.
Komro, K. A., Livingston, M. D., Markowitz, S., & Wagenaar, A. C. (2016). The effect of an
     increased minimum wage on infant mortality and birth weight. American journal of
     public health, 106(8), 1514-1516.
Maxfield, M. (2013). The effects of the Earned Income Tax Credit on child achievement and
       long-term educational attainment. Michigan State University Job Market Paper.


                                                                                             24
Mayer, S.E. (1997). What Money Can't Buy: Family Income and Children's Life Chances.
      Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mayer, S. E. (2002). The influence of parental income on children's outcomes. Wellington,
      New Zealand: Knowledge Management Group, Ministry of Social Development.
McEwen, A., & Stewart, J. M. (2014). The relationship between income and children's
     outcomes: A synthesis of Canadian evidence. Canadian Public Policy, 40(1), 99-109.
Metcalf, D. (2008). Why has the British national minimum wage had little or no impact on
       employment? Journal of Industrial Relations, 50(3), 489-512.
Murasko, J. E. (2008). An evaluation of the age-profile in the relationship between
      household income and the health of children in the United States. Journal of Health
      Economics, 27(6), 1489-1502.
Neumark, D. (2019). The Econometrics and Economics of the Employment Effects of
     Minimum Wages: Getting from Known Unknowns to Known Knowns. German
     Economic Review.
Neumark, D., Schweitzer, M., & Wascher, W. (2004). Minimum wage effects throughout the
     wage distribution. Journal of Human Resources, 39(2), 425-450.
Neumark, D., & Wascher, W. L. (2007). Minimum Wages and Employment. Foundations and
     Trends® in Microeconomics, 3(1­2), 1-182. doi:10.1561/0700000015
Neumark, D., & Wascher, W. L. (2008). Minimum wages: MIT press.
Pillas, D., Marmot, M., Naicker, K., Goldblatt, P., Morrison, J., & Pikhart, H. (2014). Social
        inequalities in early childhood health and development: a European-wide
        systematic review. Pediatric research, 76(5), 418-424.
Schmitt, J. (2013). Why does the minimum wage have no discernible effect on employment.
      Center for Economic and Policy Research, 22, 1-28.
Skedinger, P. (2015). Employment effects of union-bargained minimum wages: Evidence
      from Sweden's retail sector. International Journal of Manpower, 36(5), 694-710.
Solon, G., Haider, S. J., & Wooldridge, J. M. (2015). What are we weighting for?. Journal of
       Human resources, 50(2), 301-316.
Stewart, M. B., & Swaffield, J. K. (2008). The other margin: do minimum wages cause
      working hours adjustments for lowwage workers? Economica, 75(297), 148-167.
Todd, P. E., & Wolpin, K. I. (2003). On the specification and estimation of the production
       function for cognitive achievement. The Economic Journal, 113(485), F3-F33.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2017). 2016 National Survey of Children's Health Data Users Frequently
       Asked Questions (FAQs). Retrieved from
       https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/programs-surveys/nsch/tech-
       documentation/methodology/NSCH-2016-FAQs.pdf
US Department of Health Human Services. (2010). Healthy people 2020.



                                                                                                 24
Vaghul, K., & Zipperer, B. (2016). Historical state and sub-state minimum wage data.
      Washington Center for Equitable Growth.
Wehby, G. L., Dave, D. M., & Kaestner, R. (2020). Effects of the minimum wage on infant
     health. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 39(2), 411-443.
Zavodny, M. (2000). The effect of the minimum wage on employment and hours. Labour
      Economics, 7(6), 729-750.




                                                                                          24
24
Table 1. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 6 to 12 Years
                                                                                                       Minimum wage Minimum wage Sum of minimum
                                                                      Mean Dep.       Minimum wage
                                                                                                      from age 0 to age from age 6 to wage estimates
                                                                       Variable      during pregnancy
                                                                                                             5           current age  across all ages
General health rating (1-5 scale poor to excellent)                      4.09              0.028             0.11*              0.037             0.18*

                                                                                          (0.031)           (0.045)            (0.053)           (0.071)

Excellent/very good general health                                       0.71             -0.0032           0.062**             0.011            0.070**

                                                                                          (0.014)           (0.022)            (0.019)           (0.022)

Fair/poor general health                                                0.067             -0.016*           -0.0071            0.0041             -0.019

                                                                                         (0.0078)           (0.0076)          (0.0079)           (0.012)

Combined measure of poor healtha                                         0.28             -0.012            -0.038*            -0.033*           -0.083**

                                                                                          (0.014)           (0.017)            (0.016)           (0.031)

Combined measure of poor health (chronic conditions)a                    0.20             -0.015             -0.027            -0.024            -0.066*

                                                                                          (0.015)           (0.016)            (0.017)           (0.028)

# missed school days past 12 months due to illness or injury             3.68              -0.18             -0.57*             -0.20             -0.95*

                                                                                           (0.14)            (0.25)             (0.25)            (0.47)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 4 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in parentheses.
All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include state EITC credit
as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds (calculated similar
to the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the NSCH sampling weights. Sample size
ranges from 19,592 to 21,292 with different outcomes.
a The combined measure of poor health is constructed from responses to the following three questions: 1- Does the child need medication because of a

medical or health condition?; 2- Does the child use more medical care than other children of the same age?; and 3- Is the child limited in ability to do things
because of a medical or health condition?. The indicator is 1 if the respondent replies affirmatively to any of the three questions, 0 otherwise.
b This dichotomous variable is equal to 1 if the medical or health conditions in any the 3 questions noted above (in a) are reported as chronic .



*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.

                                                                                                                                                            24
Table 2. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 13 to 17 Years
                                                                                                                           Minimum         Sum of
                                                                                 Minimum      Minimum        Minimum
                                                                 Mean Dep.                                               wage from age minimum wage
                                                                                wage during wage from 0 to wage from age
                                                                  Variable                                               13 to current   estimates
                                                                                 pregnancy      age 5       6 to age 12
                                                                                                                              age      across all ages
General health rating (1-5 scale poor to excellent)                 4.10            0.040          0.20**          -0.066          0.026           0.20
                                                                                   (0.037)        (0.065)         (0.040)         (0.036)         (0.11)
Excellent/very good general health                                  0.72            0.017         0.077**          -0.022         0.0097           0.082
                                                                                   (0.018)        (0.022)         (0.020)         (0.016)         (0.046)
Fair/poor general health                                            0.071          -0.020         -0.064**         0.032          0.00023         -0.052
                                                                                   (0.012)        (0.020)         (0.023)        (0.0099)         (0.039)
Combined measure of poor health                                     0.28          -0.060**         -0.057          -0.044         -0.0027         -0.16*
                                                                                   (0.019)        (0.031)         (0.024)         (0.019)         (0.061)
Combined measure of poor health (chronic conditions)                0.20           -0.017         -0.082*         -0.041*         0.0031          -0.14**
                                                                                   (0.016)        (0.032)         (0.018)         (0.015)         (0.050)
# missed school days past 12 months due to illness or injury        3.95            -0.31           -0.65          -0.41           -0.28          -1.65*
                                                                                   (0.30)          (0.46)          (0.23)          (0.21)         (0.79)
Obesity (BMI95th percentile)                                        0.18           -0.025          0.012          0.0052          -0.012          -0.020
                                                                                   (0.018)        (0.052)         (0.015)         (0.018)         (0.070)
Overweight (BMI85th percentile)                                     0.35            0.035          0.015           -0.029         -0.0094          0.011
                                                                                    (0.028)         (0.062)       (0.020)          (0.018)         (0.082)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 7 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in parentheses.
All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include state EITC credit
as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds (calculated similar
to the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the NSCH sampling weights. Sample size
ranges from 16,535 to 18,087 with different outcomes.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.


                                                                                                                                                            24
Table 3. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 6 to 12 Years Controlling for Two Leads of Minimum Wage

                                                     Minimum wage Minimum wage Minimum wage Minimum wage Minimum wage Sum of minimum
                                        Mean Dep.
                                                         during    from age 0 to from age 6 to at 2 years from at 4 years from wage estimates
                                         Variable
                                                       pregnancy       age 5      current age       survey          survey     across all ages
General health rating (1-5 scale           4.09           0.016             0.099           0.0047            -0.038           -0.023             0.12
poor to excellent)
                                                         (0.030)           (0.054)          (0.050)          (0.055)           (0.059)          (0.062)
Excellent/very good general health         0.71          -0.0064           0.059*           0.0017           -0.0089           -0.0077           0.054*

                                                         (0.013)           (0.028)          (0.018)          (0.029)           (0.023)          (0.024)
Fair/poor general health                  0.067           -0.012          -0.0012            0.014            0.016            0.0038           0.00065

                                                         (0.0065)         (0.0091)          (0.013)          (0.011)          (0.0095)          (0.019)
Combined measure of poor health            0.28          -0.0076           -0.030            -0.026           0.023            -0.0055           -0.064

                                                         (0.014)           (0.019)          (0.023)          (0.018)           (0.021)          (0.040)
Combined measure of poor health            0.20          -0.0074           -0.014            -0.015           0.040*           -0.011            -0.036
(chronic conditions)
                                                         (0.013)           (0.020)          (0.020)          (0.017)           (0.015)          (0.035)
# missed school days past 12               3.68           -0.25            -0.61*            -0.53            -0.028            -0.46             -1.39
months due to illness or injury
                                                          (0.15)           (0.28)            (0.42)           (0.26)            (0.30)           (0.71)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 4 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in
parentheses. All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include
state EITC credit as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds
(calculated similar to the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the NSCH sampling
weights. Sample size ranges from 19,592 to 21,292 with different outcomes.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.




                                                                                                                                                           24
Table 4. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 13 to 17 Years Controlling for Two Leads of Minimum Wage
                                                                                                                                                   Sum of
                                                                                                     Minimum
                                                         Minimum                      Minimum                       Minimum      Minimum         minimum
                                                                        Minimum                     wage from
                                         Mean Dep.           wage                     wage from                     wage at 2    wage at 4           wage
                                                                       wage from                     age 13 to
                                          Variable         during                      age 6 to                    years from years from         estimates
                                                                        0 to age 5                    current
                                                        pregnancy                        age 12                      survey        survey        across all
                                                                                                         age
                                                                                                                                                     ages
General health rating (1-5 scale             4.10           0.039          0.20**        -0.048        0.030          0.041       -0.0031            0.22
poor to excellent)                                         (0.036)        (0.066)       (0.046)       (0.039)        (0.037)      (0.053)           (0.11)
Excellent/very good general health           0.72           0.016       0.081***       -0.0059         0.017          0.030       0.0053             0.11
                                                           (0.018)        (0.022)       (0.030)       (0.018)        (0.026)      (0.018)          (0.061)
Fair/poor general health                    0.071           -0.020       -0.063**        0.032        -0.0071        0.0068        -0.013           -0.058
                                                           (0.012)        (0.023)       (0.025)       (0.010)        (0.019)      (0.020)          (0.038)
Combined measure of poor health              0.28         -0.058**         -0.060      -0.061**        -0.018         -0.024       -0.019         -0.20***
                                                           (0.019)        (0.032)       (0.022)       (0.021)        (0.023)      (0.027)          (0.052)
Combined measure of poor health              0.20           -0.016        -0.084*      -0.056**        -0.014         -0.017       -0.022         -0.17***
(chronic conditions)                                       (0.016)        (0.032)       (0.019)       (0.017)        (0.020)      (0.021)          (0.045)
# missed school days past 12                 3.95            -0.30          -0.62         -0.40         -0.41          0.16         -0.24           -1.74*
months due to illness or injury                             (0.30)         (0.45)        (0.26)        (0.23)         (0.27)       (0.22)           (0.80)
Obesity (BMI95th percentile)                 0.18           -0.025        0.0073       -0.0072        -0.0052         -0.036        0.018           -0.030
                                                           (0.018)        (0.048)       (0.018)       (0.027)        (0.018)      (0.023)          (0.057)
Overweight (BMI85th percentile)              0.35           0.035          0.015         -0.033        -0.016       -0.00074      -0.0092          0.0016
                                                           (0.029)        (0.064)       (0.022)       (0.031)        (0.027)      (0.035)          (0.073)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 7 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in
parentheses. All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include
state EITC credit as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds
(calculated similar to the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the NSCH sampling
weights. Sample size ranges from 16,535 to 18,087 with different outcomes.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.




                                                                                                                                                           24
Table 5. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 6 to 12 Years using Sample of Married High-educated (Highest Education
Above High School) Households
                                                                                                    Minimum wage Minimum wage Sum of minimum
                                                                 Mean Dep.       Minimum wage
                                                                                                   from age 0 to age from age 6 to     wage estimates
                                                                  Variable      during pregnancy
                                                                                                          5             current age     across all ages
General health rating (1-5 scale poor to excellent)                   4.59              -0.018            -0.0080             -0.010             -0.037

                                                                                       (0.012)            (0.024)            (0.015)            (0.033)

Excellent/very good general health                                    0.91              -0.012            -0.0042            -0.0015             -0.017

                                                                                       (0.0072)           (0.0074)           (0.0082)           (0.012)

Fair/poor general health                                             0.015             -0.0015            0.0069*           -0.00035            0.0050

                                                                                       (0.0029)           (0.0027)           (0.0031)           (0.0050)

Combined measure of poor health                                       0.26              0.0012             0.017              0.023              0.042

                                                                                       (0.0098)           (0.011)            (0.012)            (0.021)

Combined measure of poor health (chronic conditions)                  0.21              0.0019             0.0050             0.021*             0.028

                                                                                       (0.0090)           (0.012)            (0.0098)           (0.021)

# missed school days past 12 months due to illness or injury          3.46              -0.055              0.11               0.13               0.19

                                                                                       (0.052)            (0.073)            (0.083)             (0.13)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 4 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in parentheses.
All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include state EITC credit
as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds (calculated similar
to the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the NSCH sampling weights. Sample size
ranges from 58,105 to 61,260 with different outcomes.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.




                                                                                                                                                           24
Table 6. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 13 to 17 Years using Sample of Married High-educated (Highest Education
Above High School) Households
                                                                                                                              Minimum         Sum of
                                                                                Minimum         Minimum        Minimum
                                                                Mean Dep.                                                  wage from age minimum wage
                                                                              wage during wage from 0 to wage from age
                                                                 Variable                                                   13 to current   estimates
                                                                               pregnancy          age 5       6 to age 12
                                                                                                                                 age      across all ages
General health rating (1-5 scale poor to excellent)                   4.56          -0.0085          0.015           0.026           0.048            0.081
                                                                                    (0.022)         (0.041)         (0.022)          (0.027)         (0.081)
Excellent/very good general health                                    0.91          0.0059          0.0096           0.0038          0.025*           0.044
                                                                                   (0.0098)         (0.0095)        (0.0077)         (0.010)         (0.024)
Fair/poor general health                                             0.018          0.019**         -0.0031         -0.0091          -0.013          -0.0059
                                                                                   (0.0057)         (0.0075)        (0.0063)        (0.0098)         (0.016)
Combined measure of poor health                                       0.30           -0.010         0.0074           0.010          -0.0043          0.0033
                                                                                   (0.0071)         (0.023)         (0.017)          (0.015)         (0.042)
Combined measure of poor health (chronic conditions)                  0.24          -0.0074          0.011           0.016           0.0047           0.024
                                                                                   (0.0075)         (0.023)         (0.019)          (0.012)         (0.037)
# missed school days past 12 months due to illness or injury          3.67           0.089           -0.14           -0.057          0.085           -0.024
                                                                                     (0.10)          (0.28)          (0.19)          (0.17)          (0.48)
Obesity (BMI95th percentile)                                         0.095          0.0082           0.023*         -0.0094         -0.0070           0.015
                                                                                   (0.0085)         (0.011)         (0.0070)        (0.0088)         (0.019)
Overweight (BMI85th percentile)                                       0.22           0.024           0.015           -0.019          -0.018          0.0029
                                                                                     (0.017)         (0.019)        (0.016)          (0.011)         (0.049)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 7 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in parentheses.
All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include state EITC credit
as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds (calculated similar to
the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the NSCH sampling weights. Sample size ranges
from 48,603 to 51,784 with different outcomes.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.

                                                                                                                                                               24
Table 7. Effects of Contemporaneous Minimum Wage on Potential Mediators for Child Health
                                                                             Age 6-12                                           Age 13-17
                                                                                             Minimum                                            Minimum
                                                                            Mean Dep.       wage from                           Mean Dep.      wage from
                                                                 N                                                N
                                                                             Variable          age 6 to                          Variable       age 13 to
                                                                                            current age                                       current age
Any insurance Coverage                                         21254            0.86            -0.020          18068              0.85           -0.011
                                                                                               (0.023)                                           (0.022)
Any preventive care use                                        21065            0.75           0.0042           17922              0.74          -0.0018
                                                                                               (0.010)                                           (0.022)
Unmet care needs                                               21271           0.062           0.0059           18068             0.072           0.015
                                                                                              (0.0082)                                           (0.014)
Household income below 100% FPL                                19413            0.54            -0.015          16402              0.47          -0.036*
                                                                                               (0.016)                                           (0.016)
Any employment in the household                                21219            0.79            -0.012          18009              0.79           0.014
                                                                                               (0.013)                                           (0.016)
Received food stamp benefit                                    20330            0.36            0.017           17315              0.27           -0.023
                                                                                               (0.012)                                           (0.019)
Maternal mental health (1-5 scale poor to excellent)           20205            3.72            0.056           16977              3.63            0.10*
                                                                                               (0.040)                                           (0.039)
Maternal excellent/very good mental health                     20205            0.58            0.022           16977              0.55         0.056***
                                                                                               (0.018)                                           (0.015)
Maternal fair/poor mental health                               20205            0.12            -0.016          16977              0.14           -0.013
                                                                                               (0.017)                                           (0.020)
Notes: Estimates represent the effects of minimum wage averaged for certain periods (estimated separately) on linkages between minimum wage and
child health. Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in parentheses. All
specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; gender; and each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include state EITC credit as a
percent of the federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds, year effects, and
state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the NSCH sampling weights.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.




                                                                                                                                                          24
24
Appendix Table 1. Summary Statistics

                                                                        Age 6-12   Age 13-17

Child health
General health rating (1-5 scale poor to excellent)                       4.09       4.10
Excellent/very good general health                                        0.71       0.72
Fair/poor general health                                                 0.067      0.071
Combined measure of poor health                                           0.28       0.28
Combined measure of poor health (chronic conditions)                      0.20       0.20
# missed school days past 12 months due to illness or injury              3.68       3.95
Obesity (BMI95th percentile)                                                         0.18
Overweight (BMI85th percentile)
Age                                                                       9.08      14.96
Gender
                                                         Male             0.51       0.52
                                                       Female             0.49       0.48
Race/ethnicity
                                           Non-Hispanic white             0.40       0.45
                                           Non-Hispanic black             0.16       0.17
                                          Non-Hispanic others             0.06       0.06
                                                      Hispanic            0.38       0.32
Notes: The summary statistics were weighted by NSCH sampling weights.




                                                                                               24
Appendix Table 2. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 6 to 12 Years Adding Household Demographic and Maternal
Health Variables
                                                                                                 Minimum wage Minimum wage Sum of minimum
                                                              Mean Dep.       Minimum wage
                                                                                                from age 0 to age from age 6 to   wage estimates
                                                                variable     during pregnancy
                                                                                                        5           current age   across all ages
General health rating (1-5 scale poor to excellent)                  4.08             0.063**              0.035             0.0099              0.11*

                                                                                       (0.027)            (0.022)            (0.036)            (0.054)

Excellent/very good general health                                   0.71              0.0052              0.016             0.00048             0.022

                                                                                       (0.010)            (0.010)            (0.011)            (0.014)

Fair/poor general health                                            0.069             -0.020**           -0.00058            0.0017             -0.019**

                                                                                      (0.0092)           (0.0065)           (0.0052)           (0.0087)

Combined measure of poor health                                      0.28             -0.037**           -0.043**            -0.019            -0.100***

                                                                                       (0.018)            (0.017)            (0.017)            (0.027)

Combined measure of poor health (chronic conditions)                 0.20              -0.044*            -0.025             -0.0061            -0.074**

                                                                                       (0.023)            (0.018)            (0.018)            (0.028)

# missed school days past 12 months due to illness or injury         3.70              -0.29*             -0.56**             -0.21             -1.05**

                                                                                       (0.15)             (0.22)              (0.23)             (0.48)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 4 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in parentheses.
All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include state EITC credit
as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds (calculated similar
to the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the NSCH sampling weights. Sample size
ranges from 18,531 to 19,926 with different outcomes.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.




                                                                                                                                                           24
Appendix Table 3. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 13 to 17 Years Adding Household Demographic and
Maternal Health Variables
                                                                                                                        Minimum        Sum of
                                                                            Minimum        Minimum        Minimum
                                                            Mean Dep.                                                 wage from age minimum
                                                                          wage during wage from 0 to wage from age
                                                             variable                                                 13 to current wage estimates
                                                                            pregnancy        age 5        6 to age 12
                                                                                                                           age      across all ages
General health rating (1-5 scale poor to excellent)                4.09            0.030          0.32***          0.053           0.025          0.43***
                                                                                  (0.027)         (0.080)         (0.052)         (0.032)         (0.15)
Excellent/very good general health                                 0.71            0.014          0.13***          0.033          0.0083          0.18**
                                                                                  (0.019)         (0.037)         (0.028)         (0.016)         (0.079)
Fair/poor general health                                           0.072          -0.0080        -0.12***         0.0100         0.00053         -0.12***
                                                                                 (0.0075)         (0.036)         (0.013)        (0.0088)         (0.037)
Combined measure of poor health                                    0.29          -0.057***        -0.029          -0.025*          0.012         -0.099**
                                                                                  (0.014)         (0.024)         (0.015)         (0.019)         (0.044)
Combined measure of poor health (chronic conditions)               0.20           -0.016         -0.051**        -0.033**          0.011         -0.089**
                                                                                  (0.015)         (0.023)         (0.013)         (0.016)         (0.035)
# missed school days past 12 months due to illness or injury       3.96            -0.15           -0.48         -0.59***         -0.40**         -1.62**
                                                                                  (0.20)          (0.43)          (0.21)          (0.20)          (0.71)
Obesity (BMI95th percentile)                                       0.18           -0.018           0.029         0.00046          -0.017          -0.0054
                                                                                  (0.020)         (0.054)         (0.011)         (0.021)         (0.075)
Overweight (BMI85th percentile)                                    0.35            0.056           0.055          -0.020          -0.023           0.068
                                                                                   (0.041)         (0.059)        (0.021)          (0.019)         (0.10)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 7 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in parentheses.
All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include state EITC credit
as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds (calculated similar
to the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Estimates are weighted by the NSCH sampling weights. Sample size
ranges from 15,470 to 16,915 with different outcomes.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.

                                                                                                                                                            24
Appendix Table 4. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 6 to 12 Years without using NSCH Sampling Weights
                                                                                                      Minimum wage Minimum wage Sum of minimum
                                                                     Mean Dep.       Minimum wage
                                                                                                     from age 0 to age from age 6 to wage estimates
                                                                      Variable      during pregnancy
                                                                                                            5           current age  across all ages
General health rating (1-5 scale poor to excellent)                      4.18             0.0087            0.057*             0.024             0.090*

                                                                                         (0.029)            (0.024)           (0.024)           (0.039)

Excellent/very good general health                                       0.75            -0.0050            0.033**           0.0088             0.037*

                                                                                         (0.012)            (0.010)          (0.0100)           (0.015)

Fair/poor general health                                                0.056            -0.0014            -0.0099           0.00034            -0.011

                                                                                         (0.0047)          (0.0062)          (0.0050)           (0.0085)

Combined measure of poor health                                          0.29            -0.0052            -0.015             -0.025           -0.046*

                                                                                         (0.012)            (0.013)           (0.013)           (0.019)

Combined measure of poor health (chronic conditions)                     0.22            -0.0092            -0.016            -0.026*           -0.051*

                                                                                         (0.012)            (0.011)           (0.011)           (0.020)

# missed school days past 12 months due to illness or injury             3.94             0.019             -0.069            -0.0080            -0.059

                                                                                          (0.14)            (0.15)             (0.12)            (0.22)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 4 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in parentheses.
All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include state EITC credit
as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds (calculated similar
to the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Sample size ranges from 19,592 to 21,292 with different outcomes.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.




                                                                                                                                                           24
Appendix Table 5. Estimates of the Effects of the Minimum Wage on Health of Children Aged 13 to 17 Years without using NSCH Sampling Weights
                                                                                                                                                 Sum of
                                                                                                                           Minimum
                                                                                 Minimum      Minimum        Minimum                            minimum
                                                                 Mean Dep.                                               wage from age
                                                                                wage during wage from 0 to wage from age                          wage
                                                                  Variable                                               13 to current
                                                                                 pregnancy      age 5       6 to age 12                         estimates
                                                                                                                              age
                                                                                                                                              across all ages
General health rating (1-5 scale poor to excellent)                 4.10           -0.014          -0.024          -0.029         -0.0026         -0.069
                                                                                   (0.030)        (0.038)         (0.037)         (0.021)         (0.065)
Excellent/very good general health                                  0.72           -0.015         -0.0067          -0.018         0.0025          -0.037
                                                                                   (0.015)        (0.016)         (0.019)        (0.0097)         (0.034)
Fair/poor general health                                            0.071         -0.0031          0.0027         0.0024          0.0040          0.0060
                                                                                  (0.0066)        (0.013)         (0.0067)       (0.0055)         (0.021)
Combined measure of poor health                                     0.28           -0.016          0.0012         -0.0034         0.0033          -0.015
                                                                                   (0.013)        (0.016)         (0.015)        (0.0082)         (0.028)
Combined measure of poor health (chronic conditions)                0.20           0.0034         -0.0052         0.0027          0.0030          0.0040
                                                                                   (0.014)        (0.019)         (0.013)        (0.0073)         (0.029)
# missed school days past 12 months due to illness or injury        3.95           -0.054           -0.14          -0.27           -0.26*          -0.72
                                                                                   (0.10)          (0.40)          (0.20)          (0.12)         (0.55)
Obesity (BMI95th percentile)                                        0.18           -0.016          -0.034         0.00056         0.0024          -0.047
                                                                                   (0.013)        (0.022)         (0.013)        (0.0086)         (0.032)
Overweight (BMI85th percentile)                                     0.34          -0.0060          0.0093         0.00051          0.010           0.014
                                                                                    (0.012)         (0.030)       (0.018)          (0.012)        (0.044)
Notes: Estimates measure changes in child health outcomes with a one dollar increase in average minimum wage in a given period (estimated using
Equation 7 and OLS). Standard errors are adjusted for arbitrary correlation in the errors across observations within each state and reported in parentheses.
All specifications include dummy variables for each year of child age; for gender; and for each race/ethnicity group. Other controls include state EITC credit
as a percent of federal credit (including 0 for states that do not have ETIC), cigarette taxes, and Medicaid income eligibility thresholds (calculated similar
to the minimum wage measures), year of birth fixed effects and state fixed effects. Sample size ranges from 16,535 to 18,087 with different outcomes.

*** p-value  0.001; ** p-value  0.01; * p-value 0.05.


                                                                                                                                                            24
