                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INFORMATION AND SOCIAL NORMS:
EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE ON THE LABOR MARKET ASPIRATIONS OF SAUDI WOMEN

                                       Monira Essa Aloud
                                        Sara Al-Rashood
                                          Ina Ganguli
                                           Basit Zafar

                                       Working Paper 26693
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26693


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                           January 2020, Revised December 2020




 This research was supported by a grant from the Saudi Arabia Labor Market Research program
 administered by Evidence for Policy Design (EPoD) at the Harvard Kennedy School and the
 Saudi Arabia Human Resources Development Fund (HRDF). We appreciate support from King
 Saud University in conducting the surveys, and various participants of focus groups that enabled
 the design of the survey instruments and the interpretation of the results. We thank Jennifer Peck
 and participants at the SITE-Stockholm School of Economics `Gender in Economics' conference
 and the 2019 EPoD-HRDF Policy Forum for useful comments. We benefited from input from
 Taghreed Alhaddab, Yaser Al Husaini, and Semiray Kasoolu. Jacob French, Zachary Milne and
 Kevin Winseck provided excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of
 the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
 Research.

 NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
 peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
 official NBER publications.

 © 2020 by Monira Essa Aloud, Sara Al-Rashood, Ina Ganguli, and Basit Zafar. All rights
 reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
 permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Information and Social Norms: Experimental Evidence on the Labor Market Aspirations of
Saudi Women
Monira Essa Aloud, Sara Al-Rashood, Ina Ganguli, and Basit Zafar
NBER Working Paper No. 26693
January 2020, Revised December 2020
JEL No. D80,D83,J10,J20,Z10

                                          ABSTRACT

How important are social norms, information gaps and family constraints in explaining the low
rates of female labor force participation (FLFP) in conservative societies? To answer this
question, we conducted a field experiment embedded in a survey of female university students at
a large public university in Saudi Arabia. We randomly provided one subset of individuals with
information on the labor market and aspirations of their female peers (T1), while another subset
was provided with this information along with a prime that made their parents more salient (T2).
We find that expectations of working among those in the Control group are quite high, yet
students underestimate the expected labor force attachment of their female peers. We show that
social information matters: relative to the Control group, expectations about own labor force
participation are significantly higher in the T1 group, which is driven primarily by receiving
information about their peers' aspirations. We show that T2, as intended, causes students to report
a higher importance of parents' approval of their choices. However, we do not find that the
impact of information is counteracted by evoking parental expectations: impacts for the T2 group
on labor market expectations are not smaller than those for T1 group. However, T2 does lead to
higher expectations of working in Education and the Public sectors - sectors that are more
socially acceptable for women, suggesting that parental expectations their daughters' labor
market aspirations but partly shape them.

Monira Essa Aloud                                Ina Ganguli
King Saud University                             Department of Economics
Riyadh                                           Crotty Hall 304
Saudi Arabia                                     412 N. Pleasant Street
mealoud@ksu.edu.sa                               University of Massachusetts Amherst
                                                 Amherst, MA 01002
Sara Al-Rashood                                  iganguli@econs.umass.edu
King Saud University
Riyadh                                           Basit Zafar
Saudi Arabia                                     Department of Economics
sara.alrashood@gmail.com                         University of Michigan
                                                 611 Tappan Street
                                                 Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109
                                                 and NBER
                                                 basitak@gmail.com
1. Introduction

         A woman's decision about whether to work outside of the home depends on a number of
factors, including her own aspirations, her expected earnings, and her beliefs about prevailing
gender norms (Jayachandran, 2019). However, in many contexts, women may not have complete
information about these factors when making decisions, particularly when the social and economic
environments are changing rapidly (Fernandez, 2013). Even if this information is readily available,
particularly in countries with more conservative gender norms, her family's preferences may still
be a constraint to her participation (Bursztyn, Gonzalez and Yanagizawa-Drott, 2020).
         An example of such a fast-changing context is the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), where
female labor force participation (FLFP) rates have been increasing recently, but cultural barriers
to FLFP persist. FLFP in KSA remains low by international standards, yet has inched up from 14%
in 1990 to 18% in 2010. The shift has been more rapid in recent years, with FLFP increasing to
23% in 2018 - roughly a 27% increase over less than a decade. 1 In such a rapidly changing social
and economic environment ­ where opportunities for women to work outside of the home have
increased and the stigma surrounding FLFP has declined ­ there is good reason to believe that
young women may be misinformed about labor market opportunities and the pace of social change.
If so, could providing information on the pace of progress have an impact on women's labor market
aspirations? Or would they still be constrained by their families' expectations and prevailing long-
standing social norms?
         To answer these questions, we conducted a randomized information experiment embedded
in an original survey at the female campus of King Saud University (KSU) in 2018, the largest
public university in KSA. 2 Our focus on the labor market aspirations of university women stems
from the fact that tertiary enrollment in Saudi Arabia has increased rapidly in recent years (from
39% in 2010 to 68% in 2017 for women) 3 and women's employment rates are highest among
university graduates. 4 It is precisely these women who are more likely to be on margin of deciding
whether to enter the labor force in the coming years.
         For approximately 1,000 female KSU students, we first collected information about
students' perceptions of the labor market aspirations of their female peers ("population" beliefs),
as well as their perceptions about labor market returns. Before the elicitation of students' own labor
market aspirations ("self" beliefs) in the final stage of the survey, a random subset of respondents
("T1", henceforth) was provided with objective information about labor market statistics (such as
actual average monthly wages of female college graduates), and social information about
aspirations of their female peers (such as the average likelihood of KSU women expecting to work


1
   World Development Indicators, World Bank (https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-development-
indicators). This change is not specific to KSA, and is underway in most Muslim-majority countries- for example,
FLFP nearly doubled from 12.5% in 1995 to 24% in 2018 in Pakistan.
2
  KSU was one of 2 Saudi universities in the top 150 universities in the AWRU ranking in 2018.
3
  World Development Indicators, World Bank
4
  The employment rate for women with University degrees is 38% overall, and 25% among 25-34 year olds and 67%
for 25-44 year olds (2017 Labor Force survey conducted by the General Authority of Statistics, GaStat).


                                                       2
at age 25). Thus, this intervention combines both standard labor market information as well as
information about peers' aspirations, or "second-order beliefs". 5
        If (1) students' own future labor market expectations depend, in part, on their perceptions
of other females' choices and expectations, or on labor market measures such as salaries, and (2)
students' perceptions and beliefs are systematically biased, then this information may impact
respondents' self beliefs. However, in a fast-changing society where current decisions may still be
anchored in the long-standing norms of the previous generation, the impact of such information
may be diminished if they consider parental expectations about working outside of the home a
binding constraint (Fernandez, 2013).
         Our second treatment arm (T2) investigates this hypothesis by providing a separate
randomly selected group with the same information provided in T1, along with a prime that evokes
their parents' expectations. To do this, we ask the respondents whether they would like to share a
summary of their survey responses with their parents. 6 While we do not actually share the
responses with the parents, this prime is meant to bring to mind the expectations of the student's
parents, which we would expect to be more in line with historic gender norms. In fact, we show
that students assigned to the T2 arm are more likely to report that parents' approval of their choices
is important to them (relative to their Control and T1 counterparts), suggestive of the treatment
being effective in evoking the role of family and parents. A comparison of impacts of T2 with
those of T1 is then informative about the extent to which parental expectations may dampen the
effect of T1, the information treatment. If we see that the impacts of T2 are no smaller than those
in T1, that would suggest that parents of the current generation of Saudi college students are not
constraining their daughters' future choices. Note that T2 may lead to positive impacts if (1)
parents are not opposed to their daughters working, and/or (2) daughters feel comfortable enough
to communicate their future plans with their parents, even if their parents do not actively support
their daughters working. While our main survey does not allow us to cleanly disentangle the two,
a positive impact of T2 on expectations would allow us to rule out family as an impediment to
educated females' labor market aspirations in Saudi Arabia.
        A crucial element of our design is that all respondents first report their beliefs about the
measures that were subsequently revealed through the information treatment, allowing us to
directly investigate the mechanisms through which the information may have an impact. We first
show that the labor market expectations in the Control group are quite high. The mean reported
self belief for working at age 25 is 67.7% in the Control group, significantly higher than the mean
population belief for the proportion of KSU students working at age 25 (51.7%). In fact, for all the
labor market beliefs, respondents' self beliefs are (economically and statistically) significantly
higher than their corresponding population beliefs, implying that students underestimate the labor


5
  The social information came from a small pilot survey that we had administered to a convenience sample of KSU
students a few months prior to the study, while official statistics were used for the labor market statistics.
6
  Note that students were asked if they would like a summary of their own responses shared with their parents, not the
information about the labor market and peer aspirations presented to the students in the survey (see exact wording in
Section 2.1).


                                                          3
market aspirations of their peers. In a society undergoing substantial transition, this
underestimation is perhaps not surprising.
         Turning to the experiment, we find that information matters: relative to the Control group,
expectations about future labor force participation are significantly higher in the T1 group. Further,
it is largely students who severely under-estimate the expectations of their female peers who are
impacted by the treatment. This suggests that the impact of the intervention is primarily due to
new social information about peers.
         Our prior was that the effect of information provision may be dampened by evoking
parental expectations about working outside of the home. However, we find little evidence of this:
the T2 treatment also significantly increases students' own labor market expectations relative to
the Control group and, in many dimensions, the effects are larger than those observed in the T1
group (although not always statistically different). This suggests that, if anything, the T2 parent
prime amplifies the impacts of the information treatment. This amplification is primarily driven
by students who report wanting to share their responses with their parents. We also find evidence
of meaningful heterogeneity by student background, with larger impacts for students with working
mothers.
         To understand why the parent prime leads to large impacts on self beliefs about future
employment, we conducted a second survey with a convenience sample of 150 female KSU
students. The results, while only suggestive, indicate that the parents' treatment did not dilute the
effects of the information treatment as these parents appear to expect their daughters to work,
confirming that social norms about women working outside of the home are changing, at least in
this selective segment of the society. Some students report wanting the opportunity to discuss their
future plans with their parents and to inform their parents about the changing social norms
regarding the FLFP. We cannot rule out that some students in the T2 group may even be over-
reporting their expectations of working in order to please their parents, which may be leading to
the larger effects in some cases of T2 compared to T1. In light of these results, a fruitful direction
for future work would be to investigate the actual beliefs and preferences of parents. Regardless,
our results indicate that the fear that parents may be impeding the aspirations of young Saudi
educated women may not be warranted.
         Strikingly, the T2 treatment led to a significant increase in the reported expectation of
working in the Education sector, small decline in the intended likelihood of working in the Service
sector, and an increase in the likelihood of working in the public sector. Current employment rates
for women are highest in the Education sector, as teaching is considered a socially acceptable
profession, and Services less so (Evidence for Policy Design, 2015; Miller, Peck, Seflek, 2019).
Similarly, public sector jobs are more desirable among Saudis and employ the majority of working
women (Evidence for Policy Design, 2015). Thus, the parent prime seems to push students into
sectors more consistent with prevailing social norms. This is also in line with findings from focus
groups with parents, where several said they wanted their daughters to work, but at the same time
exhibited a strong preference for gender segregation in the workplace; sectors like education are
much more likely to provide such an amenity. This suggests that policies that make other sectors



                                                  4
amenable for women by making it easier to abide by social customs on gender segregation may be
useful.
         Ex post, it is not entirely surprising that information impacts students' choices. There is a
large literature showing that educational and labor market choices can be impacted by the provision
of labor market information (e.g. Wiswall and Zafar, 2015; Hoxby and Turner, 2015; Jensen, 2010)
and social information (Bursztyn et al., 2020; Coffman et al., 2017). Many of these studies are
based in settings where information is arguably more readily available than in the Saudi content,
suggesting potentially larger information gaps in our context. However, ex ante, it is far from clear
that in a setting with conservative gender norms, information could shift individuals' aspirations.
Our findings are quite encouraging on this front, and suggest that, in an environment with cultural
barriers to FLFP like Saudi Arabia, information on a potentially sensitive cultural topic can impact
intended choices. Our results make the case for information campaigns that disseminate both
objective and social information about the labor market to be targeted at both students and parents,
and for facilitating communication regarding future plans between parents and their daughters.
         This paper contributes to the literature examining the role of culture and changing social
norms on female labor market outcomes and labor supply choices (e.g. Fernandez and Fogli, 2009;
Jayachandran, 2019). Consistent with the idea of the inter-generational transmission of attitudes
and norms (Dhar, Jain and Jayachandran, 2018a), we find that impacts are larger for female
students whose mothers have worked in the past. These results are in line with both theory and
existing evidence. For example, evidence from the US shows that girls who grow up around
women who work are more likely to work as adults (Olivetti, Patacchini, and Zenou, forthcoming),
and that a married woman is more likely to work if her husband's mother had worked while he
was young (Fernandez, Fogli and Olivetti, 2004). Our findings also suggest that the process of
social change can be expedited by leveraging social information that contributes to learning during
a period of transition (Fernandez, 2013). Our results support the growing body of evidence which
finds that interventions can even increase the pace of change in social norms regarding gender
roles. For example, recent work by Dhar, Jain and Jayachandran (2018b) from India shows that
gender norms of students can be changed through school-based discussions about gender equality.
         Our results also speak to a related literature that has examined how educational and career
decisions are jointly made in the household (e.g., Bursztyn and Coffman, 2012). Our findings
suggest that family and parents could be leveraged to have meaningful impacts on women's labor
market choices, which would be consistent with evidence that providing parents with information
can impact educational outcomes of their children (Dizon-Ross, 2019; Andrabi, Das and Khwaja,
2017). Giving students the opportunity to discuss future plans with their parents may even
empower students and impact labor market outcomes, which is a promising area for further
research.
         Finally, our paper adds to a small but growing literature on the role of cultural norms on
female labor force participation and employment in the Saudi context. Using a randomized
information experiment, Bursztyn, Gonzalez and Yanagizawa-Drott (2020) show that correcting
misperceptions of social norms among Saudi husbands leads to greater labor force participation



                                                  5
among their wives. Like the current study, they elicit individuals' second-order beliefs, that is,
beliefs about others' beliefs (regarding female labor supply norms). Miller, Peck and Seflek
(2019), meanwhile, focus on the demand-side factors, and show that a policy increasing gender-
neutral quotas for Saudi employment at private sector firms increased female employment.
Importantly, they find impacts even for firms where quotas were not binding ­ suggesting that the
policy led to changed norms about women working. While these studies look at the role of norms
through Saudi men and the impact of policies on firms, in this paper we provide complementary
evidence on the aspirations of Saudi women themselves and how information and cultural norms
can impact these aspirations.
        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we present the research
design and describe our sample. Section 3 presents descriptive analysis of the subjective beliefs
about students' future career and family expectations, as well as their perceptions of these beliefs
for their female peers (second-order beliefs). In Section 4, we present the experimental results and
examine heterogeneity in the treatment impacts. Section 5 presents results from the follow-up
survey, and Section 6 concludes.


2. Research Design and Sample

In this section, we describe our experimental design and sample.

2.1. Survey and Experimental design

        Our experiment was conducted through an original survey of undergraduate students at the
female campus of King Saud University (KSU), located in Riyadh, from March to June 2018.
Students were recruited to participate in the online survey by sending instructors of large courses
a link to the survey and asking them to distribute the link. The survey link was also sent to
participants of large student clubs.
        The survey was programmed in Qualtrics, and was administered in Arabic. The survey
took approximately 40 minutes to complete (median completion time was 37 minutes). The first
part of the survey collected information on students' demographics, family background, and
college experiences. The second part of the survey elicited beliefs and attitudes.
The experimental part of the survey was divided into three stages. In the first stage, respondents
were asked about their beliefs about the future intended behavior of the population of other female
students at KSU regarding their labor market, marriage, and fertility. For example, students were
asked about the proportion of current KSU female students who expect to be working for pay when
25 years old. Likewise, respondents were asked about the age at which KSU students expect to be
married by, and the age at which they expect to have their first child. These are students' beliefs
about their peers' beliefs and intended choices, and hence are "second-order beliefs". We refer to
these as "population" beliefs in the analysis.



                                                 6
       In the second stage, participants were randomly assigned to one of three possible groups,
with each participant having an equal likelihood of being assigned to a group. Each group was
shown different information, as follows.

(i) Control group: This group only saw a screen saying that "We will next ask you about YOUR
BELIEFS regarding your own future outcomes".

(ii) Information Treatment (T1): The second group received the same screen plus an "information
treatment", which consisted of a bundle of three types of information: information about their
peers' beliefs regarding family and career, actual average monthly wages, and information about
Hafiz, the national job assistance program with primarily female beneficiaries. Participants were
then asked a series of questions about how useful they found the information.

       Information on peers' beliefs was based on data we collected in a separate survey of
approximately 80 KSU students. Specifically, we conducted focus groups with female students at
KSU in fall 2017, at the end of which students were asked to fill out a short quantitative survey
about their aspirations. This was a convenience sample. Summary statistics from this survey were
used in the information treatment. The source of the wage information was the 2017 Quarter 2
Labor Force survey conducted by the General Authority of Statistics (GaStat). 7

The text presented to participants in this treatment group was as follows:

Here is some information about your KSU peers' plans:
In a survey we conducted earlier this year, female students at KSU reported a very high likelihood,
80%, of working for pay when they are 25 years old. We also found that KSU female students, on
average, expect to get married by age 25, and to have their first child by age 28.

Here are some statistics about monthly wages.
The average monthly wages of Saudi female workers with a college degree in 2017 was 10,072
riyals per month.

Here is some information about the Hafiz job assistance program administered by the Human
Resources Development Fund (HRDF):
The Hafiz `Searching for Employment' program provides training and motivational services and
financial assistance of up to 2,000 SAR monthly in order to support and enable job search among
Saudis. Job seekers enrolled in Hafiz gain access to job placement centers, TAQAT-online job
postings, Liqaat career fairs, numerous education and training offerings, and many more services.



7
  Specifically, we used average monthly wages per paid employee (15+), including public and private sectors
(https://www.stats.gov.sa/en).


                                                    7
They also receive financial support, provided for a period of 1 year, to ease the financial strain of
unemployment and allow them to fully focus on finding work.

(iii) Information + Parents Treatment (T2): The third group received the same screen as the Control
group plus the T1 "information treatment", plus an additional "parents treatment". For the "parents
treatment", the participants were additionally asked if they wanted to share their answers to the
survey with their parents. Our goal here was to see if the effects of the information would be
diluted by making the student's parents and family (and thus long-standing social norms about
FLFP) salient in their minds.

Specifically, they were told:

 "The answers you provide in this section might be helpful for you in discussing your post-college
plans and career options with your parents." They were then asked, "Would you be interested in
having a summary of your answers be shared with your parents?" and "What would be the best
way of sharing this information with your parents?", with choices of email, mail, in person and
other. Note that the students' answers were never actually shared with their parents ­ the point was
to simply prime the students to make them think about their parents and family.

         In the third and final stage, all respondents were asked the same questions about their
beliefs about labor market and family outcomes for themselves. These included beliefs about own
future labor market participation, marriage, and fertility. We refer to these as "self" beliefs in the
analysis below.
         In the final part of the survey, we also asked a series of questions about gender attitudes
and cultural norms.
         The survey had several in-built checks. For example, prompts were given if students
skipped a question or answered outside a specified range. Since the survey had several questions
that elicited probabilistic beliefs, a brief introduction was provided to students to help them answer
such questions: "In some of the questions, you will be asked for the percent chance of something
happening. Your answers can range from 0 to 100, where 0 means there is absolutely no chance,
and 100 means that it is absolutely certain. For example, numbers like: 2 and 5 percent may
indicate "almost no chance"; 18 percent or so may mean "not much chance"; 47 or 52 percent
chance may be a "pretty even chance"; 83 percent or so may mean a "very good chance"; 95 or
98 percent chance may be "almost certain"."

        Note that, in Stage 1, all respondents reported their beliefs about the measures that were
subsequently revealed in T1 or T2. The purpose of T1 was to investigate whether social
information and/or labor market information can impact students' family and career aspirations. If
(1) students' own future family and career expectations depend, in part, on their perceptions of
other females' choices and expectations, or on labor market measures such as salaries and job



                                                  8
assistance programs, and (2) students' perceptions and beliefs are systematically biased, then T1
may impact respondents' self expectations.
        In T2, we provide the same information but then prime the students to think about their
parents. A comparison of impacts for T2 with those for T1 will be informative about the strength
of gender and family norms. Sharing responses with parents may positively impact responses
because: (1) parents want their daughters to work and that is what students want to tell them (even
if they do not themselves really want to work); or (2) daughters want to work but their parents do
not want them to, and this gives the daughters an opportunity to communicate this to them. While
either mechanism would mean that parents or family are not an impediment to educated females'
aspirations in Saudi Arabia, it might be of policy interest to tell the two apart. For example,
evidence for the second channel would suggest that facilitating communication between daughters
and parents may be useful. Our main survey does not allow us to cleanly disentangle the two apart.
A second survey was conducted in February to May 2019 to further understand the results of the
main survey. In Section 5, we will discuss this supplementary sample further.

2.2. Sample selection

         Our sample consists of 971 female undergraduate students. A total of 1,067 students began
and reached the randomization stage of the survey. We, however, restricted the sample to the
students who completed the full survey so that we do not have missing data for the main variables
of interest (as we show later, missing data is not correlated with treatment assignment in almost
all cases). In the analysis, we winsorize the responses to parents' income, own salary beliefs, and
beliefs of females' average earnings at the top and bottom 1% of the respective distributions.
         In June 2018, during the last month when the survey was open, we shortened the survey
by excluding several questions since final exam period had begun and we did not want to over-
burden students. Thus, for a few outcomes, we have a smaller sample.
         The first column in Table 1 shows the characteristics for the entire sample. The average
age of the respondents is around 20.4 years. While we have students from across different school
years, more than half (54%) are in their first or second year of study at the university. The parents
of the participants are highly-educated, with more than 55% of the fathers and 44% of the mothers
having a Bachelor's degree. However, only 16% of the students report that their mothers have ever
worked for pay. The average income of the parents reported by the participants is around 31,600
riyals per month, or approximately $8,400. Around 42% of the participants are majoring in the
humanities and 31% in business. The lower part of the table shows statistics regarding certain
individual traits. The average female student in the sample exhibits reasonable levels of confidence
in ability (an average of 3.8 on a 1-5 scale), is fairly risk averse (an average of 5.2 on a 0-10 scale),
and has high levels of religiosity (2.8 on a 0-4 scale). The most important reasons reported for
choosing a career are enjoying the work and helping others, followed by monetary considerations.
         Compared to the actual distribution of students across major tracks at the university, our
sample has a similar share of science track respondents (16.3% at KSU vs. 17.5% in our sample),



                                                   9
and a slightly lower share of students in the humanities track (49.6% at KSU vs. 41.6% in our
sample). Where our sample differs is in having a lower share of health track respondents (18.6%
at KSU vs. 10.1% in our sample) and a larger share of business track respondents (15.1% at KSU
and 30.8% in our sample).
        While our sample is a selected group of university-going women, as mentioned earlier,
tertiary enrollment has increased rapidly in recent years (from to 39% in 2010 to 68% in 2017 for
women), so a very large share of young Saudi women is participating in higher education. KSU is
one the most selective public universities in Saudi Arabia, and is drawing in females from high-
SES high-education families from across the country (most of the students in our sample ­ 89% -
- did not attend high school in Riyadh). Thus, one should be cautious in extrapolating from our
study. However, we argue that it is precisely females with backgrounds as in our sample who are
likely to be on the margin of deciding whether to participate in the labor force or not. It is also
worth noting that 16% of our respondents reported that their mother ever worked, which is quite
close to the current employment rate of women age 45-54 of 12% among all Saudi women. 8
        Columns (2)-(4) of Table 1 show the characteristics for the control and the two treatment
groups. P-values for the differences between the control group and each treatment group are
reported in the last two columns (5 and 6). Only 5 of the 48 p-values are statistically significant at
the 90% level or higher, which indicates that the randomization was effective in achieving balance
across the groups.

3. Descriptive Analysis

       Before presenting the experimental impacts in the next section, we first provide descriptive
evidence from the survey on students' social attitudes and cultural norms. We also describe
students' beliefs about the population (second-order beliefs) and about their own selves. In
addition, we explore the heterogeneity in these self-beliefs for the Control group.

3.1. Social Attitudes

        Table 2 presents statistics for several social attitudes and cultural norms questions. These
questions were asked of participants post-treatment, and so may be impacted by the treatment.
Hence, we primarily focus on the Control group responses here (Column 2). The table shows that
parents and family likely play an important role in students' beliefs about the labor market.
Students were asked "What do you think is the percent chance (or chances out of 100) that your
family would approve of you working full-time after graduation?" The average response is quite
high, 79.5%. However, the large standard deviation of 28.4 points indicates that there is substantial
heterogeneity in the sample across families. In fact, 15.9% of Control group students report a
response of less than 50% (that is, it is more likely that their family would not approve of them
working). We also see that it is quite important to the students that their parents approve of their

8
    Based on calculations from the 2017 Labor Force survey conducted by the General Authority of Statistics (GaStat)


                                                          10
choices: the mean response is 7.3 to the question "On a scale from 0 to 10 where 0 means "Not
Important At All" and the value 10 means "Absolutely Important," how important to you is it that
your parents approve of your choices?"
        The survey also included questions to gauge students' perceptions of whether female full-
time work was consistent with local norms and with religious values. The questions were phrased
as follows: "On a scale of 0 to 10, where 0 is "Not at all" and 10 is "Fully", how consistent do
you think the full-time work of females is with local norms and customs [religious values]?' We
see that students, on average, report high values for how consistent they think full-time work of
females is with religious values (7.3), and with local norms and customs (6.1). This also suggests
that students, on average, find that local norms and customs are more restrictive in terms of labor
market participation than religious values. Again, the large standard deviations indicate there is
substantial heterogeneity in the sample in these attitudes. In fact, 24.0% of Control group students
provide a response of less than 5 for local norms being consistent with female work, and 15.6%
provide a response of less than 5 for religious norms being consistent with female work.
        The survey also provided students with three statements that can generally be categorized
as reflecting traditional gender roles. 9 They were asked how many of these three statements they
agreed with. The average respondent only agreed with half a statement, suggesting that females in
our sample do not subscribe to traditional gender roles.
        Columns (3) and (4) of the Table 2 show the responses for the two treatment groups. There
is evidence that the treatment had an impact on students' attitudes. In particular, we see that T2,
which primed parents and family, has a notable impact on students' perceptions. The prime seems
to have been effective in the sense that it increases the importance that students attach to their
parents approving of their choices: the average response for this question is 7.5 in T2 versus 7.2 in
the Control group, with the difference statistically significant (p-value = 0.06). We also see that
T2 respondents report a higher likelihood of their family approving of their choices, and of full-
time female work being consistent with local and religious norms (these differences are statistically
significant at the 0.15 level). Thus, T2 seems to have been effective in making salient the role of
parents in choices. The table shows little impact on the attitudes of T1 respondents (information
alone).

3.2. Subjective Beliefs

        We next investigate the patterns in students' subjective beliefs. Table 3 shows the means
of the key beliefs measures for the population (Panel A) and for self (Panel B). We show the
means for the entire sample and for each treatment group, as well as the F-test p-value for the
differences between the treatment groups and the control group. Recall that we elicited population



9
 The three statements were: (1) Women who negotiate for a higher salary or job benefits are too aggressive. (2) A
man's job is to earn money while a woman's job is to look after the home and family. (3) It is more important for a
wife to help her husband's career than to have one herself.


                                                        11
beliefs before the information intervention, so the measures in Panel A are pre-treatment, while
the measures in Panel B are post-treatment.

3.2.1. Population Beliefs

         We first note that in Panel A in Table 3, there are no significant differences in population
beliefs across the control and treatment groups, as one would expect since treatment was
randomized. One of the population beliefs that is of interest to us is "What proportion of KSU
female graduates do you think work (either full-time or part-time) when they are 25 years old?"
We see that the average belief about other KSU females working at age 25 is approximately 54.4%.
The average belief for working full-time (conditional on working) is 47.6%. While we did not
directly ask the unconditional belief for others working full-time, we calculated this from these
two measures to be 27.9%, on average.
         We are, in particular, interested in students' beliefs regarding the aspirations of their female
peers (that is, students' second-order beliefs ­ beliefs regarding their peer's beliefs). The survey
asked: "We asked other female students the chances (on a 0-100 scale) of working for pay when
they are 25 years old. What do you think the average response was?" The mean response to this
question is 53.2%, not too different from the average belief regarding the labor force participation
rate of past KSU female graduates. This suggests that students perceptions of females' future labor
supply is not too different from their perceptions of current females' labor supply.
         Table 3 shows that respondents believe Saudi women with a college degree who work earn
6,027 Riyals per month (approximately $1,606), on average. Students were also asked about the
age at which KSU students expect to get married by and expect to have their first child by. The
average response for expected marriage age is 24.4 years, and for the age at which the first child
is expected is 26.2 years.
         The two treatment groups received some information about these aspects. As mentioned
above, for example, they were informed about the average likelihood of KSU women expecting to
work at age 25 (80%), and the age at which they expect to get married by (age 25) and have their
first child (age 28). Note, in this case, the information is about the aspirations of other female KSU
students, not objective statistics on actual outcomes of past graduates. The reason we provide this
information is that objective statistics from KSU (or for that matter, for the broader college-going
population) simply do not exist. In addition, in a rapidly changing society, it is arguably one's
perceptions about the aspirations of current peers that matter more than information on past
cohorts.
         The lower part of Panel A shows several `underestimate' measures. This is the share of
participants whose responses were lower than the corresponding measures that were presented to
the Treatment groups (see section 3.1). For example, the underestimate measure for females
working is the share of respondents who believe that the average intended likelihood of KSU
females working is less than 80%, that the average monthly wage of Saudi female workers with a
college degree in 2017 was less than 10,072 riyals per month, that the age at which KSU students



                                                   12
expect to get married at is less than 25 years, and that the expected age at birth of first child is less
than 28.
        We see that the vast majority of our sample underestimates both the share of women
expecting to work (86%) and the monthly salary (95%). Only 51% of respondents underestimate
the expected age of marriage while 76% underestimate the expected age of first child. A majority
of the students ­ 80% ­ report they are aware of the Hafiz program, but 62% report an
underestimate of the benefits.
        Table 4 presents OLS regression results examining the determinants of students'
population beliefs. We find that there are few significant predictors among the observable
characteristics of students. Respondents whose mother has completed at least a Bachelor's degree
report lower beliefs about others working full time, and also lower beliefs regarding peers' beliefs.
The low R-squared reported in the last row indicate that this large set of controls explain a very
small part of the cross-sectional variation in beliefs (less than 5 percent in the first six columns).

3.2.2. Self Beliefs

        Panel B of Table 3 shows respondents' self beliefs. Asterisks on the means in Panel B
reflect significance levels for t-tests of equality between the means for the self beliefs and the
corresponding population beliefs.
        The first row shows that the mean belief for working at the age of 25 is 67.7% for the
Control group, significantly higher than the belief regarding the proportion of KSU graduates who
work (54.4%) and the belief regarding the proportion of current KSU students who expect to work
(53.2%). In fact, we see that for all the labor market beliefs, respondents' beliefs about themselves
are (economically and statistically) significantly higher than their corresponding population
beliefs. We also see that Control group respondents expect to have their first child later than they
believe their peers expect to do so (age 26.9 versus 26.2).
        Panel B also shows the effects of the information interventions on outcomes. We will
estimate these treatment effects in a regression framework in the next section, but we note that
based on differences in means for our key outcomes of interest, we see that both T1 and T2 lead
to higher beliefs about working (in particular, working full-time) and beliefs about enrolling in the
Hafiz (unemployment assistance) program.
        Table 5 examines the drivers of the heterogeneity in self beliefs. Since these are likely to
be impacted by the treatments, the sample is restricted to the Control group. Again, we see few
significant predictors based on observables. Participants with a higher self-reported GPA do report
higher beliefs about working and a later age of having their first child. Interestingly, we see that
those reporting higher chances of family approving of their work also report higher self-beliefs
about working: a 10-percentage point (pp) increase in the chance the respondent's family would
approve of her working full-time after graduation is associated with a 2 pp greater belief of working
(either overall or full-time). There are some other interesting relationships in the data: (1) the
presence of an older sister is associated with a significantly lower likelihood of expecting to get



                                                   13
married by age 25, and (2) a higher level of agreement with traditional gender roles is associated
with a significantly higher likelihood of getting married by 25. Overall, this rich set of controls
can explain about 20 percent of the cross-sectional variation in beliefs in our sample.
         Before we move to the experimental analysis, it is worth investigating whether self beliefs
are correlated with population beliefs. If the two are related and if this relationship is causal (at
least, in part), then systematic biases in population beliefs are likely to have consequences for self
beliefs. That would make the case for information interventions along the lines we investigate in
the next section. In Panel A of Table 6, we regress each self belief onto the corresponding
population belief. For reasons mentioned above, we restrict this analysis to the Control group. We
see a strong relationship between population and self beliefs. 10 For example, a 1 pp higher belief
of other females working at age 25 is associated with a 0.42 pp higher likelihood that the
respondent expects to work at age 25. Likewise, a 1-year increase in the population belief of age
at birth of first child is associated with a 0.6-year increase in the expected age of childbearing.
Panel B shows that the qualitative relationships are unchanged even after controlling for a rich set
of covariates.

4. Experimental Analysis

This section investigates the impacts of the information interventions on our outcomes of interest.


4.1. Baseline Analysis

         Our main specification takes the form:

                                    
                                         = 0 + 1 1 + 2 2 +  ,                           (1)

         
where         is the outcome of interest (i.e., the various beliefs about one's own self), and 1 (2 )
is an indicator that equals 1 if student  was assigned to the information treatment (the information
+ parents treatment), and  is an error term. The parameters of interest are 1 and 2 , which show
the average impact of the two treatments on beliefs. 0 shows the average belief in the Control
group. Since assignment to treatment is random, an OLS estimation of (1) yields unbiased
estimates of the parameters.
        Panel A of Table 7 presents the estimates of equation (1) for various self belief outcomes.
The first column uses the belief about working at age 25 as the dependent variable. The mean of
this belief for the control group, as indicated by the constant term in the regression, is 67.7. Recall
that the intervention revealed the mean intended likelihood of KSU female students working at

10
  Since we did not elicit the share of other females who are married by age 25 but the age at which they get married,
self beliefs about the likelihood of being married at age 25 are regressed onto the belief regarding the age at which
KSU females expect to get married. A negative relationship between the two indicates that a higher belief of other
females' expected marriage age is associated with a lower expected likelihood of oneself being married by age 25.


                                                         14
age 25. Table 3 shows that the vast majority of our respondents ­ 86 percent ­ had underestimated
this likelihood. We see that the intervention leads to a sizable positive impact on the belief of
working at age 25, with an average impact of 2.4-2.6 points for the two treatments. While the
estimates are not statistically significant at conventional levels (p-values of the estimates are 0.19
or less), Figure 1 shows that the cumulative distributions in the two treatment groups are below
the cumulative distribution of the Control group for most values (the p-value of a Kolmogorov-
Smirnov (KS) test for the equality of the Control and T1 distributions is 0.06 and for the Control
and T2 distributions is 0.07).
        In column (2), we regress an indicator for a high belief of working at age 25, where the
indicator is for whether this belief is 70% or higher; 51.5% of the respondents in the Control group
report a belief of 70% or higher for this question. We see that the treatments have a significant
impact on the likelihood of the student reporting a response of 70% or higher, increasing the
proportion of such students by 9.4 pp in T1 and 8.5 pp in T2.
        Column (3) of Table 7 uses belief of working full-time at age 25, conditional on working,
as the dependent variable. The mean response for this variable in the Control group is 60.9 percent.
The interventions lead to a sizable impact on this belief, increasing it, on average, by 3.8 and 6.9
pp for the T1 and T2 groups, respectively. Given that the standard deviation of this belief is 24.6
percent in the Control group, these impacts are sizable, corresponding to 0.15 and 0.28 of the
baseline standard deviation. The next column uses the unconditional belief of working full-time at
age 25; this is the product of the dependent variables in columns (1) and (3). The mean belief for
this variable in the Control group is 43.9 percent. We again see that the treatments lead to sizable
impacts on the intended likelihood of working full-time in the future. The average impact is slightly
larger for T2 (an increase of 7.0 pp) than for T1 (an increase of 5.2 pp), though the estimates are
not statistically different. Figure 2 shows the distribution of responses to this question for the three
groups. We see a clear shift towards the right for the two treatment groups (the p-value of a KS
test for the equality of the Control and T1 distributions is 0.07, and for the Control and T2
distributions is 0.02). In fact, we see that the T2 cumulative distribution first order stochastically
dominates the Control distribution: at any given value, the proportion of students giving a response
higher than that is larger for the T2 group (than it is for the Control group).
        Next turning to family outcomes in columns (5) and (6), we see that the treatments lead to
a small increase in the intended likelihood of being married by age 25. The mean likelihood of this
outcome is 48.6 percent for the Control group. The treatments increase this likelihood by 2.0-3.6
pp, though the estimates are not precise. Column (6) shows the intervention had no meaningful
impact on the expected age at which students plan to have their first child.
        Column (7) investigates whether the treatment had an impact on the likelihood of students
expecting to apply for Hafiz, the country's generous job assistance program. Ex-ante, it is not
obvious what we should find. Table 3 showed that about a fifth of the respondents were not aware
of the program and 62 percent under-estimated the monetary benefits of the program. On the other
hand, KSU students might not expect themselves to have to resort to using this program. We see
that the treatment leads to a statistically and economically meaningful impact on students' intended



                                                  15
likelihood of enrolling in Hafiz: the impacts are between 3.3 and 5.0 percentage points for the two
treatment groups, on a base of 37 percent for the Control group. However, the impact of T2 is
smaller than T1.
         Finally, the last column of the table shows that the intervention had no impact on students'
beliefs about future earnings. This is somewhat surprising since, as shown in Table 3, virtually all
the students underestimated earnings of current college-educated female workers. We can only
speculate on why that might be the case. First, the Saudi labor market is rapidly changing, and
students might not think that past wage is relevant for the future. Second, the average KSU student
might not think the earnings of the average woman in the workforce are relevant for them. This
explanation is, however, hard to rationalize with the patterns in the data: KSU students, who are
arguably positively selected, in fact report beliefs for their own earnings (shown in Panel B of
Table 3) that are significantly lower than the official average wage of SR 10,072. Third, the official
statistics may be biased. All these factors would lead students to ignore this information.
         Overall, Table 7 shows that the information had sizable impacts on students' labor market
aspirations. Given the previous literature that information interventions can be effective at
impacting individuals' beliefs and choices, this may not seem surprising. However, in a setting
like Saudi Arabia with restrictive norms, it is not ex ante clear that information alone could shift
individuals' intended choices. It is also worth noting that we cannot reject that the estimates for
the two treatment dummies are statistically different for any of the outcomes, as shown by the p-
values of a test of equality of the estimates. That is, on average, both treatments lead to similar
effects. This is arguably a surprising result, since it suggests that making family salient does not
dilute the impacts of the treatment. We discuss this in more detail later.
         Panel B of Table 7 reports the same regressions as in Panel A, except that we now also
control for a vector of student characteristics. Doing so has little qualitative impact on the
estimates. However, the precision of the estimates generally improves. Since the sample size
moves around in the various columns of Table 7, Appendix Table A1 reports the same set of
regressions as in Table 7, but for the sub-sample for which we have non-missing data on all
dependent variables. This drops the sample size to 802 respondents. As mentioned earlier and
shown in Appendix Table A2, item non-response does not differ systematically by treatment
assignment. 11 Restricting to a common sample shows that results are qualitatively unchanged.
         Next, we investigate whether the interventions had any impact on students' expectations
about sector of work. Table 8 shows the results for expectations of working in various sectors ("If
you are working full time when you are 25 years old, what do you think is the percent chance (or
chances out of 100) that you will be working in each of the following sectors?"). Since the T1
information was not sector-specific, it is not surprising that we do not see any significant impacts
here. However, we see that T2 led to a significant increase in the average expectation of working
in Education (close to 4 percentage points) and a small decline in the average expectation of


11
  Table A2 shows that there was differential non-response for the question that asked students about the age at which
they expect to have a child. Non-response was higher due to a setting in Qualtrics that allowed respondents to skip
this question without answering.


                                                         16
working in Services. Column (11) shows that both T1 and T2 led to increased average expectations
of working in the Public sector (conditional on working), but the increase for T2 is larger. In the
last column, we regress an indicator for a high belief of working in the public sector (that is, a
belief of 70% or higher). We see that T2 increased the proportion of students reporting a high
belief by 8 pp, but the effects are not significant for T1.
        Current employment rates for women are highest in the Education sector, as teaching is
considered a socially acceptable profession for women, and Services less so. 12 Moreover, most
female employment is concentrated in the public sector. At least for Education, these higher
expectations in T2 are unlikely to be due to students expecting higher earnings in Education
(relative to other sectors). In fact, among our respondents majoring in Humanities ­ the major
whose students report the highest likelihood of being employed in Education­ reported earnings
expectations are the lowest. 13
        Thus, these effects suggest that the parent prime in T2 is making traditional norms salient,
and pushing students into jobs that are more traditionally acceptable. This is also consistent with
the findings in Table 3, which shows that T2 moved students towards more socially traditional
values.

4.2. Heterogeneity Analysis

       The previous section shows that the information treatments had a significant impact on
students' beliefs regarding future labor supply. Beliefs for applying for the Hafiz program also
showed modest impacts. In addition, we see that the impacts do not systematically differ by the
two treatments, although effects appear larger in T2. In this section, we investigate the
heterogeneity and potential mechanisms for the impacts.

4.2.1. Mechanisms

        The first question we ask is whether students who had more biased second-order beliefs
are the ones who are more responsive to the treatment. The idea is that the treatments may have a
larger impact on students who learn that a much higher or lower proportion of female students
expect to work in the future than they had previously believed.
                                                 
        For a given outcome,  , let            be the corresponding belief of student  regarding
                                                                                
that outcome for their female peers. Let             = ( -  ), where  is the value of
the belief of female peers as shown in the treatment. A positive value of this variable means that
the individual reports a population belief about that outcome that is below the objective statistic.
                                                           
For example, in the case of age at first childbirth,           is the gap between age 28 and the

12
   See discussion in Miller et al (2019). For example, 74 percent of employed women were working in girls' schools
in 2014 (Evidence for Policy Design, 2015).
13
   Average expected earnings were 7,131 Riyals for Humanities majors, 12,563 Riyals for Health, 8,998 for Science,
and 9,376 for Business.


                                                       17
respondent's belief about other females' average belief of age at childbirth. Note that the "Error"
is effectively revealed to respondents in the Treatment groups but not the Control group.

We estimate the following regression specification:

                                                                                                       
             = 0 + 1 1 + 2 2 + 3                       + 4 (1 ×                 ) + 5 (2 ×                 ) +  .
                                                                                              (2)

         If the treatments impacted students through an information channel, we would expect 4
and 5 to be positive for all outcomes (except for probability of being married by age 25, which
would be negatively impacted since underestimation of marriage age of peers should lead to a
decline in one's expected probability of being married by age 25). In this specification, 3 captures
the relationship between one's own belief and bias in the population belief for the Control group
respondents. If students' self beliefs are based, in part, on their population beliefs (as is indeed the
case, according to Table 6), we would expect the estimate of 3 to be negative for all outcomes
(except probability of being married), i.e., underestimation of population beliefs ­ a positive error
­ should be correlated with lower self beliefs.
         Estimates of equation (2) are presented in Panel A of Table 9. Consistent with our prior,
the estimate of 3 is negative in all columns (and positive for the marriage probability). That is,
those who underestimate population beliefs do, in fact, report lower self beliefs. However, this
relationship gets weaker in the treatment groups, as shown by the estimates of 4 and 5 . While
these estimates are not precisely estimated, they are of the expected sign (the only exceptions being
the negative estimates for 4 and 5 in the last column). Estimates of 4 and 5 are also
economically meaningful: for example, column (4) shows that a 21-point increase in in the error
variable (i.e., a one standard deviation increase) is associated with a 2.5 (4.2) pp increase in the
intended likelihood of working full-time for T1 (T2) respondents, relative to students in the Control
group. 14
         Table 9 also reports the p-value of a joint test of both interaction terms (4 and 5 ) being
positive for each outcome (and negative for the probability of being married). For the outcomes in
the first four columns, the p-values are below 0.22. This suggests that the treatment effects that we
have found are, in part, driven by students who had ex-ante under-estimated the revealed
information. This can, for example, be seen in Figure 3, which shows the average unconditional
belief of working full-time against the belief about other females' working (this belief was elicited
prior to the provision of information). As one would expect, there is a positive relationship between
the two for students in each of the three groups. However, the relationship is flatter for students in
the two treatment groups. Provision of information leads students ­ especially those who ex-ante
reported lower beliefs about other female students' beliefs ­ to report higher beliefs regarding their
own future intended labor supply.

14
  The result in Table 8 of a higher expectation of working in Education in T2 is also driven by individuals who ex
ante have lower beliefs for their female peers intended likelihood of working (results available upon request).


                                                       18
         We have additional suggestive evidence that the content of the provided information led to
the treatment impacts: Treatment respondents were asked "How informative do you find this
information?" 25.5% of the respondents choose "very informative/useful" and 9.8% chose "not
informative/useful", with the remaining choosing "somewhat informative/useful". 15 Panel B of
Table 9 reports estimates from a regression where the treatment terms are interacted with a dummy
if the respondent chooses "very informative/useful". Ex-ante we would expect the impacts to be
larger in magnitude for this set of respondents. This is generally what we see in the table, though
estimates lack precision. For example, in column (3), the average impact for T2 respondents who
found the information very informative is an additional increase of 6 percentage points. That is,
for T2 respondents who find the information very informative, the impact is nearly doubled
(5.24+5.98).

4.2.2. Heterogeneity by School Year

        Ex ante it is not clear as to how impacts should differ by school year. Students in later years
are closer to graduation and so post-graduation outcomes (labor supply and family) are more
relevant outcomes for them. They may be particularly impacted by the provided information. On
the other hand, their beliefs might already be well-informed and, hence, be less malleable to any
intervention. This is investigated in Panel A of Table 10, where the Treatment indicators are
interacted with a variable "Senior", a dummy that equals 1 for students in the third year or higher
(46% of the sample falls in this category). The first four columns show that the impacts on labor
market aspirations are larger for those in later years; the p-value for the joint significance of the
two interaction terms is less than 0.20. Thus, average impacts ­ especially on labor market
outcomes (including intended Hafiz enrollment) ­ seem to somewhat differ systematically by
school year.

4.2.3. The Role of Family

        The finding that T2 leads to impacts that are similar to (or in some cases, even larger than)
those for T1 is, at some level, surprising. Ex-ante, in a society with conservative gender norms,
one might have expected that making the role of parents salient and flagging the possibility of
sharing responses with parents may mute impacts of the intervention. Yet, we find no evidence of
that.
        Before we dig deeper into T2, we ask if impacts differ by whether the student's mother has
ever worked for pay. Close to 16% of our respondents belong to such households. One would
expect that students from households where the mother has ever worked for pay ­ in a setting with
very low female labor supply rates ­ are arguably less constrained by gender norms. Labor market

15
   Column 1 of Appendix Table A3 shows little evidence of socioeconomic characteristics being correlated with
perceiving the information to be very informative. Students in later years and those with an older sister are less likely
to find the information very informative, presumably because they already have access to such information from other
sources.


                                                           19
information may have a larger impact on such households. Conversely, such students may already
know such information-- Table 4, however, shows that average beliefs (about other females) of
students with a mother who has ever worked are not different from those of their counterparts.
         Panel B of Table 10 presents the estimates of equation (1) where we include interactions
with an indicator for whether the student reports that her mother has ever worked. In the first four
columns that investigate the impacts on beliefs regarding future labor supply, we see that the T1
and T2 interaction terms with this variable are positive. That is, the treatment impact is larger for
students whose mother has ever worked. In addition, the impacts are (statistically and
economically) significantly larger for T2 students. That is, students from households with a
working mother revise their labor supply beliefs up when provided with information and primed
about their parents. We see a modest increase in the marriage likelihood for such students in
column (5), though the estimates are not precise. In column (7), we see that having a working
mother actually leads to large decreases in the intended likelihood of applying for the Hafiz
program. Overall, it seems that having a working mother amplifies the treatment effects.
         Next, to better understand the effects of T2, we investigate whether the impacts differ by
whether a T2 respondent opted to have her responses shared with her parents. 16 A differential
treatment effect would be informative of the mechanisms that lead to an impact. We find that a
high proportion ­ 47% ­ opted for their survey responses to be shared with their parents. The
subsample of T2 respondents who choose the option of sharing their survey responses with their
parents also reports a higher importance for their parents approving of their choices (an average
response of 7.9 versus 7.2 for their counterparts; p-value = 0.013). This is of course a self-selected
group, but suggests that individuals who really care about seeking out their parents' approval were
more likely to choose to share their responses with their parents. This can also be seen in the last
two columns of Appendix Table A3, where the only significant covariate of one's decision to share
her responses with her parents is importance of parents' approval. A one standard deviation
increase in this variable increases the likelihood of opting to share the responses with parents by
5.5 percentage points.
         Some other relationships, which not statistically significant, merit some discussion: column
(3) shows that students with college-educated mothers, those with a mother who has ever worked,
those who are more likely to believe that female labor supply is consistent with local and religious
norms, all are more likely to report to want to share their responses with their parents. On the other
hand, students who are more likely to agree with traditional gender role statements are less likely
to opt to have their responses shared, but again these results are not statistically significant. Overall,
column (2) shows that a large set of covariates can explain less than 7 percent of the variation in
the decision to share the survey responses with one's parents.
         Table 11 investigates whether impacts differ by whether the student opted to have her
survey responses shared with their parents. We see that in nearly all cases where we had significant

16
  Note that the question was "Would you be interested in having a summary of your answers be shared with your
parents?" Those who answered "Yes" to this were then asked "What would be the best way of sharing this information
with your parents?" We never collected any contact information for the parents. The point of these questions was to
prime the students to think about their parents.


                                                        20
impacts of T2 in the baseline specification (Table 7), the results are driven by the subset of students
who indicated they would want their survey responses shared with their parents. For example,
looking at the intended likelihood of working at age 25 in the first column, we see that among
those T2 students who opted to share their responses, the average impact was a 7.3 pp larger
increase (compared to those in T2 who opted not to share their responses). It is also notable that
the estimate on the T2 dummy ­ which now captures the average impact for T2 students who chose
not to share their responses ­ are either economically small or in the same direction as the estimate
for the "T2 x Share" term. It is certainly not the case that priming students to think about their
family leads such respondents ­ who do not want to share their responses with their parents ­ to
give more conservative responses. This is reassuring since this is the subpopulation that one might
particularly be concerned about otherwise.
        Looking across the columns in Table 11, we see that the average impact for T2 students
who opted to share their responses is larger in magnitude than the average impact of T1 students
(though the differences are not statistically significant). Clearly the subset of students who decided
to share their responses with their parents is endogenous. But why is it that these students who
want to share their responses with their parents exhibit such high responsiveness to information?
We investigate this point in the next section.

5. Further Evidence on the Role of Family

         In order to better understand the effects of the T2 treatment, we conducted a shorter follow-
up survey during February-May 2019. The goal was twofold: first, to understand the somewhat
surprising (at least, to us) result that the T2 treatment did not dilute the effects of the information.
Second, to understand why it was that the students most responsive to the information treatment
were those who wanted to share their survey responses with their parents.
         Specifically, we conducted this follow-up survey to differentiate between several possible
reasons for the effects of T2: (1) the responsive students actually want to work but believe their
parents would not approve of them working and thus want to signal their labor market aspirations
to their parents through their survey responses; (2) these students do not discuss their labor market
aspirations with their parents otherwise, and sharing their responses would provide a way to
communicate their preferences to their parents; (3) these students believe that their parents do want
them to work and making their parents salient in their minds amplifies the effects of the
information.
         This was a convenience sample of 150 students, recruited by asking instructors of large
courses to distribute a link to the survey to students. While some of the respondents may have
completed our main survey, we did not ask for information that would allow us to link responses
across surveys. Compared to the initial study sample, this sample had disproportionately more
students from the Health and Business tracks, and from the fourth (final) year. The survey was
again administered online using Qualtrics, but this time was administered in English. This survey
took approximately 10 minutes to complete.



                                                  21
        The survey asked a few of the same questions as our main survey about self beliefs about
working at age 25 and beliefs about marriage and childbearing age. However, most of the questions
in this survey were aimed at understanding students' perceptions about their parents' (both
mother's and father's) expectations of them working, and how often they communicate with their
parents. We also showed them the same information provided in T1 in the original survey (see
Section 2.1) and asked whether they would want to share the information with their parents, how
the information would make their parents feel (happy or disappointed), and reasons why they
would want to or not want to share the information with their parents. Although this was not the
intent of T2 in the original survey, it sheds light on whether T2 was helping correct misperceived
social norms (as in Bursztyn et al., 2020) or evoking social norms.
        We also asked them what we asked in T2 in the original survey: whether they would want
to share their responses about their labor market aspirations with their parents, and we probed them
for the reasons for their responses.
        In Table 12, we show the means for the key variables from the survey. A higher share of
this sample wants to share their survey responses with their parents (79% vs. 46% in the main
survey). As, mentioned above, this sample differs in certain observables from the initial sample.
In addition, the follow-up survey included a much smaller and focused set of beliefs questions,
and that may have led a larger share of students to want to share their responses with their parents.
Panel A also shows that beliefs of this convenience sample are somewhat more progressive than
those of the main sample: on average, students report a higher intended likelihood of working and
later ages of marriage and childbirth, compared to the self beliefs in the main survey (shown in
Panel B of Table 3). Surprisingly, almost all respondents reported that both their parents expect
them to work: the share reporting that their mother and father expects them to work was 97% (as
shown in Panels B and C).
        The proportion of respondents who would want to share the information provided in our
intervention with their parents is also quite high: 66 (56) percent of the students reported wanting
to share the information with their mother (father). 44 percent of the respondents reported that
sharing the information in the survey with their parents would make their parents more likely to
want them to work, but an equal proportion (43 percent) reported that the information would have
no impact.
        Panel A shows that the top reasons reported for sharing this information with their parents
was to "inform them about how Saudi society is changing" (65% of respondents) and "it would
make them happy to know that more people think like me" (29%). This suggests that while almost
all students report that both their parents expect them to work, students still want to share the
(social and labor market) information with their parents to show them how cultural and social
norms about work are changing.
        The last two panels of Table 12 show the top reasons selected for sharing their beliefs
("future plans") with their parents were to "make him (her) proud about his (her) daughter's
aspirations" (71% for sharing with father, and 79% for mother), and to "inform my father (mother)
about my plans since we rarely talk about them" (25% for both). These patterns suggest that while



                                                 22
some students want to signal their labor market aspirations to their parents, the majority want to
share their aspirations with their parents because they think their aspirations to work will make
their parents proud.
        We further examined whether these results differ by how often students reported talking
with their parents about future plans. This question ("How often do you talk with your father
(mother) about your future plans?") was asked on a 1 (never) to 7 (very often) scale, with the
average being reasonably high for talking with fathers (4.3), and even higher for talking with
mothers (5.2). In Table 13, we split the sample into those who talk frequently with their fathers
and mothers (median response and above) and those who talk infrequently with fathers and
mothers. We see several notable differences in these two subsamples. First, those who talk
frequently with their parents are relatively more likely to want to share the information and their
beliefs with their parents, especially their fathers. However, even among those who talk to their
parents infrequently, a sizable proportion reports wanting to share their responses with their
parents.
        Second, the reason they would want to share the information with their parents differs
across the groups. A smaller share of the group that infrequently talks with their mothers selected
the reason "inform them about how Saudi society is changing" for sharing the information,
compared to those who frequently talk to their mothers (48% versus 74%; difference statistically
different). We also see that, while more than three-quarters of the subsample that frequently talks
to either parent chose "make him (her) proud about his (her) daughter's aspirations" as a reason
to share responses, the corresponding proportions were significantly lower for those who talk
infrequently with either parent.
        It is also notable that a higher share of the group that infrequently talks to fathers chose
"inform my father about my plans since we rarely talk about them" as a reason for sharing their
plans with them (46% vs. 16% among those who frequently talk about them). This suggests that
this group saw sharing their responses as a way to communicate their aspirations to their parents.
These differences are particularly notable when we condition on frequently talking with the father
or not (in fact, reasons for sharing the plans differ less when we look at those who frequently talk
with their mother and those who do not).
        In sum, our follow-up survey suggests that the parents' treatment did not dilute the effects
of the information treatment since parents of this generation of college-going Saudi women ­ or
to be more precise, parents of Saudi women attending selective colleges ­ appear to expect their
daughters to work. 17 Yet, we also see that some daughters would like the opportunity to discuss
their future plans with their parents and inform their parents about the changing social norms
regarding the labor market.


17
   We corroborate this in focus groups that we conducted with parents. Both fathers and mothers reported that they
wanted their daughters to work after graduation. At the same time, they were aware of potential constraints on sector
choice for their daughters. Fathers, in particular, voiced a strong preference for work environments that limit
interaction with men. Preferences for gender segregation are common in the Middle East and South Asia
(Jayachandran, 2015).


                                                         23
6. Conclusions

         In this paper, we investigate the extent to which the provision of new information can play
a role in impacting young women's career and family aspirations in a fast-changing economic and
social context. Through a survey of female university students, we first show that female college-
going students in t Saudi Arabia appear to have much higher expectations of future employment
than the actual female LFP among older generations. Interestingly, their self beliefs about working
are higher than their beliefs about the probability that their peers will be employed in the future.
         Using a field experiment that randomly provided social and labor market information to a
subset of students, we find that receiving information about peers' aspirations leads to higher
expectations of future employment among students. This appears to be largely due to students
under-estimating the aspirations of their female peers. Testing whether information can impact
aspirations when it might be inconsistent with the prevailing long-standing social norms, we find
that contrary to our priors, making the role of parents salient to students did not counteract the
impact of the information treatment. We present evidence that this is likely due to the fact that
many students believe that their parents want them to work. However, at the same time, we find
that the parent prime increases the likelihood of students expecting to work in Education and the
Public sector, socially acceptable sectors where women have tended to work. In a setting where
parents seen to be supportive of females working but have a strong preference for gender
segregation in the workplace, policies that lower costs for firms to employ males and females (by,
for example, providing subsidies to build gender-segregated facilities) may be useful. In fact,
Miller et al. (2019) show that costs of integrating females into the workplace are very high in our
context.
         Our results suggest that students appear to underestimate the pace of social change, and are
eager to discuss their future plans and the provided information with their parents. This, in turn,
suggests that policies which disseminate information about objective labor market statistics and
the pace of social change, while also enabling communication between daughters and their parents,
are likely to facilitate informed decision-making and should be promulgated. Interventions that
can persuade families that careers outside of education and the public sector are socially acceptable
and can lead to higher earnings are likely to be effective.
         While our results are encouraging, in that social norms are not diluting the impact of
information, one should be cautious in interpreting them. A positive impact on aspirations of future
labor supply is a necessary but not sufficient condition for actual change in female labor supply.
Constraints (such as on the demand side or other societal norms) may prevent women from
increasing their labor force participation even if they aspire to do so. In fact, the average aspirations
in our sample are much higher than existing FLFP rates, suggesting that these constraints may be
binding. Future work which investigates impacts on actual labor supply would be valuable. It is
also worth noting that we find a positive impact of the parents prime in our sample of females
attending one of the most selective public universities in the country. Women outnumber men
among Saudi university graduates, but tertiary enrollment rates for both men and women only



                                                   24
recently increased dramatically (from to 39% in 2010 to 68% in 2017 for women, and from 34%
in 2010 to 69% in 2017 for men) 18. While it is reassuring that social norms are not an impediment
in this selective sample, the interaction of information and social norms in the broader population
remains unknown.




18
   World Development Indicators, World Bank (https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-development-
indicators).


                                                   25
References
Andrabi, T., Das, J., & Khwaja, A. I. (2017). Report Cards: The Impact of Providing School and Child Test
Scores on Educational Markets. The American Economic Review, 107(6), 1535.

Bursztyn, L., & Coffman, L. C. (2012). The Schooling Decision: Family Preferences, Intergenerational
Conflict, and Moral Hazard in the Brazilian Favelas. Journal of Political Economy,120(3), 359-397.
doi:10.1086/666746

Bursztyn, L., González, A.L. and Yanagizawa-Drott, D., (2020). Misperceived Social Norms: Women
Working Outside the Home in Saudi Arabia. American Economic Review, 110(10), pp.2997-3029.

Coffman, L. C., Featherstone, C. R., & Kessler, J. B. (2017). Can social information affect what job you
choose and keep?. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 9(1), 96-117.

Dhar, D., Jain, T., & Jayachandran, S. (2018a). Intergenerational Transmission of Gender Attitudes:
Evidence From India. The Journal of Development Studies. doi:10.1080/00220388.2018.1520214

Dhar, D., Jain, T., & Jayachandran, S. (2018b). Reshaping Adolescents' Gender Attitudes: Evidence from
a School-Based Experiment in India

DizonRoss, R. (2019). Parents' Beliefs About Their Children's Academic Ability: Implications for
Educational Investments. SSRN Electronic Journal. doi:10.2139/ssrn.3348071

Evidence for Policy Design (2015). "Back to Work in a New Economy: Background Paper on the Saudi
Labor Market," Harvard Kennedy School, Harvard University, April 2015.

Fernández, R. (2013). Cultural change as learning: The evolution of female labor force participation over a
century. American Economic Review, 103(1), 472-500.

Fernández, R., & Fogli, A. (2009). Culture: An Empirical Investigation of Beliefs, Work, and Fertility.
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics,1(1), 146-177. doi:10.1257/mac.1.1.146

Fernández, R., Fogli, A., & Olivetti, C. (2004). Mothers and sons: Preference formation and female labor
force dynamics. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(4), 1249-1299.

Hoxby, C., & Turner, S. (2015). What High-Achieving Low-Income Students Know About College.
American Economic Review,105(5), may 2015, 514-517. doi:10.3386/w20861

Jayachandran, S. (2015). The Roots of Gender Inequality in Developing Countries. Annual Review of
Economics, August, 7, 63-88.

Jayachandran, S. (2019). Social Norms as a Barrier to Women's Employment in Developing Countries.
Working Paper, Northwestern University.

Jensen, R. (2010). The (Perceived) Returns to Education and the Demand for Schooling. Quarterly Journal
of Economics,125(2), 515-548. doi:10.1162/qjec.2010.125.2.515

Miller, C., Peck, J. & Seflek, M. (2019). Integration Costs and Missing Women in Firms. National Bureau
of Economic Research, No. w26271.




                                                    26
Olivetti, C., Patacchini, E., & Zenou, Y. (2013). Mothers, friends and gender identity. Journal of the
European Economic Association, forthcoming.

Saudi Census. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.stats.gov.sa/en

Wiswall, M., & Zafar, B. (2015). How Do College Students Respond to Public Information about Earnings?
Journal of Human Capital,9(2), 117-169. doi:10.1086/681542

World         Development       Indicators.      (2019,      April       24).    Retrieved       from
https://datacatalog.worldbank.org/dataset/world-development-indicators




                                                   27
                 1         .8
     Cumulative Probability
   .2     .4     0.6




                                0          20          40           60           80        100
                                                   Chance Working at Age 25

                                                  Control             T1           T2




Figure 1: Cumulative distribution of self beliefs of working at age 25, by
                                                       treatment
                 1
                 .8
   Probability
   .4      .6    .2
                 0




                                0           20          40            60           80      100
                                            Chance of Working Full-Time Given Working

                                                   Control            T1              T2




  Figure 2: Cumulative distribution of self beliefs of working full-time
                                    (conditional on working) at age 25, by treatment




                                                                 28
                   80
  Self Belief of Working Full-Time
       50         60
                   40      70




                                     20      40               60               80   100
                                              Belief About Females' Work Beliefs

                                                    Control      T1      T2




Figure 3: Relationship between self employment beliefs and population
                                          employment beliefs, by treatment




                                                               29
                                                     Table 1: Sample Characteristics
                                                                All   Control      T1           T2       p-value      p-value
                                                                                                        Control-T1   Control-T2
                                                                  (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)          (6)
      Observations                                               971        334       317       320
      Age                                                       20.42      20.38     20.44     20.44      0.792        0.800
                                                                (1.77)     (1.77)    (1.75)    (1.78)
      Year at KSU                  First                         0.22       0.23      0.22      0.22      0.890        0.681
                                   Second                        0.32       0.31      0.32      0.33      0.948        0.608
                                   Third                         0.17       0.19      0.17      0.15      0.921        0.199
                                   Fourth                        0.18       0.17      0.18      0.20      0.984        0.347
                                   Fifth+                        0.11       0.10      0.11      0.11      0.817        0.873
      Graduation Year              2019 or Earlier               0.29       0.28      0.30      0.28      0.589        0.730
                                   2020                          0.32       0.34      0.29      0.33      0.136        0.678
                                   2021                          0.26       0.24      0.28      0.28      0.525        0.412
                                   2022 or Later                 0.13       0.14      0.14      0.11      0.606        0.231
      GPA                                                        4.51       4.49      4.50      4.55      0.593        0.082
                                                                (0.45)     (0.49)    (0.46)    (0.38)
      Father BA+                                               55.10%     55.09%    56.78%    53.44%      0.463        0.466
      Mother BA+                                               43.67%     45.21%    44.16%    41.56%      0.828        0.355
      Mother ever worked                                       15.65%     14.67%    18.61%    13.75%      0.078        0.253
      Any Older Sister                                         56.75%     56.59%    56.15%    57.50%      0.795        0.740
      Any Older Brother                                        56.13%     52.40%    60.57%    55.62%      0.052        0.825




30
      Parent Monthly Inc. (1000s)                               31.63      30.76     31.84     32.32      0.935        0.791
                                                               (56.90)    (57.41)   (53.60)   (59.63)
      Major:                     Health track                  10.10%      9.88%    11.67%     8.78%      0.259        0.338
                                 Science track                 17.53%     20.06%    16.09%    16.30%      0.412        0.483
                                 Humanities track              41.55%     39.82%    41.64%    43.26%      0.967        0.449
                                 Business track                30.82%     30.24%    30.60%    31.66%      0.916        0.693
      Con...dence in Ability (1-5)                               3.82       3.83      3.80      3.81      0.760        0.927
                                                                (0.82)     (0.81)    (0.83)    (0.82)
      A¢ nity for Risk (0-10)                                    5.23       5.30      5.23      5.15      0.993        0.527
                                                                (2.42)     (2.32)    (2.33)    (2.61)
      Religiosity (0-4)                                          2.81       2.87      2.73      2.83      0.088        0.677
                                                                (1.02)     (0.96)    (1.06)    (1.04)
      Career Values (0-10):        Money                         7.46       7.25      7.53      7.61      0.494        0.139
                                                                (2.19)     (2.28)    (2.10)    (2.19)
                                   Being a Leader                5.77       5.70      5.67      5.95      0.417        0.146
                                                                (2.70)     (2.69)    (2.74)    (2.68)
                                   Enjoying Your Work            8.83       8.71      8.69      9.09      0.107        0.002
                                                                (1.86)     (1.94)    (2.00)    (1.58)
                                   Helping Others                8.56       8.51      8.48      8.68      0.429        0.210
                                                                (2.11)     (2.28)    (2.16)    (1.88)
                                   Working With Others           7.37       7.35      7.38      7.37      0.894        0.998
                                                                (2.58)     (2.56)    (2.55)    (2.62)
     The table reports sample means. Standard deviations reported in parentheses.
                                   Table 2: Attitudes on Social Factors
                                                   All    Control     T1             T2              p-value
                                                                                             Control-T1 Control-T2
                                                      (1)        (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)          (6)

    Observations                                     971         334       317       320
    Family Approve of Working (%)                   81.25       79.52     81.25     83.04      0.998       0.133
                                                   (26.08)     (28.37)   (25.34)   (24.18)
    Importance of Parents'Approval (0-10)a           7.28        7.19      7.15      7.50      0.297       0.064
                                                    (2.50)      (2.58)    (2.59)    (2.32)
    Work Consistent w/ Local Norms (0-10)a           6.35        6.14      6.40      6.53      0.668       0.122
                                                    (2.50)      (2.67)    (2.35)    (2.45)
    Work Consistent w/ Relig Norms (0-10)            7.37        7.28      7.24      7.59      0.285       0.071
                                                    (2.66)      (2.82)    (2.61)    (2.51)
    Female Traditional Roles (0-3)b                  0.59        0.60      0.62      0.57      0.455       0.408
                                                    (0.74)      (0.75)    (0.79)    (0.69)
Means reported. Standard deviations reported in parentheses.
a 10
   means very important/consistent.
bStudents were presented with 3 statements of traditional gender roles, and asked to report the
number of statements they agreed with.




                                                       31
                       Table 3: Subjective Beliefs about the Population and Self
                                                 Resp.       All    Control        T1                 T2       pvaluea
                                                  Rate
                                                   (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)                (5)         (6)
      Panel A: Population Beliefs
      Belief about % Females Working               100     54.38      54.22      54.44               54.48      0.9833
                                                          (20.00)   (19.95)    (19.71)              (20.41)
      Belief % Fem Working FT j Work               92      47.59      48.04      47.38               47.33      0.8898
                                                          (20.05)   (19.44)    (20.11)              (20.67)
      Belief about % Females Working FTb           92      27.88      27.97      27.81               27.85      0.9933
                                                          (18.13)   (18.32)    (17.86)              (18.26)
      Belief about Females'Work Beliefs            100     53.21      51.65      52.90               55.15      0.1032
                                                          (21.24)   (20.71)    (21.35)              (21.60)
      Belief about Monthly Earnings                100      6027      6098        6031                5949      0.8261
                                                          (3093)     (3299)     (2941)              (3025)
      Belief of Females'Exp Marriage Age           100     24.37      24.49      24.44               24.19      0.1053
                                                           (1.93)    (1.93)      (2.02)              (1.81)
      Belief of Females'Exp Childbirth Age         100     26.23      26.24      26.38               26.07      0.2448
                                                           (2.30)    (2.26)      (2.51)              (2.12)
      % Underestimatec
      Females'Work Beliefs                         100      0.86       0.87       0.87               0.83       0.1962
      Female Salary                                100      0.95       0.95       0.95               0.95       0.9197
      Marriage Age Beliefs                         100      0.51       0.47       0.51               0.54       0.1763
      Exp Age at Childbirth                        100      0.76       0.74       0.75               0.79       0.3940
      Ha...z Bene...ts                             100      0.62       0.61       0.62               0.62       0.9733
      % Aware of Ha...z Program                    100      0.80       0.80       0.81               0.78       0.5175
      Panel B: Self Beliefs
      % Chance of Working at Age 25                100   69.40*** 67.74*** 70.38***                70.17***     0.2746
                                                          (23.40)   (22.92)    (22.77)              (24.48)
      % Chance of Working FT j Working              92   64.48*** 60.95*** 64.77***                67.89***     0.0027
                                                          (24.78)   (24.58)    (25.77)              (23.53)
      % Chance of Working Full-Time                 92   47.91*** 43.93*** 49.07***                50.94***     0.0049
                                                          (27.35)   (26.16)    (27.76)              (27.76)
      Expected Monthly Salary (Riyals)             97    8701*** 8518*** 9005***                   8590***      0.3313
                                                          (4431)     (4569)     (4620)              (4077)
      % Chance of being Married by 25              100     50.37      48.54      50.50               52.15      0.2919
                                                          (29.43)   (29.66)    (29.80)              (28.80)
      Expected Childbirth Age                       93   27.08*** 26.92*** 27.23***                27.10***     0.5601
                                                           (3.58)    (3.52)      (4.29)              (2.78)
      % Chance of Enrolling in Ha...z              100     39.68      36.99      41.95               40.24      0.0361
                                                          (25.02)   (25.32)    (24.48)              (25.06)
Standard deviation in parentheses.
Asterisks represent signi...cance levels for t-tests for equality of means between the population belief and the corresponding
self belief. ***, **, * denote pvalues of the tests are less than 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1, respectively.
a p-value of a F-test of the equality of the means/proportions for the Control, T1, and T2 groups (i.e., columns 3-5).
b The product of (Belief about % Females Working) x (Belief about % Females Working FT j Working).
c Proportion of respondents who under-estimate these values for the population.




                                                      32
                                Table 4: Covariates of Population Beliefs
                                                             Beliefs about females'beliefs of
                          % Work     % Work      % Work Working Marriage            Age at                Aware     Log Exp
                                    FTj Work        FT        at 25       Age     Childbirth              Ha...z    Earnings
                            (1)         (2)         (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)                  (7)        (8)

 Age                       -0.95*         -0.79       -0.96*        -0.42       -0.01          -0.05        0.01       -0.01
                           (0.53)        (0.69)       (0.57)       (0.59)      (0.06)         (0.07)       (0.01)     (0.02)
 Year in School              0.80         1.33*        1.02         -0.02       -0.04          -0.07       0.02*        0.03
                           (0.60)        (0.75)       (0.64)       (0.68)      (0.07)         (0.08)       (0.01)     (0.02)
 Science track              -0.23          2.36        1.60         2.58       0.53**        0.70**        0.08*       -0.04
                           (2.53)        (2.79)       (2.57)       (2.64)      (0.23)         (0.27)       (0.05)     (0.07)
 Humanities track           -3.71       -4.81**      -4.34**        1.75         0.11          0.26         -0.00   -0.25***
                           (2.26)        (2.44)       (2.20)       (2.40)      (0.21)         (0.24)       (0.05)     (0.06)
 Business track             -0.45         -0.90        -1.10        3.10       0.44**        0.60**         0.06     -0.13**
                           (2.26)        (2.45)       (2.23)       (2.42)      (0.21)         (0.25)       (0.05)     (0.06)
 GPA                         2.12          2.12        2.20         1.67        0.32*        0.37**       0.12***    0.11**
                           (1.56)        (1.62)       (1.47)       (1.93)      (0.17)         (0.19)       (0.03)     (0.06)
 Religiosity (0-4)           0.01         -0.61        -0.44        -0.33        0.04          0.08        -0.02*    0.04**
                           (0.58)        (0.66)       (0.60)       (0.65)      (0.06)         (0.07)       (0.01)     (0.02)
 Father BA+                  0.68         -0.32        0.42         -0.96       -0.02          0.08         -0.03      -0.04
                           (1.39)        (1.52)       (1.34)       (1.54)      (0.13)         (0.16)       (0.03)     (0.04)
 Mother BA+                 -1.62        -2.70*      -3.38**        -0.59      -0.27*        -0.38**        -0.05     -0.07*
                           (1.43)        (1.51)       (1.34)       (1.52)      (0.14)         (0.17)       (0.03)     (0.04)
 Log parent income           0.11         -0.54        -0.46        0.27        -0.04          0.09         0.01    0.12***
                           (0.74)        (0.79)       (0.69)       (0.84)      (0.08)         (0.10)       (0.02)     (0.03)
 Mom ever worked            -1.05          1.33        -0.43        -0.88        0.02          0.06         0.01       -0.01
                           (1.67)        (1.82)       (1.58)       (1.81)      (0.15)         (0.18)       (0.03)     (0.05)
 Any Older Sister            0.80          0.25        0.20         -0.37      0.30**        0.47***        -0.02      -0.01
                           (1.46)        (1.47)       (1.33)       (1.56)      (0.14)         (0.16)       (0.03)     (0.04)
 Any Older Brother           2.03         -0.66        0.39         -0.24       -0.00          -0.10        0.05        0.02
                           (1.43)        (1.44)       (1.31)       (1.51)      (0.13)         (0.17)       (0.03)     (0.04)
 Num Siblings            -1.69***         -0.71       -1.23*        -0.49       -0.04          -0.09        0.00       -0.01
                           (0.51)        (0.68)       (0.65)       (0.58)      (0.06)         (0.06)       (0.01)     (0.02)
 Constant                68.34***      63.88***     48.53***     53.67***     23.46***      24.50***        -0.08   7.13***
                          (15.25)       (17.94)      (15.32)      (16.56)      (1.61)         (1.86)       (0.34)     (0.53)

 Observations               971           892          892          971          970           968         971        971
 Mean of Dep Var           54.38         47.59        27.88        53.21        24.37         26.23        0.80       8.56
 R2                         0.03          0.03        0.03         0.01         0.03          0.04         0.05       0.09
OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.




                                                       33
                      Table 5: Covariates of Self Beliefs (for Control Group only)

                                               Prob          Prob Work    Prob         Prob        Age 1st   Log Exp
                                               Work          FTj Work    Work FT      Married       Child    Earnings
                                                (1)             (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)       (6)

 Age                                            -0.90           -0.51       -1.13         0.98       -0.09      -0.02
                                               (0.85)          (1.20)      (1.18)       (1.37)      (0.18)     (0.02)
 Year in School                                  1.24           0.78         1.99         0.16        0.25      0.01
                                               (1.04)          (1.46)      (1.44)       (1.54)      (0.26)     (0.03)
 Science track                                   4.95           1.31         5.17      12.25**        0.92    -0.23**
                                               (4.36)          (4.78)      (5.37)       (5.61)      (0.71)     (0.09)
 Humanities track                               -5.41           -5.41       -6.09         6.14        0.81   -0.47***
                                               (4.20)          (4.42)      (4.92)       (5.18)      (0.62)     (0.07)
 Business track                                  0.59           -7.27       -4.18         5.81        0.68   -0.28***
                                               (4.19)          (4.77)      (5.20)       (5.32)      (0.50)     (0.07)
 GPA                                          5.46**            3.91      6.60**          1.53     1.58***      -0.11
                                               (2.61)          (2.82)      (3.16)       (3.80)      (0.50)     (0.08)
 Religiosity (0-4)                               1.04           1.69         1.97         0.27       -0.10      0.03
                                               (1.23)          (1.44)      (1.53)       (1.55)      (0.25)     (0.04)
 Father BA+                                      1.03           -2.64       -2.54        -0.86        0.05      0.02
                                               (2.61)          (3.18)      (3.43)       (3.54)      (0.61)     (0.07)
 Mother BA+                                      1.69           2.31         2.98         4.06       -0.18      0.03
                                               (2.54)          (3.04)      (3.18)       (3.62)      (0.59)     (0.08)
 Log parent income                               1.92           0.70         1.04         1.75        0.00      0.01
                                               (1.34)          (1.61)      (1.63)       (1.75)      (0.24)     (0.05)
 Mother ever worked                             -2.50           -3.68       -5.00        -6.74        0.66      -0.03
                                               (2.96)          (3.53)      (3.59)       (4.64)      (0.46)     (0.08)
 Any Older Sister                               -0.74           -2.34       -1.91       -7.02*        0.10      -0.03
                                               (2.66)          (2.81)      (3.06)       (3.77)      (0.43)     (0.08)
 Any Older Brother                              -3.87           1.22        -0.11        -3.31       -0.27      0.01
                                               (2.65)          (2.76)      (2.98)       (3.71)      (0.52)     (0.07)
 Num Siblings                                   -0.59           0.23         0.05        -1.19        0.22      -0.01
                                               (1.03)          (1.51)      (1.60)       (1.52)      (0.21)     (0.03)
 Family Approve of Working (%)                0.20***         0.24***     0.22***         0.11       -0.00    0.00**
                                               (0.06)          (0.07)      (0.06)       (0.08)      (0.01)     (0.00)
 Work Consistent Local Norms (0-10)              0.09           1.02         0.89        -0.39       -0.09    -0.03**
                                               (0.66)          (0.72)      (0.75)       (0.97)      (0.18)     (0.02)
 Work Consistent Relig Norms (0-10)              0.49           0.21         0.44        -0.20     0.33***     0.03*
                                               (0.54)          (0.61)      (0.64)       (0.86)      (0.12)     (0.02)
 Female Traditional Roles (0-3)                 -0.46           -2.37       -1.85        4.57*        0.15      0.06
                                               (1.67)          (1.66)      (1.82)       (2.34)      (0.30)     (0.05)
 Imp. of Parents'Approval (0-10)                -0.07           -0.23       -0.25      2.02***    -0.25***      -0.01
                                               (0.47)          (0.49)      (0.55)       (0.65)      (0.09)     (0.01)
 Constant                                      22.72           21.46        -1.80       -14.21    19.59***    9.60***
                                              (24.51)         (30.75)     (31.38)      (35.27)      (4.61)     (0.68)

 Observations                                   334             307         307          334         300       324
 Mean of Dep Var                               67.74           60.95       43.93        48.54       26.92      8.91
 R2                                            0.20            0.20        0.19         0.12        0.15       0.15
OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.



                                                        34
                          Table 6: Self Beliefs and Population Beliefs
                     Prob            Prob            Prob    Prob Married                 Age 1st     Log Exp
                    Work      Work FTj Work Work FT               by 25                    Child      Earnings
                      (1)             (2)             (3)           (4)                     (5)         (6)
 Panel A (no controls)
 Population Belief 0.42***         0.62***         0.69***      -4.38***                  0.63***          0.00*
                    (0.06)          (0.07)          (0.07)        (0.92)                   (0.10)          (0.00)
 Constant          44.71***       31.23***        24.51***     155.86***                 10.52***         8.75***
                    (3.95)          (3.63)          (2.33)       (22.76)                   (2.66)          (0.10)
 Observations         334            307             307           334                      299             324
 Mean of Dep Var     67.74          60.95           43.93         48.54                    26.92            8.91
 R2                  0.14            0.24            0.24          0.08                     0.15            0.06

 Panel B (controls included)
 Population Belief 0.32***                    0.52***        0.59***      -4.27***        0.54***           0.00
                    (0.06)                     (0.07)         (0.08)        (0.90)         (0.08)          (0.00)
 Constant            8.92                      15.11           -1.38        66.34         11.09**         9.65***
                   (23.61)                    (25.40)        (27.31)       (40.78)         (4.32)          (0.67)

 Controlsa                   Y                   Y              Y             Y              Y              Y
 Observations               334                 307            307           334            299            324
 Mean of Dep Var           67.74               60.95          43.93         48.54          26.92           8.91
 R2                        0.27                 0.35           0.35          0.20           0.50           0.19
OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
a Controls for all covariates from Table 5.




                                                        35
                                                     Table 7: Treatment E¤ects on Beliefs
                        Prob                 Prob Work Prob Work        Prob      Prob             Exp Age       Prob Enroll        Log Exp
                       Work                      70 %    FTj Work Work FT Married                 Childbirth        Ha...z          Earnings
                         (1)                    (2)          (3)         (4)       (5)               (6)             (7)              (8)
      Panel A (no controls)
      Constant        67.74***                 51.50***         60.95***   43.93***   48.54***     26.92***        36.99***         8.91***
                       (1.25)                   (2.74)           (1.40)      (1.49)    (1.62)       (0.20)          (1.39)           (0.03)
      Treatment1        2.64                    9.39**           3.82**     5.15**      1.95         0.31           4.96**            0.05
                       (1.79)                   (3.88)           (2.06)      (2.20)    (2.33)       (0.32)          (1.95)           (0.05)
      Treatment2        2.43                    8.50**          6.94***     7.01***     3.61         0.18           3.25*             0.01
                       (1.86)                   (3.88)           (1.97)      (2.21)    (2.29)       (0.26)          (1.97)           (0.05)

      p-valuea            0.91                   0.82              0.13     0.42        0.48         0.65             0.38            0.41
      Observations         971                    971               892      892         971          902             971             945
      Mean of Dep var   69.40                    57.36             64.48    47.91       50.37        27.08           39.68            8.93
      R2                  0.00                    0.01              0.01     0.01        0.00         0.00            0.01            0.00
                         b




36
      Panel B (controls)
      Constant         60.90**                  76.66*           50.56**   45.78*       40.03      27.10***           2.97          7.88***
                       (24.75)                  (44.54)          (24.99)   (26.29)     (29.46)      (3.75)          (23.88)          (0.48)
      Treatment1        3.07*                   9.89***           4.20**   5.85***       2.82        0.24           5.38***           0.06
                        (1.71)                   (3.77)           (1.97)    (2.07)      (2.31)      (0.31)           (1.97)          (0.04)
      Treatment2          2.68                  8.77**           7.71***   7.73***      4.34*        0.07           4.11**            0.03
                        (1.78)                   (3.78)           (1.91)    (2.08)      (2.24)      (0.26)           (1.98)          (0.04)

      p-value                     0.83            0.76              0.07     0.38        0.51         0.56            0.52            0.54
      Observations                971             971               892      892         971          902             971             945
      Mean of Dep var            69.40           57.36             64.48    47.91       50.37        27.08           39.68            8.93
      R2                          0.15            0.12              0.14     0.19        0.08         0.09            0.06            0.17
     OLS estimates reported (each column in a panel is a separate regression). Standard errors reported in parentheses.
     ***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     a P-value is for equality of coe¢ cients on T1 and T2.
     b Panel B regressions include the controls: age, year in school, graduation year, GPA, parent education, mother ever worked,

     major, con...dence in ability, a¢ nity for risk, and religiosity.
                                                                    Table 8: Treatment E¤ects on Sector Choice
                          Education        Health      Commerce       Business Telecom Services Construction                      Mineral     Transport         Agri          Work       High %
                                                                         &          &                                              Res.           &               &          Public      Public
                                                                      Finance Info Tech                                                        Storage        Livestock      Sectorb     Sectorb
                               (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)                        (8)         (9)             (10)         (11)        (12)

      Constant             20.34***       14.37***      10.65***       27.63***      12.20***      3.73***         1.65***        3.22***       1.56***        1.20***      52.77***      0.28**
                            (1.24)         (1.19)        (0.79)         (1.42)        (0.99)        (0.41)          (0.26)         (0.34)        (0.21)         (0.23)       (1.28)       (0.02)
      Treatment1             1.24           2.19          -0.82          -0.01        -2.56*         -0.81           -0.26          -0.33         -0.08          -0.07        3.54*        0.04
                            (1.82)         (1.85)        (1.15)         (2.07)        (1.34)        (0.54)          (0.35)         (0.55)        (0.30)         (0.32)       (1.85)       (0.04)




37
      Treatment2            3.96**          -0.79         -0.56          0.24          -0.19       -1.24**          -0.58*          -0.45         -0.07          -0.27       5.13**       0.08**
                            (1.91)         (1.72)        (1.25)         (2.09)        (1.44)        (0.55)          (0.31)         (0.49)        (0.36)         (0.29)       (1.86)       (0.04)

      p-valuea                0.17           0.11          0.83          0.91           0.08          0.4            0.27           0.83          0.97           0.49         0.40         0.29
      Observations            966            956           955            967           961          958             966            964           964            962           965         965
      Mean Dep var           22.04          14.82          10.2          27.71          11.3         3.06            1.37           2.96          1.51           1.08         55.60        0.31
      R2                       0              0             0              0             0           0.01             0               0             0             0           0.01          0
     OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
     ***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     a P-value is for equality of coe¢ cients on T1 and T2.
     a Dep var in col (11) is the likelihood of working in the Public sector (on a 0-100 scale), conditional on working. In (12), the dep var is a dummy for this likelihood being 70 or higher.
                                                                      Table 9: Mechanisms
                                          Prob      Prob Work         Prob Work     Prob            Prob      Exp Age     Prob Enroll      Log Exp
                                          Work          70 %          FTj Work Work FT             Married   Childbirth      Ha...z        Earnings
                                           (1)         (2)               (3)         (4)             (5)        (6)           (7)            (8)
         PANEL A
         Constant                        77.50***    66.47***         73.01***       57.77***     46.30***   28.05***       41.27***       9.19***
                                          (2.27)      (4.60)           (2.35)         (2.65)       (1.56)     (0.30)         (3.14)         (0.21)
         Treatment1                        -0.66       4.68             -0.24          0.99          3.07      -0.22           2.51           0.16
                                          (3.01)      (6.35)           (3.40)         (3.76)       (2.30)     (0.41)         (4.31)         (0.23)
         Treatment2                        -0.93       4.46             0.89           0.01          2.43      -0.15           0.59           0.11
                                          (2.95)      (6.04)           (3.08)         (3.56)       (2.25)     (0.35)         (4.27)         (0.25)
         T1      Errora                    0.11        0.15             0.12           0.12        -2.38*      0.25           3.09           -0.11
                                          (0.09)      (0.18)           (0.10)         (0.10)       (1.26)     (0.18)         (4.83)         (0.24)
         T2      Error                     0.09        0.09             0.17*         0.20**        -0.17      0.20           3.26           -0.10
                                          (0.09)      (0.18)           (0.09)         (0.10)       (1.27)     (0.13)         (4.81)         (0.26)
         Error                           -0.34***    -0.53***         -0.41***       -0.47***     4.38***    -0.63***         -5.34          -0.30
                                          (0.07)      (0.13)           (0.07)         (0.07)       (0.92)     (0.10)         (3.50)         (0.21)

         p-valueb                           0.12       0.22              0.03          0.03          0.12      0.05           0.23           0.32
         Observations                     971.00      971.00           892.00         892.00        970.00    899.00         971.00         945.00
         Mean of Dep var                   69.40       57.36            64.48          47.91         50.37     27.08          39.68          8.93
         R2                                 0.07       0.05              0.09           0.10          0.06      0.09           0.01          0.02
         PANEL B




38
         Constant                        67.74***    51.50***         60.95***       43.93***     48.54***   26.92***       36.99***       8.91***
                                          (1.26)      (2.74)           (1.40)         (1.49)       (1.62)     (0.20)          (1.39)        (0.03)
         Treatment1                        2.36       9.00**            2.83           3.88          2.13       0.53         4.88**           0.08
                                          (1.91)      (4.17)           (2.25)         (2.37)       (2.48)     (0.37)          (2.09)        (0.05)
         Treatment2                        2.09       8.59**           5.24**         6.03**         2.87       0.22           1.00          -0.01
                                          (2.04)      (4.23)           (2.19)         (2.46)       (2.47)     (0.28)          (2.14)        (0.05)
         T1      Very Informativec         1.22        1.67             4.11           5.21         -0.75     -0.90*           0.33          -0.12
                                          (3.12)      (6.47)           (3.36)         (3.84)       (4.17)     (0.47)          (3.27)        (0.08)
         T2      Very Informative          1.25        -0.32           5.98**          3.43         2.73       -0.15         8.28***         0.07
                                          (3.05)      (6.17)           (2.83)         (3.49)       (3.70)     (0.36)          (3.08)        (0.07)

         p-valued                          0.29        0.44              0.01          0.05         0.36       0.04           0.03           0.33
         Observations                      971          971              892            892          971        902            971           945
         Mean of Dep var                  69.40        57.36            64.48          47.91        50.37      27.08          39.68          8.93
         R2                                0.00        0.01              0.02           0.02         0.00       0.01           0.01          0.01
     OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
     ***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     a Error is the (true value of the variable - belief about the variable). For example, in cols (1)-(4), it is (80 - belief regarding

     the proportion of females who expect to work). A positive value means underestimation of the population value. For Ha...z,
     Error is a dummy that equals 1 if the respondent was not aware of the program.
     b P-value for a joint test of (T1    Error) and (T2   Error) being positive.
     c   Dummy that equals 1 for those T1 and T2 respondents who say the presented information was very informative.
     d P-value for a joint test of (T1    Very Informative) and (T2     Very Informative) being positive.
                                      Table 10: Heterogeneity in Treatment E¤ects
                           Prob    Prob Work Prob Work          Prob      Prob    Exp Age                          Prob Enroll   Log Exp
                           Work        70 %      FTj Work Work FT Married Childbirth                                  Ha...z     Earnings
                            (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)                              (7)         (8)
      Panel A: Heterogeneity by School Year
      Constant           67.64***   48.89***     61.04***     43.83*** 46.57*** 26.81***                            35.93***     8.89***
                          (1.64)     (3.74)       (1.79)       (1.89)    (2.28)    (0.309)                           (1.87)       (0.046)
      Treatment1          -0.112      5.50         2.51          2.96    -0.116     0.432                            4.44*         0.104
                          (2.48)     (5.35)       (2.63)       (2.85)    (3.22)    (0.477)                           (2.55)      (0.0699)
      Treatment2          -0.185      6.86        5.29**         4.10    6.63**     0.186                             2.69        0.0582
                          (2.51)     (5.31)       (2.59)       (2.87)    (3.18)    (0.383)                           (2.62)      (0.0663)
      T1 Seniora           5.98*      8.45         3.12          5.16      4.49     -0.253                            1.15         -0.113
                          (3.57)     (7.72)       (4.22)       (4.49)    (4.64)    (0.635)                           (3.94)      (0.0918)
      T2 Senior             5.74      3.67         3.98          7.03     -6.59    -0.0137                            1.26         -0.100
                          (3.72)     (7.75)       (3.97)       (4.47)    (4.57)    (0.512)                           (3.97)      (0.0901)
      Senior               0.200      5.66        -0.210        0.235      4.29     0.230                             2.29        0.0417
                          (2.54)     (5.49)       (2.88)       (3.07)    (3.23)    (0.401)                           (2.79)      (0.0621)

      p-valueb                      0.031         0.183           0.158        0.057         0.396        0.394      0.363         0.086
      Observations                   971           971             892           892          971          902         971          945
      Mean of Dep var               69.40         57.36           64.48        47.91         50.37        27.08       39.68        8.93
      R2                           0.0136        0.0181          0.0162        0.0206       0.0121       0.0019      0.0107       0.0039




39
      Panel B: Heterogeneity by Mother'  s Work History
      Constant           68.00***  51.58***     61.30***                      44.41***    49.24***      26.83***    36.04***     8.92***
                           (1.36)    (2.97)      (1.54)                        (1.65)      (1.78)        (0.23)       (1.51)      (0.03)
      Treatment1             2.33    7.72*         3.10                        4.47*        0.40          0.52       6.56***       0.05
                           (1.99)    (4.27)      (2.29)                        (2.47)      (2.57)        (0.37)       (2.16)      (0.05)
      Treatment2             0.97     6.39       4.91**                        4.57*        2.91          0.22        3.72*        -0.01
                           (2.04)    (4.21)      (2.16)                        (2.41)      (2.51)        (0.29)       (2.12)      (0.05)
      T1 Mother worked       2.06     9.05         4.46                         4.43        9.31         -1.23*      -9.95**       0.01
                           (4.63)   (10.33)      (5.20)                        (5.41)      (6.11)        (0.68)       (5.05)      (0.12)
      T2 Mother worked 10.54**       15.31      15.36***                      18.35***      4.76          -0.25        -3.00       0.16
                           (4.70)   (10.69)      (4.74)                        (5.59)      (5.91)        (0.58)       (5.73)      (0.14)
      Mother ever worked    -1.77     -0.56       -2.41                         -3.35       -4.73         0.59        6.50*        -0.05
                           (3.55)    (7.75)      (3.72)                        (3.81)      (4.29)        (0.47)       (3.75)      (0.09)

      p-valuec                     0.05           0.53           0.02           0.01        0.44          0.11         0.21        0.22
      Observations                  971            971            892            892         971           902         971         945
      Mean of Dep var              69.40          57.36          64.48          47.91       50.37         27.08       39.68        8.93
      R2                            0.01           0.01           0.02           0.02        0.00          0.00        0.01        0.00
     OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
     ***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     a Dummy that equals 1 if student is in the third year or higher.
     b P-value for joint signi...cance of the estimates (T1 senior) and (T2 senior).
     c P-value is for equality between T1 mother worked and T2 mother worked.
                                            Table 11: Treatment E¤ects on Beliefs: Share with parents interaction
                                          Prob     Prob Work Prob Work         Prob      Prob Work Married Age 1st                Enroll    Log Exp
                                          Work         70 %     FTj Work Work FT FT 70%                 at 25     Child           Ha...z    Earnings
                                           (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)       (7)             (8)        (9)

      Constant                          67.74***       51.50***        60.95***      43.93***   19.22***   48.54***   26.92***   36.99***   8.91***
                                          (1.25)        (2.74)          (1.40)        (1.49)     (2.25)     (1.62)     (0.20)     (1.39)     (0.03)
      Treatment1                           2.64         9.39**           3.82*        5.15**     7.06**      1.95        0.31     4.96**      0.05
                                          (1.79)        (3.88)          (2.06)        (2.21)     (3.42)     (2.33)     (0.32)     (1.95)     (0.05)
      Treatment2                           -0.96         1.99            4.08*         3.14       6.59       1.38        0.18      0.02       -0.01
                                          (2.30)        (4.69)          (2.45)        (2.70)     (4.18)     (2.72)     (0.30)     (2.32)     (0.06)




40
      T2     Share with parentsa         7.34***       14.08***         6.09**        8.25**      5.58       4.82       -0.01     6.97**      0.05
                                          (2.69)        (5.42)          (2.71)        (3.21)     (5.31)     (3.22)     (0.32)     (2.79)     (0.07)

      p-valueb                             0.15           0.48            0.51        0.43        0.81       0.47       0.47       0.55       0.98
      Observations                         971            971             892          892        892        971        902        971        945
      Mean of Dep var                     69.40          57.36           64.48        47.91      24.55      50.37      27.08      39.68       8.93
      R2                                  0.01           0.01            0.02         0.02       0.01       0.00       0.00       0.01        0.00
     OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
     ***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     a Dummy that equals 1 for those respondents who report they want to share their responses with their parents.
     b P-value is for equality of coe¢ cients on T1 and (T2 x share with parents).
                  Table 12: Follow-up Survey Statistics

Number of Observations                                              150

Panel A
Would share beliefs with parents                                    0.79

Percent chance of working at age 25                                 80.71
Exp age at marriage                                                 25.80
Exp age at ...rst childbirth                                        28.14

Information is surprising                                           0.38
Information a¤ects future plans                                     0.32

Impact of info on parents:   More likely to want me to work         0.43
                             Less likely to want me to work         0.01
                             No impact                              0.44

Reasons to share Info:       Inform how Saudi society is changing   0.65
                             Let me work and delay marriage         0.07
                             Inform them others are like me         0.29

Reasons to not share Info:   Upset/disappoint them                  0.07

Reactions to sharing Info:   Make parents happy                     0.39
                             Make parents disappointed              0.05
                             No change                              0.34
                             Not sure                               0.23
Panel B: Responses Related to Father
How often do you talk about future plans (1-7)                      4.26
Expects me to work                                                  0.97
Share info                                                          0.56
Reasons to/not share plans: Make proud                              0.71
                             Don' t talk much                       0.25
                             Does not expect me to work             0.05
                             Expects me to work                     0.01
                             Does not expect me to marry early      0.03
                             Does expect me to marry early          0.03
Panel C: Responses Related to Mother
How often do you talk about future plans (1-7)                      5.20
Expects me to work                                                  0.97
Share info                                                          0.66
Reasons to/not share plans: Make proud                              0.79
                             Don' t talk much                       0.25
                             Does not expect me to work             0.01
                             Expects me to work                     0.01
                             Does not expect me to marry early      0.01
                             Does expect me to marry early          0.05




                                      41
        Table 13: Beliefs about Parents by Frequency of Talking About Future Plans
                                               Frequently Talk to:a Infrequently Talk to:b
                                               Father    Mother      Father     Mother
                                                 (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)
   Expects Me to Work:
                                      Father    0.99       0.98      0.93**       0.96
                                     Mother     0.96       0.96       0.98        0.98

   Share Info With:
                                           Father        0.65      0.64       0.35***      0.40***
                                           Mother        0.64      0.75         0.70       0.48***

   Share Beliefs With Parents                            0.86      0.84       0.65***      0.69**

   Reasons to Share Info:
        Inform how Saudi society is changing             0.67      0.74         0.61       0.48***
             Let me work and delay marriage              0.08      0.07         0.04         0.06
              Inform them others are like me             0.31      0.32         0.24         0.21

   Reasons to Not Share Info:
                   Upset/Disappoint them                 0.05      0.05        0.13*        0.12*

   Reasons to/not Share Plans:
                         Make proud: Father              0.86      0.76       0.39***       0.60**
                         Make proud: Mother              0.90      0.88       0.52***      0.58***
                    Do not talk much: Father             0.16      0.24       0.46***        0.29
                   Do not talk much: Mother              0.17      0.23       0.43***        0.31
          Does not expect me to work: Father             0.01      0.06       0.13***        0.02
         Does not expect me to work: Mother              0.00      0.01       0.04**         0.02
              Does expect me to work: Father             0.00      0.01        0.04**        0.02
             Does expect me to work: Mother              0.00      0.00         0.02         0.02
   Does not expect me to marry early: Father             0.01      0.03        0.07**        0.02
   Does not expect me to marry early: Mother             0.01      0.01         0.02         0.02
       Does expect me to marry early: Father             0.01      0.02       0.09**         0.06
      Does expect me to marry early: Mother              0.05      0.03         0.07        0.10*
We conduct pairwise tests for the equality of means in column (3) versus column (1). Signi...cance
denoted by asterisks on the mean in column 3.
We conduct pairwise tests for the equality of means in column (4) versus column (2). Signi...cance
denoted by asterisks on the mean in col 4.
***, **, * denote di¤erences are signi...cant at the 1, 5, and 10% levels, respectively.
a Frequently talk means respondent talks at least the median response frequency with the given parent.
b Infrequently talk means respondent talks less than the median response frequency with the given parent.

{Frequently talk to both} [ {Infrequently talk to both} is not exhaustive since it omits those who
frequently talk to exactly one parent.




                                                    42
                              Table A1: Treatment E¤ects on Beliefs (Consistent Sample Across Outcomes)
                                Prob     Prob Work Prob Work         Prob       Prob    Exp Age Prob Enroll              Log Exp
                                Work         70 %    FTj Work Work FT Married Childbirth              Ha...z             Earnings
                                 (1)        (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)          (7)                (8)

      Constant                 75.07***          53.60            -14.95    -15.69     -27.06       32.50***    -11.27   7.59***
                                (22.60)         (39.57)          (22.77)   (24.03)    (24.98)        (3.49)    (23.61)    (0.58)
      Treatment1                 3.31*          9.86**            3.92*     5.53**      2.61          0.07     6.14***     0.03
                                 (1.88)          (4.17)           (2.10)    (2.18)     (2.54)        (0.29)     (2.19)    (0.05)
      Treatment2                  3.15          10.27**          7.99***   7.74***     4.36*          -0.01     4.92**     0.04
                                 (1.96)          (4.17)           (2.02)    (2.19)     (2.49)        (0.27)     (2.23)    (0.05)




43
      p-valuea                   0.93            0.92              0.04     0.31       0.48          0.76        0.57      0.91
      Controlsb                    Y               Y                 Y        Y          Y             Y          Y         Y
      Observations                802             802               802      802        802           802        802       802
      Mean of Dep var            69.15           56.48             64.61    47.95      50.82         26.98      39.27      8.93
      R2                          0.18            0.15              0.15     0.20       0.08          0.13       0.06      0.19
     OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
     ***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
     a P-value is for equality of coe¢ cients on T1 and T2.
     b Controls: age, year in school, graduation year, GPA, parent education, mother ever worked,

     major, con...dence in ability, a¢ nity for risk, and religiosity.
                                      Table A2: Item Non-Response by Treatment
                             Prob     Prob Work      Prob     Prob      Exp Age               Prob Enroll      Log Exp
                             Work      FTj Work Work FT Married Childbirth                       Ha...z        Earnings
                              (1)         (2)         (3)      (4)        (5)                     (6)            (7)

      Constant              100.00     91.92***       91.92***      100.00      89.82***         100.00        97.01***
                              (.)       (1.49)         (1.49)         (.)        (1.66)            (.)          (0.93)
      Treatment1             0.00        0.51            0.51        0.00        4.50**           0.00           0.79
                              (.)       (2.11)         (2.11)         (.)        (2.11)            (.)          (1.25)




44
      Treatment2             0.00        -0.67          -0.67        0.00        4.87**           0.00           0.18
                              (.)       (2.18)         (2.18)         (.)        (2.08)            (.)          (1.31)

      Observations           971          971            971         971           971            971            971
      Mean of Dep var       100.00       91.86          91.86       100.00        92.89          100.00         97.32
      R2                       .          0.00           0.00          .           0.01             .            0.00
     OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
     ***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.
         Table A3: Correlates of Informativeness, and Sharing with Parents
 Dependent Var:                              Info Very      Share with Parentsb
                                           Informativea Multivariate Univariate
                                                  (1)           (2)         (3)
 Treatment1                                      -0.04           -            -
                                                (0.03)
 Age                                          0.04***          0.16         1.22
                                                (0.01)       (1.99)       (1.60)
 Year in School                               -0.06***         3.01         2.77
                                                (0.02)       (2.56)       (1.89)
 Science track                                 -0.14**         0.99        -9.30
                                                (0.07)      (11.72)       (7.43)
 Humanities track                                0.01          8.04         2.77
                                                (0.07)      (10.67)       (5.65)
 Business track                                  -0.03       14.31          6.20
                                                (0.07)      (10.77)       (6.02)
 GPA                                             -0.01         5.19        -1.13
                                                (0.04)       (9.34)       (2.13)
 Religiosity (0-4)                               -0.00         1.17         3.11
                                                (0.02)       (2.84)       (2.14)
 Father BA+                                      0.02         -4.34        -1.37
                                                (0.04)       (6.39)       (5.61)
 Mother BA+                                      0.04          6.18         3.20
                                                (0.04)       (6.64)       (5.67)
 Log parent income                               -0.01        -1.26        -0.22
                                                (0.02)       (3.39)       (2.81)
 Mother ever worked                              0.01         -1.13         1.71
                                                (0.05)       (8.15)       (8.13)
 Any Older Sister                               -0.08*        -4.95        -2.69
                                                (0.04)       (6.60)       (5.66)
 Any Older Brother                               0.03          1.84         3.39
                                                (0.04)       (6.58)       (5.62)
 Num Siblings                                    0.00          1.14         1.54
                                                (0.02)       (2.36)       (1.75)
 Family Approve of Working (%)                   0.00          0.01         0.11
                                                (0.00)       (0.14)       (0.12)
 Work Consist Local Norms (0-10)                0.02*          1.48         1.58
                                                (0.01)       (1.45)       (1.12)
 Work Consist Relig Norms (0-10)                 0.00         -0.08         0.45
                                                (0.01)       (1.41)       (1.11)
 Female Traditional Roles (0-3)                  0.01         -5.73        -2.96
                                                (0.03)       (4.66)       (4.08)
 Importance of Parents'Approval (0-10)           0.01        2.19*       2.13**
                                                (0.01)       (1.20)       (0.87)
 Constant                                    38.69***        -12.95
                                                (5.80)      (65.94)
 Observations                                     637          320          320
 Mean of Dep Var                                 0.25        46.25         46.25
 R2                                              0.07          0.06           ­
OLS estimates reported. Standard errors reported in parentheses.
***, **, * denote estimates are statistically signi...cant at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels,
respectively.
a Dep var is a dummy that equals 1 if respondent (in T1 or T2 group)

reports the provided information is very informative.
b Dep variable is a dummy that equals 1 if T2 respondent reports she wants to

share her responses with their parents. In col45 (1), each cell is the estimate from a
separate univariate regression. Both cols (1) and (2) use only the T2 subsample.
