                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 A CENTURY OF THE AMERICAN WOMAN VOTER:
              SEX GAPS IN POLITICAL PARTICIPATION, PREFERENCES,
             AND PARTISANSHIP SINCE WOMEN'S ENFRANCHISEMENT

                                     Elizabeth U. Cascio
                                      Na'ama Shenhav

                                     Working Paper 26709
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26709


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We thank Andrew Ahn and Catalina Garcia Valenzuela for outstanding research assistance and
Dartmouth College for funding support. We also thank Christina Wolbrecht, Ebonya Washington,
Dawn Teele, Dean Lacy, and Lisa Baldez for helpful comments. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Elizabeth U. Cascio and Na'ama Shenhav. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
A Century of the American Woman Voter: Sex Gaps in Political Participation, Preferences,
and Partisanship Since Women's Enfranchisement
Elizabeth U. Cascio and Na'ama Shenhav
NBER Working Paper No. 26709
January 2020
JEL No. I0,J16,K16,N32

                                         ABSTRACT

This year marks the centennial of the Nineteenth Amendment, which provided American women
a constitutional guarantee to the franchise. We assemble data from a variety of sources to
document and explore trends in women's political participation, issue preferences, and
partisanship since that time. We show that in the early years following enfranchisement, women
voted at much lower rates than men and held distinct issue preferences, despite splitting their
votes across parties similarly to men. But by the dawn of the 21st century, women not only voted
more than men, but also voted differently, systematically favoring the Democratic party. We find
that the rise in women's relative voter turnout largely reflects cross-cohort changes in voter
participation and coincided with increasing rates of high school completion. By contrast,
women's relative shift toward the Democratic party permeates all cohorts and appears to owe
more to changes in how parties have defined themselves than to changes in issue preferences.
The findings suggest that a confluence of factors have led to the unique place women currently
occupy in the American electorate, one where they are arguably capable of exerting more
political influence than ever before.


Elizabeth U. Cascio
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
elizabeth.u.cascio@dartmouth.edu

Na'ama Shenhav
Department of Economics
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
naama.shenhav@dartmouth.edu
       The November 2020 presidential election will be the twenty-sixth in which American

women will have been eligible to vote. The Nineteenth Amendment to the US Constitution,

adopted a century ago this August, entitled women to cast ballots ­ for many in their first

election ­ on November 2, 1920. Before 1920, 15 states had granted women equal voting rights,

and an additional 24 states had granted partial voting rights (Keyssar 2009; Lott and Kenny

1999). The scope of partial voting rights varied widely across states and municipalities, covering

local school board elections to the national presidential election. But a Constitutional guarantee

that sex could not be used as a basis of exclusion from the vote represented the crowning

achievement ­ the "sacred right to the elective franchise," as laid out in the Declaration of

Sentiments at the celebrated Seneca Falls convention of 1848.

       But paradoxically, there was a great deal of speculation back in 1920 that women might

not have much political influence even with the right to vote. As the story went, women would

be inclined to "duplicate" the male vote, if they turned out at the polls at all. Some argued that

any other outcome would be too disruptive to household harmony, and also disrespectful of the

"separate spheres" that men and women had historically occupied. As late as 1940, pollster

George Gallup mused, "How will [women] vote on election day? Just exactly as they were told

the night before" (as quoted in Berinsky 2006, 506). Others believed that other aspects of a

woman's identity ­ her social class, race, or immigrant status ­ would be more critical than her

sex to her political choices. Because women were similarly distributed across these other

groups, so too would be women's votes--and public policy would be little affected.

       A growing literature looking at a number of outcomes challenges this narrative. A series

of studies using area-by-time variation has examined the impacts of women's enfranchisement
on levels of state and municipal spending (Lott and Kenny 1999; Miller 2008), the distribution of

spending across priorities, like public health and education (Miller 2008; Moehling and

Thomasson 2012; Carruthers and Wanamaker 2015; Kose, Kuka, and Shenhav 2018), electoral

outcomes (Morgan-Collins 2019), and downstream impacts on human capital in the short and

long-term (Miller 2008; Kose, Kuka, and Shenhav 2018). The findings are consistent with

survey, lab, and field evidence from a variety of settings and time periods suggesting women

place higher priorities on child welfare and redistribution (for reviews, see Duflo 2012; Croson

and Gneezy 2009). Thus, the evidence suggests that the women's vote translated into real

impacts on policy and social welfare, even at a time ­ as we will show ­ that women participated

less in the electoral process relative to the present day.

        Our goal in this paper is not to revisit the immediate impacts of the Nineteenth

Amendment. Rather, we aim to describe how women as political actors have evolved over the

past century, a period when women have had de jure ­ even if not always de facto ­ full voting

rights. We will focus on three sets of outcomes: political participation is involvement in the

political process, issue preferences are preferences over policy outcomes, and partisanship is

identification with specific political parties and candidates. We posit that women's potential for

political influence is an increasing function of their participation and how much both their issue

preferences and partisanship differ from men's. When relatively high political participation

intersects with relatively different issue preferences, and there is sufficient party polarization

along divisive preferences, the so-called "women's vote" may become truly pivotal to the

candidates elected and the policies enacted.

        To describe the evolution of the female voter in the United States, we bring together data

from a variety of data sources. For the elections immediately after 1920, we do not have survey
data on voting patterns by sex, but we can draw inferences about voting behavior of women from

overall changes in voting turnout. We also compile a range of survey data from Gallup polls and

other sources on patterns of men and women voting back to 1940. Wolbrecht and Corder

(forthcoming) contemporaneously use a similar scope of data to analyze time trends in the sex

gap across a wide breadth of voting-related outcomes. To the extent that our analyses overlap,

we find consistent results. However, the scale and detail of our data allow us to explore the

drivers of change in data-intensive, novel ways. Paralleling analyses of the growth in women's

labor force participation over time (for example, in Goldin 1990; Bailey 2006), we bring a new

focus on the contributions of cohort- and time-specific factors in shaping voting outcomes.

       We arrive at two key sets of findings. First, we show that the female-male sex gap in

voter turnout grew substantially over the last 80 years, from a deficit of almost 10 percentage

points in 1940 to a surplus of over 4 percentage points in the 2016 election. This shift has been

driven primarily by an increase in women's relative turnout across cohorts, which we find is

associated with the accompanying rise in education, particularly high school graduation. Second,

we show that the sex gap in identification with the Democratic party rose from roughly parity in

the late 1940s to almost 12 percentage points in 2017. This shift in partisanship permeated all

cohorts but did not coincide with a significant shift in policy preferences. We present survey

evidence consistent with observations by political scientists (see, for example, Layman and

Carsey 2002; Gillion, Ladd, and Meredith 2018) that party polarization across recent decades has

contributed to a widening gulf in party affiliation by sex.

       While we will not attempt to provide new estimates of the real policy and economic

impacts of the female voter, we provide new descriptive evidence on when and how women's

potential for political influence changed since the Nineteenth Amendment. However, we urge
caution in making strong inferences from these descriptive patterns. After all, despite the higher

voter turnout rates and greater Democratic partisanship of women as a whole, Republican

Donald J. Trump won the 2016 Presidential election ­ and women are believed to have

contributed. Post-election analyses have emphasized the role of divisions within women,

particularly by race, which serves as a reminder that the notion of a "woman voter" is a vast

simplification, as is the notion of a "man voter." 1 Exploring long-term trends in women's relative

political behavior in subpopulations defined by race, education, marital status, geography, and so

on is beyond the scope of the present paper but an important area for future research.



Political Participation

        We begin with a new investigation of women's relative political participation since 1920.

We focus on voter turnout in presidential elections, the measure of turnout that can be most

consistently observed over the longest time horizon. Presidential elections also have the highest

voter turnout, allowing us to observe the frontier of voter turnout for men and women alike. We

consider the extent to which other participation metrics for women moved along with their

turnout in a supplemental analysis to follow.



National Trends

        There is not any direct data on voter participation patterns of men and women in the 1920

election, or for the several elections that follow. Thus, researchers have sought to infer the voter

participation rates of women based on overall voter turnout.



1
  See Cassese and Barnes (2018) for analysis of the 2016 election, and broader discussions in Wolbrecht and Corder
(forthcoming.)
        The bold line in Figure 1 plots national voter turnout in presidential elections based on

aggregation of state-level vote counts. We divide the number of votes cast in a presidential

election nationally by an estimate of the total voting-age population in states with election

returns. 2 We thus allow the denominator to include both men and women, even during the pre-

1920 period when women were generally not eligible to vote in presidential elections. We also

include non-citizens in the denominator, since a citizenship question was not consistently asked

in the Census from 1900 forward.

        Some states granted women the right to vote in presidential elections prior to 1920 ­ six

states in 1912, and 12 states in 1916. 3 However, these states were concentrated in the sparsely

populated West and therefore comprised a small share of the total population. If women voted at

the same rate as men, then women's suffrage should have led to a near-doubling of voter turnout.

Measured against this standard, women entered the electorate slowly. Between 1916 and 1920,

voter turnout increased by only 35 percent, from 32.7 to 44.3 percent. However, over the next 20

years, voter turnout continued to increase basically unabated, reaching 59.8 percent in 1940.

        The descriptive pattern from overall voting totals is consistent with other indirect

methods. Using variation in the timing of state suffrage initiatives in addition to ratification of

the Nineteenth Amendment, Kose, Kuka, and Shenhav (2019) find that women's suffrage

increased voter turnout in the short term by 56 percent. Taking a Bayesian approach to data from




2
  The Twenty-Sixth Amendment extended the franchise to 18-20-year-olds in 1971. Thus, the voting-age population
consists of persons aged 21 and older in elections through 1968, and persons aged 18 and older in 1972 and later.
3
  These included Washington, California, Idaho, Utah, Wyoming, and Colorado, each of which passed full suffrage
by 1912; and Oregon, Arizona, Montana, Nevada, Kansas, and Illinois, which either passed full or presidential
suffrage by 1916. See Kleppner (1982) and Corder and Wolbrecht (2016) for discussions of turnout in these early
elections. An additional 16, including North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas,
Minnesota, Iowa, Wisconsin, Michigan, Indiana, Ohio, Tennessee, New York, Rhode Island, and Maine, passed
presidential or full suffrage prior to the adoption of the Nineteenth Amendment. See Teele (2018) for a mapping of
the timing of these and other voting rights (e.g. primary voting) that were passed during this period.
ten states, Corder and Wolbrecht (2016) also find substantial, and generally shrinking, sex gaps

in turnout across the five presidential elections from 1920 to 1936.

        To describe the evolution of the female US voter in more detail, we turn to survey data.

We provide an overview of the data here, with further details in the Data Appendix. Scholars of

American politics interested in long-term trends in political behavior typically rely on data from

the American National Election Studies (ANES) or the General Social Survey (GSS). These

surveys are detailed ­ and we will also use them ­ but have small sample sizes of around several

thousand per election and start later than ideal for our purposes (1952 and 1972, respectively).

To extend backward in time and obtain more data for the 1950s and 1960s, we turn to historical

polling data collected by the Gallup Organization's American Institute of Public Opinion

(AIPO). These data have been used on a limited but growing basis by economists (for example,

Fogli and Veldcamp 2011; Kuziemko and Washington 2018; Farber et al. 2018). The standard

question on voter participation first prompts respondents about whether they are certain they

voted (few say no), then asks about candidate chosen. The Gallup data begin in 1936, but we

start our series in 1940, the first year in which respondents are asked about their education.

        With the addition of data from the November Vote Supplement of the Current Population

Survey, starting in 1972, we have microdata on voting in presidential elections that span nearly

80 years: 1940 to 2016. 4 Focusing on Gallup polls conducted within two years after a given

presidential election, we obtain sample sizes at least an order of magnitude higher than those

available in the American National Election Studies and the General Social Survey. The




4
  As we discuss above, contemporaneous work by Wolbrecht and Corder (forthcoming) assembles a similar dataset
to ours; however, while we pool together information from overlapping data sources to gain additional precision,
Wolbrecht and Corder (forthcoming) analyze each data source separately.
November Current Population Survey similarly offers large samples that allow us to explore the

drivers of trends in the sex gap in data-intensive ways.

         Figure 1 includes national trends in voter turnout based on these four survey sources:

Gallup polls, the American National Election Studies, the General Social Survey, and the

November Current Population Survey. We use weights provided in the last three surveys to

generate nationally representative statistics. For the Gallup data, we create weights from Census

microdata to adjust Gallup demographics to match the distribution of the population across cells

defined by year, region, education, sex, and birth cohort. Weighting of the Gallup data is

especially important since the sampling approach used by Gallup into the 1950s had a goal of

representing the "engaged public," rather than the population at large (Berinsky 2006). Thus, the

unweighted Gallup data in early years under-represent those with less education, the South, the

non-white population, and women. 5

         Regardless of the survey source or year, self-reported voter turnout is consistently higher

than the administrative measure ­ a well-known feature of self-reports of voting (for example,

see Bernstein, Chadha, and Montjoy 2001 and Ansolabehere and Hersh 2012). The

administrative and survey series nevertheless move together, suggesting that the survey data

capture important margins of change in voter turnout from election to election. There are also

less pronounced but still noticeable differences in levels of voter turnout across surveys.

American National Election Studies and Gallup data consistently produce higher turnout

estimates than the General Social Survey and November Current Population Survey. However,

focusing on the sex gap in turnout ­ our measure of interest ­ will eliminate survey effects that




5
 Application of the weights tends to bring these characteristics in line with national averages, as shown in Appendix
Figure 1. See Data Appendix for a complete description of the weights and their creation.
are the same across sex. A recent validation study (Ansolabehere and Hersh 2012) suggests that

women have similar levels of misreporting as men in the American National Election Studies.



The Sex Gap in Participation

       The solid line in Figure 2 plots the difference between female and male turnout

combining data from our four survey sources. Overall, the figure shows a stunning story of

change. During the 1940s and early 1950s, the sex gap in turnout was roughly constant at about

10 percentage points, while aggregate voter turnout varied from election to election. In other

words, women were consistently about 10 percentage points less likely to vote than men. The

gap dramatically narrowed thereafter, however, reaching about a 3 percentage point deficit for

women in 1964. Though the gap re-expanded somewhat in 1968, women's voter turnout rates

fell relatively less over the 1970s than men's, enough that women's and men's turnout basically

reached parity by 1980. Women's voter turnout continued to gain in relative terms after 1980.

In the last three presidential elections, women have been about 4 to 5 percentage points more

likely to vote than men. Because women make up more than half of the voting-age population,

they became the majority of voters earlier ­ 1960, according to our data.

       American women thus appear to have become increasingly comfortable exercising their

right to vote. Is this pattern of convergence and eventual female dominance in political

participation apparent in other metrics? Table 1 summarizes a series of political interest and

mobilization variables available both in the 1950s and more recently in the American National

Election Studies. The sex gap in some ­ but not all ­ of these measures shows a similar pattern

as for voter turnout. For example, women on average used to care less about which party won an

election and were less interested in elections; they also used to be less likely to try to influence
someone's vote or to display campaign paraphernalia. Sex differences in these attitudes and

behaviors are now largely gone. However, sex gaps in rarer measures ­ being "very interested"

in elections, making political donations, attending campaign rallies, and working for campaigns

­ have remained largely unchanged over time.

         These findings thus seem to suggest a relatively dramatic narrowing of the sex gap in

mass, but not extreme, political participation. At the same time, however, women's participation

as elected officials ­ another extreme participation metric ­ has increased over time, though the

sex gap still strongly favors men. 6 For example, nearly a quarter of current members of the

Senate and House of Representatives are women, compared to 10 percent following the 1992

election ("the year of the woman") and less than 3 percent in the early 1950s. These statistics

closely track the increasing propensity of women to run in a Congressional primary (Lawless and

Pearson 2001).



Sex, Race, and Persistence of Limits on the Franchise after 1920

         Not all women actually gained the franchise in 1920: in particular, black women in the

South were largely excluded. Though black men were granted the right to vote after the Civil

War via ratification of the Fifteenth Amendment, southern states subsequently designed a series

of electoral devices ­ poll taxes and literacy tests at voter registration in particular ­ to

disenfranchise them (Keyssar 2009; Valelly 2004). Historical evidence suggests that these

devices similarly limited southern black women's entrée into voting booths in 1920; for example,

voter turnout estimated as a ratio of votes cast to voting age population shows a weak response to


6
 The persistence in this gap could reflect gender differences in preferences or in socialization around political
careers. A recent survey of college students suggests that women are less likely to have political ambitions but are
also less likely to have received parental encouragement to run for political office (Lawless and Fox, 2013). See also
Wasserman (2018), which shows that women are less likely to run again for political office after a loss.
the Nineteenth Amendment in the South, relative to other regions like the Northeast and the

Midwest. However, poll taxes were eliminated by a combination of state action and ratification

of the Twenty-Fourth Amendment in January 1964, and literacy tests were removed via passage

of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. Civil rights activism may have also helped register southern

blacks and get them to the polls, even before structural barriers to participation were removed 7

         How might this history have contributed to the evolution of the national sex gap in voter

turnout? The answer to this question will depend on whether there were sex differences in the

efficacy of both the disenfranchising measures and the remedies. Anti-suffragists in the South

worried that it would be more difficult to use the tactics that had been applied to black men to

staunch the vote of black women. One Mississippi senator said: "We are not afraid to maul a

black man over the head if he dares to vote, but we can't treat women, even black women, that

way" (as quoted in Keyssar 2009, p. 169). By this reasoning, southern black women would have

been more likely to vote than southern black men, potentially narrowing the sex gap in turnout in

the South relative to the rest of the country even early in the period. Contrary to this, Figure 2

shows that the sex gap was actually much larger in 1940 ­ and male-female convergence in voter

turnout thereafter much more dramatic ­ in the southern Census region. Further exploration of

the data shows that the sex gap in voter turnout in the South from the 1940s through the early

1960s was roughly the same for whites and non-whites, suggesting that forces that were unique

to the region ­ but not necessarily to any particular race ­ contributed to the marked closure in

the sex gap over this same period.




7
  See Appendix Figure 2 for the time series of turnout by region. Voter turnout in the South did not converge to that
in rest of the country until after poll taxes and literacy tests were removed. See Cascio and Washington (2014) and
Filer, Kenny, and Morton (1991) for causal evidence on this link using historical voting records and geographic
variation in the black share of the population. We see similar patterns in our data, which affords us voting
information by race (see Appendix Figure 3).
Preferences over Policies and Parties



Background: Theory and Evidence

       Over the past 80 years, women's political mobilization has not only steadily converged

with men's, but has overtaken it. Does this mean that women have been increasingly influential

for political outcomes over time? Theoretical models suggest that the implications of women's

political participation for policy may depend on not just women's turnout and policy preferences

relative to men's (Downs 1957; Cox and McCubbins 1986), but also the nature of political

competition. If politicians are able to implement their preferred policies (Osborne and Slivinski

1996; Besley and Coate 1997), for example, having an impact on policy would require voting for

candidates with shared ideology, which could be captured by party affiliation.

       In the years leading up to and following passage of the Nineteenth Amendment, women

had different issue preferences than men ­ valuing policies that benefited children and public

health and welfare and more government spending ­ but not dramatically different party

alignment. Studies using variation in the timing of state laws enabling women to vote in state

and local elections prior to the Nineteenth Amendment find impacts on policy and real economic

outcomes at the federal, state, and local levels that move toward women's preferences (Lott and

Kenny 1999; Miller 2008; Moehling and Thomasson 2012; Carruthers and Wanamaker 2015;

Kose, Kuka, and Shenhav 2018). However, Corder and Wolbrecht (2016) show that, in the first

five presidential elections in which women could vote, their votes went toward parties much the

same way as those of the men in their state. This seeming contradiction may be explained by the

political environment: historically, the two major parties were not well-sorted on the dimensions

of public opinion along which men and women tend to systematically differ (Gillion, Ladd, and
Meredith 2018). While this was particularly the case before the 1930s (Gerring, 1998), our data

suggest this pattern held as recently as the 1970s, as argued elsewhere by political scientists.

       What has happened over the past 50 to 60 years? Literature from across the social

sciences suggests that the sex gap in public opinion on various issues has been fairly stable in the

face of dramatic social and cultural change (Shapiro and Mahajan 1986; DiMaggio, Evans, and

Bryson 1996; Bolzendahl and Myers 2004; Clark 2017). And yet, the sex gap in party

identification has not: there has been a dramatic relative shift of women toward the Democratic

party as men have increasingly been drawn toward the Republican party (Kaufmann and Petrocik

1999; Edlund and Pande 2002; Box-Steffensmeier, De Boef, and Lin 2004; Gillion, Ladd, and

Meredith 2018). Other advanced industrialized countries also experienced a relative shift of

women toward more liberal political parties over the latter half of the 20th century (Inglehart and

Norris 2000).

       In this section, we consider the evolution of the sex gap in party affiliation and in policy

preferences, and then ask: How can the sex gap in party affiliation have widened without a

change in the sex gap in preferences?



The Sex Gap in Party Affiliation

       Our core analysis of the sex gap in party affiliation is based on polling microdata,

primarily from the Gallup Organization, on party identification spanning 1953 to 2012,

generously provided by Gillion, Ladd, and Meredith (2018). For consistency with our study of

the sex gap in voter turnout and in party of the candidate chosen, we limit attention to polls taken

within two years after an election, summarizing these polls with an election-year average.
Applying this constraint, we use Gallup data to extend the series both backward in time to the

1948 election, and forward in time to the 2016 election, as described in the Data Appendix.

         Figure 3 shows national trends in the sex gaps in identification with the Democratic Party

and, for comparison, in vote share for the Democratic candidate. Estimated population shares

voting for the Democratic candidate and identifying with the Democratic party are shown for

context (right axis). 8 The voting series is naturally punctuated by election years with Democratic

victories, but overall, there is a clear reduction in Democratic party identification between the

late 1940s and early 1980s, driven by political realignment in the South (Kuziemko and

Washington 2018).

         The figure shows that women have been increasingly more likely to affiliate with the

Democratic party ­ or rather, less likely to leave the Democratic party (Kaufmann and Petrocik

1999) ­ than men. While a divergence in party preferences of American women and men

emerged in the 1960s, it took off starting in the 1980s. 9 Following the 2016 election, women

were almost 12 percentage points more likely than men to consider themselves Democrats,

compared to a sex gap hovering around zero in the late 1940s and 1950s. Past work using the

American National Election Studies (Kaufmann and Petrocik 1999), other polling data (Box-

Steffensmeier, De Boef, and Lin 2004), or the same polling data used here but with different

weighting (Gillion, Ladd, and Meredith 2018) has also documented an increasing partisan sex

gap in the United States, though over shorter time horizons. While we focus on average gaps



8
  National statistics on Democratic vote share from Gallup, General Social Survey, and American National Election
Studies data map fairly well to statistics based on historical voting records, though survey reports tend to favor the
winning candidate, as shown in Appendix Figure 4. Again, to the extent that this tendency is the same across sex,
survey-based measures of the sex gap in partisanship should be representative.
9
  Appendix Figure 5 shows the parallel series for the Republican party. Men are now more likely to identify as
Republicans than women. However, unlike in the Democratic case, the population share identifying as Republicans
is not that different today than in 1948. Unlike in the case of voter turnout, moreover, there are no significant
regional differences in trends in the sex gap in Democratic party identification. See Appendix Figure 6.
between men and women, recent work has shown that these gaps are often less pronounced

among white voters than non-white voters (see, e.g., Cassese and Barnes 2018).



The Sex Gap in Issue Preferences

        Political parties and political preferences do not necessarily align. There are no large-

scale microdata asking consistent public opinion questions over the same time frame as

represented in Figure 3. However, every few years starting in the 1940s, Gallup polls fielded

questions concerning traits of hypothetical presidential candidates: for example, whether one

would vote for a qualified woman if she were one's party nominee (starting in 1949), or for a

qualified black man (starting in 1958). To these data we add responses to a similar set of

questions from the General Social Survey in more recent years (until 2010). The answers

provide some insight into both the magnitude of social change over the period of interest, and

sex differences in reactions to it.

        Even if it only represented changes in social desirability bias, the scope of social change

represented in Figure 4 is breathtaking: the share of the population stating they are willing to

vote for a female president rose from 47 percent in 1949 to 96 percent in 2010. Growth in the

share of the population willing to vote for a black president has been even more striking, rising

from 38 percent in 1958 to 97 percent in 2010. Yet, the sex gaps in both measures have bounced

around zero, showing no clear trend; indeed, men have more often than not exhibited greater

support for the idea of a female president. This is consistent with existing evidence that suggests

that women have historically not used the franchise to advance their own political or economic

interests as a sex.
        Table 2 presents a mixed pattern of changes in the sex gap in views on various policy

topics reported in the GSS between 1977 to 1986 and 2007 to 2016, the earliest and latest 10-

year spans with consistent responses to our questions of interest. We summarize responses to 25

preference elicitations with seven indices, which are calculated as the mean of responses in a

particular area (coded such that higher values always indicate more progressive views). 10

        In the earliest decade, 70 percent of respondents reported voting in the last election, with

an immaterial gap across sexes; and 39 and 42 percent reported identifying with or voting for a

Democrat, with a 5 p.p. sex gap favoring women The sex gap in issues preferences varied in size

and direction. The largest absolute sex gaps were in sexuality attitudes, where women espoused

more conservative views (owing to less approval of pre-marital sex), and in the criminal justice

and family gender roles index, where women were more progressive. There were somewhat

smaller gaps in abortion attitudes and in the progressive government and race equality indices,

and opinions on the women's public roles index.

        Over the next four decades of the survey, women's voting rates and propensity to identify

or vote for a Democrat increased relative to men's, by 3, 2, and 7 percentage points respectively.

In terms of preferences, we find a striking increase in the gap in the sexual attitudes index (9

percentage points), which includes more favorable views towards the gay community

(Fernandez, Parsa, and Viarengo 2019) as well as towards premarital sex. But otherwise, the

changes are minor, with inconsistent signs. To a limited degree, women have become relatively

more supportive of women's public roles and less supportive of reform of the criminal justice



10
   These questions and groupings strongly overlap with the questions and categories in DiMaggio, Evans, and
Bryson (1996). Not all questions are asked in all years, but all of the questions in the indices appear both in the
early and later periods. See Appendix Table 1. Additional survey evidence from the American National Election
Studies broadly confirms the patterns discussed here, in some cases with polls reaching back to the 1950s and 1960s.
See Appendix Table 2 for results and details.
system. We do not see any meaningful change in relative views towards abortion, racial equality,

support for government services (although women's relative support for government services to

the sick does rise), or perceptions of the role of women as mothers first. These results align with

previous research over somewhat shorter time horizons showing little movement in the sex gap

in policy preferences (Clark 2017; DiMaggio, Evans, and Bryson 1996).



Party Polarization as Reconciliation

       How can the sex gap in party affiliations have widened without an underlying change in

preferences? Gillion, Ladd, and Meredith (2018) posit that the rise in Democratic identification

among women since the 1970s represents a change in sorting across political parties, influenced

by the increasing party polarization, driven by elites, and growing public awareness of that

polarization (Carsey and Layman 2006). In support of this hypothesis, they show in the

American National Election Studies that the gender partisan gap is larger among those who are

college-educated and more aware of the polarization across parties. They also show that the

weight placed on social welfare and other preferences in the partisan identification decision has

increased. Thus, they argue that (i) more-educated groups would be in the best position to sort

into political parties based on current party positions, and (ii) changes in these issue weights

would be predicted to induce a larger response by women, given existing gaps in preferences.

       In a similar spirit, we turn to the General Social Survey to investigate the scope of

changes in polarization over this period and their relevance for the sex gap in partisanship. In

particular, we examine the total change in the gap in policy preferences between individuals that

identify as Democrats and Republicans ("party gap"), within and across sexes. This reduced-

form approach is purely descriptive but provides a transparent look into these patterns over time
in a wide variety of domains. Our calculations exclude independents (which have been

increasing over this time period), but we find similar patterns when we include independents

who lean towards either Democrats or Republicans.

       Table 3 shows that the party gap in attitudes has grown significantly in every domain for

both men and women. For example, in the 1970s, the party gap in the abortion attitude index for

both sexes hovered around 2 percentage points, while in the 2010s the party gap grew to 21 and

14 percentage points for women and men, respectively. The party gap in attitudes towards

sexuality similarly increased more for women. On both of these issues, a substantial 22

percentage point chasm has opened across Democratic and Republican women, compared with a

15 percentage-point gap for men. On other issues, women and men have essentially converged to

the same party gap, which now stands at two to three times the level of the 1970s. Particularly

striking are the 20 and 30 percentage point party gaps in the criminal justice and progressive

government indices, respectively.

       It thus appears that the profile of the Democratic and Republican voter, regardless of sex,

is quite distinct from the past. This provides suggestive evidence in line with the hypothesis in

Gillion, Ladd, and Meredith (2018) that changes in party sorting across sexes can reconcile the

trends in the partisan sex gap and preferences that we observe.



Drivers of Sex Gaps and the Growing Political Influence of Women



       The findings thus far suggest that women are a much stronger political force today than

they were immediately after adoption of the Nineteenth Amendment. Relative to men, women

are now more likely to vote and more likely to identify as Democrats. What forces have
generated the large observed changes in relative female mobilization and partisanship? Stronger

partisans show up more reliably at the polls (Gerber, Huber, and Washington 2010). But this

need not mean that the trends in the sex gaps in voter turnout and party identification shown in

Figures 2 and 3 have the same root causes.



Cohort and Time Effects

       For an exploratory analysis, we categorize potential forces changing the sex gap into two

mutually-exclusive groups ­ cohort effects that are constant across the life span of a given

cohort, defined as a group of individuals born at roughly the same time, and time effects that

affect individuals of all ages observed at the same time in the same way. With regard to cohort

effects, experiences in early life may socialize women and men differently into (or away from)

voting, and perhaps a later-life experience at the polls (or elsewhere) reinforces this early-life

socialization (Gerber, Green, and Shachar 2003; Coppock and Green 2016; Fujiwara, Meng, and

Vogl 2016). With regard to time effects, changes in society or in the policy stances that define

parties may attract women of all ages.

       Figures 5 and 6 show time trends in the sex gap in voter turnout and Democratic party

identification, respectively, separately by cohort. We group birth years into nine roughly 16-year

cohorts that have a large degree of overlap with generations studied by demographers. These

include individuals who would have been children when the Nineteenth Amendment was

ratified, born 1901 to 1916 (roughly the first half of the "Greatest Generation"), and individuals

who would have been the youngest eligible voters in 1920, born 1885-1900 (the "Lost

Generation"). We also include two earlier cohorts comprised of individuals who would have

been exposed to the Nineteenth Amendment at mid-life (born 1869 to 1884) or older (born 1860
to 1868). Generations since the Nineteenth Amendment include individuals born 1917 to 1933

(the second half of the Greatest Generation), 1933 to 1948 (the Silent Generation), 1949 to 1964

(Baby Boomers), 1965 to 1980 (Generation X), and 1981 to 1998 (Millennials).

         The patterns of Figures 5 and 6 suggest, consistent with our earlier discussion, that cohort

effects have been more important for the evolution of the sex gap in voter turnout, and time

effects more important for the evolution of the sex gap in party identification. While the cohort-

specific time trends shown in Figure 5 are not literally flat (which is what a completely pure

cohort effect would look like), younger generations typically show more positive sex gaps in

turnout in every year. In addition, differences in the sex gap are on average greater across earlier

cohorts than later ones, just like the sex gap in turnout shrinks at a faster pace over earlier years

of our sample period. In earlier research, Prior (2010) also shows that political mobilization is

remarkably stable over the life cycle, using individual panel data. Also consistent with these

findings, Firebaugh and Chen (1995) show that there is an especially large sex gap in voter

turnout for the earliest cohort observable in the American National Election Studies data.

         In contrast, the pattern in Figure 6 is better interpreted as a time effect pattern, in which

the sex gap in Democratic party identification rises over time within each cohort. The result is

smaller cross-cohort differences in the sex gap at a given point in time, and a strong common

upward trajectory. A regression analysis of data collapsed to the cohort-by-election year-by-

state level confirms that cohort effects essentially completely explain the time trend in the sex

gap in voter turnout but explain little of the time trend in the sex gap in Democratic party

identification. 11


11
  The geographic unit to which we collapse is actually the single states and groups of states (27 total) identified in
the 1976 November CPS. We omit the GSS from this portion of the analysis, due to lack of information on state of
residence in the public-use data. We regressed sex-by-cohort-by-state group-by-year outcomes on decade indicators
interacted with a female indicator in a model including fixed effects for sex, decade, state group, and sex-by-state
Can the Cohort Effects Be Explained?

        The relative contributions of cohort and time effects for these outcomes map to different

sets of potential causal mechanisms for the evolution of sex gaps in voting behavior. Above, we

presented evidence consistent with the inter-decadal growth in relative Democratic party

identification among women that cannot be explained by generational replacement: women of

all ages have moved toward the Democrats as the two major parties have become increasingly

divided on issues that women tend to care about. On the other hand, the growth in women's

turnout appears to be largely explained by generational replacement. In this section, we consider

the relevance of several cohort-varying factors for these findings.

        Because our data are stratified by state, we can assess the explanatory power of both

observed and unobserved factors that vary across cohorts. This is important, because some

factors potentially contributing to cohort effects, like the "norms against [women's] political

engagement" (Corder and Wolbrecht 2016; p. 14), will be difficult to quantify. On the other

hand, other potentially important cohort-specific factors can be measured. We initially focused

on educational attainment, employment rates, and divorce because they have been identified as

important determinants of political behavior in prior research. 12 But because our central finding

was that changes in the sex gap in turnout across cohorts tracked gains in education, we focus on

the attainment results here. Even so, our findings should not be interpreted causally. We have




group. Appendix Figure 7 shows what happens to the coefficients on the decade-by-female interaction terms with
addition of cohort and cohort-by-sex fixed effects to this model. For details and further explication of the
regression, see the online Appendix available with this paper at the JEP website.
12
   For example, divorce and economic vulnerability have been linked to the rising sex gap in Democratic party
identification in the United States (Edlund and Pande 2002; Box-Steffensmeier, De Boef, and Lin 2004).
used the extant variation, not exogenous variation, in educational attainment across cohorts and

states, which may be correlated with other, unobserved state-by-cohort factors.

         Baseline cohort effects in the sex gap in voter turnout, represented as an across-cohort

change relative to the earliest two cohorts combined, are shown with the solid line in the first

panel of Figure 7. For all cohorts beyond the first, these changes are significant both statistically

and in magnitude. For example, the sex gap in turnout has been about 14 percentage points more

favorable to Baby Boomer women than it was to women born roughly a century before.

         To examine the role of rising levels of education in these patterns, we begin by

introducing state-by-cohort controls for high school completion as of age 25, estimated from the

Census and American Community Survey. Since cross-cohort gains in high school were similar

by sex, we do not expect this to have much explanatory power, and in fact we see little impact on

our estimated cohort effects in Figure 7 Panel A. Next we allow for changes in high school

completion to have different effects by sex, thus allowing for the realistic possibility that

education could have a different impact on women's political participation. Since the positive

association between high school completion and lifetime political mobilization is significantly

stronger for women than for men, much of the unobserved cohort effects in the sex gap in

turnout fades away. 13 Though women born in the mid-1950s and later have been more likely to

attend and complete college than their male counterparts (Goldin, Katz, and Kuziemko 2006),

adjusting for college attendance by age 25 offers little additional explanatory power, given the

comparatively weak association between college attendance and turnout in our data. 14




13
   The association in our data for women is similar to that found by Milligan, Moretti, and Oreopolous (2004) for the
population overall exploiting variation in completion from compulsory schooling and child labor laws early in the
20th century.
14
   We add each variable directly and interacted with a female indicator to the model outlined in footnote 11. For
detailed regression findings, see Appendix Table 3.
           Thus, the rise in educational attainment ­ or, perhaps, other correlated outcomes ­

appears to explain the changes in the sex gap in voter turnout across cohorts; adding sex-specific

effects of high school completion in particular to the model lowers and renders statistically

insignificant the contribution of unobserved cohort-specific factors. The change is especially

noticeable for cohorts born in the first half of the 20th century, for whom changes in high school

completion were particularly dramatic even if similar across sex. The sizable sex difference in

the association between high school completion and turnout in our data could be explained by

the particular role that education plays in women's lives, such as through reductions in fertility,

or through other factors coinciding with the high school movement ­ such as advancement of

social norms ­ that could have pushed women's voter participation up more than men's.

           The solid line in the other panel of Figure 7 shows the baseline, essentially negligible

cohort effects in sex gap in Democratic party identification, consistent with Figure 6. Though not

associated with turnout in our data, college attendance is positively associated with increases in

Democratic partisanship and more so for women. Because of the divergence of women's college

attendance rates from men's across recent cohorts, holding constant college attendance thus

generates some unexplained cohort effects. As shown in the figure, in the absence of rising

college attendance, Baby Boomer, Gen-X, and Millennial women would have actually been less

likely to identify with the Democratic party.

           Taken as a whole, these descriptive findings suggest that each successive generation of

women has been more politically mobilized than her predecessors, with educational attainment

playing an important role. However, this is only a descriptive exercise that would be useful to

revisit.
Conclusion



       The female voter has come a long way since the passage of the first suffrage laws at the

turn of the century, and since the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment of 1920 extended the

franchise (at least in principle) to women nationwide. We trace the evolution of the sex gap in

voter turnout and partisanship over the last 80 years using a novel dataset of voter surveys. We

find that women closed a 10 percentage-point gap in voter turnout over the 40 years from 1940

to 1980, and over the next 40 years from 1980 to present gained more than a 4 percentage-point

advantage in turnout over men. Additionally, while women and men had similar patterns of party

support in 1940, over the last half-century, a 12 percentage-point sex gap has emerged in the

probability of women and men identifying with the Democratic party.

       What accounts for these changes? We argue that the relative rise in women's turnout is

largely explained by the replacement of older, low-participation cohorts with younger, high-

participation cohorts. Descriptively, we find that these cohort effects are associated with

women's differential response to increasing rates of high school graduation, with less

explanatory power for rising rates of college attendance. In contrast, the rise in women's support

for Democrats appears to have been common to all cohorts. At least since the 1970s, this seems

to be best explained by the trend towards greater polarization of political parties, as we find little

evidence of any change in the gap in policy preferences across men and women.

       Many gaps remain in analyzing the causes and consequences of this century of political

progress for women. First, what are the causal factors behind the large rise in women's voter

turnout across cohorts? To the best of our knowledge, there is no research providing a credible

analysis of the link between the increase in voter participation that we have documented and the
significant advances made by women across cohorts ­ in educational attainment, economic

opportunities, and access to contraceptive technology, to name a few ­ despite the fact that these

changes appear to have occurred simultaneously. Our descriptive analyses suggest that rising

education may have the most explanatory power, but a more rigorous design may yield different

results. Second, in what ways the rise in women's voter participation and greater identification

with the Democratic Party affected modern policy outcomes? In addition to clarifying the

process of political change for women, providing answers to these questions may also provide

broader insights into the process of acquiring political capital for newly enfranchised groups.
References
Ansolabehere, Stephen and Eitan Hersh. 2012. "Validation: What Big Data Reveal About Survey
       Misreporting and the Real Electorate." Political Analysis 20(4): 437-459.

Bailey, Martha J. 2006. "More Power to the Pill: The Impact of Contraception on Women's Life
        Cycle Labor Supply." Quarterly Journal of Economics 121(1): 289-320.

Berinsky, Adam J. 2006. "American Public Opinion in the 1930s and 1940s: The Analysis if
        Quota-Controlled Sample Survey Data." Public Opinion Quarterly 70(4): 499-529.

Bernstein, Robert, Anita Chadha, and Robert Montjoy, Overreporting Voting: Why It Happens
        and Why It Matters, Public Opinion Quarterly, Volume 65, Issue 1, March 2001, Pages
        22­44

Besley, Timothy and Stephen Coate. 1997. "An Economic Model of Representative
        Democracy." Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(1): 85-114.

Bolzendahl, Catherine I. and Daniel J. Myers. 2004. "Feminist Attitudes and Support for Gender
       Equality: Opinion Change in Women and Men, 1974-1998." Social Forces 83(2): 759-
       789.

Box-Steffensmeier, Janet M., Suzanna De Boef, and Tse-min Lin. 2004. "The Dynamics of the
       Partisan Gender Gap." American Political Science Review 98(3): 515-528.

Carruthers, Celeste and Marianne Wanamaker. 2015. "Municipal Housekeeping: The Impact of
        Women's Suffrage on Public Education." Journal of Human Resources 50(4): 837-872.

Carsey, Thomas. M. and Geoffrey Layman. 2006). "Changing Sides or Changing Minds? Party
        Identification and Policy Preferences in the American Electorate." American Journal of
        Political Science, 50: 464-477.

Cascio, Elizabeth U. and Ebonya Washington. 2014. "Valuing the Vote: The Redistribution of
        Voting Rights and State Funds After the Voting Rights Act of 1965." Quarterly Journal
        of Economics 129(1): 376-433.

Cassese, Erin and Tiffany Barnes. 2018. "Reconciling Sexism and Women's Support for
        Republican Candidates: A Look at Gender, Class, and Whiteness in the 2012 and 2016
        Presidential Races." Political Behavior. 41:677-700.

Clark, April K. 2017. "Updating the Gender Gap(s): A Multilevel Approach to What Underpins
        Changing Cultural Attitudes." Politics & Gender 13(1): 26-56.

Coppock, Alexander and Donald P. Green. 2016. "Is Voting Habit Forming? New Evidence
       from Experiments and Regression Discontinuities." American Journal of Political
       Science 60(4): 1044-1062.
Corder, J. Kevin and Christina Wolbrecht, 2016. Counting Women's Ballots: Female Voters
        from Suffrage through the New Deal. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Cox, Gary W. and Matthew D. McCubbins. 1986. "Electoral Politics as a Redistributive Game."
       Journal of Politics 48(2): 370-389.

Croson, R. and Gneezy, U. 2009. "Gender Differences in Preferences." Journal of Economic
        Literature 47(2): 448-474.

Dee, Thomas. 2004. "Are There Civic Returns to Education?" Journal of Public Economics 88:
       1697-1720.

DiMaggio, Paul, John Evans, and Bethany Bryson. 1996. "How American's Social Attitudes
      Become More Polarized." American Journal of Sociology 102(3): 690-755.

Downs, Anthony. 1957. "An Economic Theory of Political Action in a Democracy." Journal of
       Political Economy 65(2): 135-150.

Duflo, Esther. 2012. "Women Empowerment and Economic Development." Journal of
        Economic Literature, 50 (4): 1051-79.

Edlund, Lena and Pande, Rohini, 2002. "Why Have Women Become Left-Wing? The Political
        Gender Gap and the Decline in Marriage." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(3):
        917­961.

Farber, Henry S., Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. 2018. "Unions and
        Inequality Over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data." Manuscript.

Fernandez, Raquel, Sahar Parsa, and Martina Viarengo. 2019. "Coming out in America: AIDS,
       Politics, and Cultural Change." Manuscript.

Filer, John E., Lawrence W. Kenny, and Rebecca B. Morton. 1991. "Voting Laws, Educational
         Policies, and Minority Turnout," Journal of Law and Economics 34(2): 371-393.

Firebaugh, Glenn A. and Kevin Chen. 1995. "Vote Turnout of Nineteenth Amendment Women:
        the Enduring Effect of Disenfranchisement." American Journal of Sociology 100(4):
        972-996.

Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles and J. Robert Warren. Integrated
       Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset].
       Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0

Fogli, Alessandra and Laura Veldcamp. 2011. "Nature or Nurture? Learning and the Geography
        of Female Labor Force Participation." Econometrica 79(4): 1103-1138.
Fujiwara, Thomas, Kyle Meng, and Tom Vogl. 2016. "Habit Formation in Voting: Evidence
        from Rainy Elections." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 8 (4): 160-88.

Gillion, Daniel Q., Jonathan M. Ladd, and Marc Meredith. 2018. "Party Polarization,
         Ideological Sorting and the Emergence of the U.S. Partisan Gender Gap." British
         Journal of Political Science 1-27.

Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American
        Women. New York: Oxford University Press.

Goldin, Claudia, Lawrence Katz, and Ilyana Kuziemko. 2006. "The Homecoming of American
        College Women: The Reversal of the College Gender Gap." Journal of Economic
        Perspectives 20(4): 133-156.

Gerber, Alan S., Donald P. Green, and Ron Shachar. 2003. "Voting May Be Habit-Forming:
        Evidence from a Randomized Field Experiment." American Journal of Political Science
        47(3): 540-550.

Gerber, Alan, Gregory Huber, G., and Ebonya Washington. 2010. "Party Affiliation,
        Partisanship, and Political Beliefs: A Field Experiment." American Political Science
        Review, 104(4), 720-744.

Gerring, J. 1998. Party Ideologies in America, 1828­1996. Cambridge: Cambridge University
        Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139174992

Inglehart, Ronald and Pippa Norris. 2000. "The Developmental Theory of the Gender Gap:
        Women's and Men's Voting Behavior in Global Perspective." International Political
        Science Review 21(4): 441-463.

Kaufmann, Karen M. and John R. Petrocik, 1999. "The Changing Politics of American Men:
      Understanding the Sources of the Gender Gap." American Journal of Political Science
      43(3): 884-887.

Keyssar, Alexander. 2009. The Right to Vote: The Contested History of Democracy in the
        United States [Revised Edition]. New York, NY: Basic Books.

Kleppner, P. 1982. Were Women to Blame? Female Suffrage and Voter Turnout. The Journal of
       Interdisciplinary History, 12(4), 621-643.

Kose, Esra, Elira Kuka, and Na'ama Shenhav. 2019. "Who Benefited from Women's Suffrage?"
        Manuscript, Dartmouth College.

Lott, John R. Jr. and Lawrence W. Kenny. 1999. "Did Women's Suffrage Change the Size and
         Scope of Government?" Journal of Political Economy 107(6): 1163-1198.
Kuziemko, Ilyana and Ebonya Washington. 2018. "Why Did the Democrats Lose the South?
      Bringing New Data to an Old Debate." American Economic Review 108(10): 2830-
      2867.

Lawless, Jennifer L and Richard L Fox. 2013 "Girls Just Wanna Not Run: The Gender Gap in
       Young Americans' Political Ambitions," Women & Politics Institute.

Lawless, J., & Pearson, K. 2008. The Primary Reason for Women's Underrepresentation?
      Reevaluating the Conventional Wisdom. The Journal of Politics, 70(1), 67-82.

Layman, Geoffrey and Thomas Carsey. 2002. "Party Polarization and "Conflict Extension" in
      the American Electorate." American Journal of Political Science. 46. 786.
      10.2307/3088434.

Miller, Grant. "Women's Suffrage, Political Responsiveness, and Child Survival in American
         History." Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(3): 1287-1327.

Milligan, Kevin, Enrico Moretti, and Philip Oreopoulos. 2004. "Does Education Improve
        Citizenship? Evidence from the United States and the United Kingdom." Journal of
        Public Economics 88: 1667-95.

Moehling, Caroline M. and Melissa A. Thomasson. 2012. "The Political Economy of Saving
       Mothers and Babies: The Politics of State Participation in the Sheppard-Towner
       Program." Journal of Economic History 72(1): 75-103.

Morgan-Collins, Mona. 2019. "The Electoral Impact of Newly Enfranchised Groups: The Case
       of Women's Suffrage in the United States. Journal of Politics.

Osborne, Martin J. and Al Slivinski. 1996. "A Model of Political Competition with Citizen-
       Candidates." Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1): 85-96.

Prior, Markus. 2010. "You've Either Got It or You Don't? The Stability of Political Interest
        Over the Life Cycle." Journal of Politics 72(3): 747-766.

Robinson, W.S. 1950. "Ecological Correlations and the Behavior of Individuals." American
       Sociological Review 15(3): 351-357.

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas and
       Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS,
       2019. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0

Shapiro, Robert Y. and Harpreet Mahajan. 1986. "Gender Differences in Policy Preferences: A
        Summary of Trends from the 1960s to the 1980s." Public Opinion Quarterly 50(1): 42-
        61.
Sondheimer, Rachel Milstein and Donald P. Green. 2010. "Using Experiments to Estimate the
       Effects of Education on Voter Turnout." American Journal of Political Science 54(1):
       174-189.

Teele, Dawn L, 2018. Forging the Franchise. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

Valelly, Richard M. 2004. The Two Reconstructions: The Struggle for Black Enfranchisement.
         Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Wasserman, Melanie. 2018. "Gender Differences in Politician Persistence." Manuscript.
      University of California, Los Angeles.

Wolbrecht, Christina and Kevin J. Corder, forthcoming. A Century of Votes for Women:
       American Elections Since Suffrage. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Figure 1
Voter Turnout in U.S. Presidential Elections: Survey and Administrative Data, 1900-2016




Data Sources: The numerator of the series represented by the solid black line is the U.S. presidential vote count,
constructed by the authors from state-level vote tallies available at http://uselectionsatlas.org. The denominator of
this series is U.S. voting-age population (ages 18 and up for 1972 forward+ and ages 21 and up in all earlier years)
for the subsample of states in a region with election returns, estimated from Decennial Census (1900-2000) and
American Community Survey (ACS) (2005-16) Public Use Microdata Samples (Ruggles et al., 2019). We compile
Gallup microdata from polls conducted from 1940-70 by the Gallup Organization and November CPS Voter
Supplement microdata from ICPSR Study #60 (for 1972) and IPUMS CPS (Flood et al., 2018) (for 1976-2016).
GSS data are drawn from the GSS 1972-2018 Cross-Sectional Cumulative Data file (Release 1) (for 1972-2016) and
ANES data from the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2016) (for 1952-2016). See Data Appendix.

Notes: We weight statistics from the Gallup microdata using weights that we construct from the Census, which
adjust Gallup demographics to the year x region x education x race x sex x birth cohort level. (Birth cohorts are
defined as described later in the paper.) We weight statistics from the November CPS, GSS, and ANES using
survey-provided weights. All weights are re-normed so as to average to one within each survey-year.
Figure 2
Sex Gap in Voter Turnout, U.S. Overall and by Region: Pooled Survey Data, 1940-2016




Notes: Survey data pool the Gallup, November CPS, GSS, and ANES series described in the notes to Figure 1.
Statistics are weighted by survey-provided weights (for the CPS, GSS, and ANES) or author-constructed weights
(for Gallup), with all weights re-normed to average to one within each survey-year. More details are in the Data
Appendix. The figure plots the difference in estimated voter turnout rates between women and men by year,
nationally and separately by region, with South representing the southern Census region.
Figure 3
The Sex Gap in Democratic Partisanship: Pooled Survey Data, 1940-2016




Data sources: Microdata on Democratic party identification are from the replication archive of Gillion, Ladd, and
Meredith (2018) (for 1953-2012), Gallup polls spanning 1948-52 and 2013-17 that we collected from the Roper
Center, the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2016), and the GSS Cross-Sectional Cumulative Data
1972-2018 (Release 1). Microdata on voting for the Democratic presidential candidate are from Gallup polls
spanning 1940-70, the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2016), and the GSS Cross-Sectional
Cumulative Data 1972-2018 (Release 1).

Notes: Statistics are weighted by survey-provided weights (for the GSS and ANES) or author-constructed weights
(for Gallup), with all weights re-normed to average out to one within each survey-year.
Figure 4
Sex Gap in Political Opinion: Preferences over Presidents, Pooled Survey Data, 1948-2010




Data sources: Microdata are from Gallup polls (1948-69) and the GSS Cross-Sectional Cumulative Data 1972-2018
(Release 1).

Notes: Statistics are weighted by survey-provided weights (for the GSS) or author-constructed weights (for Gallup),
with weights re-normed to average to one within each survey-year.
Figure 5
The Sex Gap in Voter Turnout, by Cohort: Pooled Survey Data, 1940-2016




Notes: Survey data pool the Gallup, November CPS, GSS, and ANES series described in the notes to Figure 1.
Statistics are weighted by survey-provided weights (for the CPS, GSS, and ANES) or author-constructed weights
(for Gallup), with all weights re-normed to average to one within each survey-year. The figure plots the difference in
estimated voter turnout rates between women and men by year and cohort. We omit cells based on small sample
sizes (<150 observations per sex) to reduce noise.
Figure 6
Sex Gap in Democratic Party Identification, by Cohort: Pooled Survey Data, 1948-2016




Notes: Survey data pool the Gallup, GSS, and ANES series described in the notes to Figure 3. Statistics are
weighted by survey-provided weights (for the GSS and ANES) or author-constructed weights (for Gallup), with all
weights re-normed to average to one within each survey-year. The figure plots the difference in estimated rates of
identification with the Democratic party between women and men by year and cohort. We omit cells based on small
sample sizes (<150 observations per sex) to reduce noise; for this reason, no observations from the earliest cohort
are shown.
Figure 7
Educational Attainment and the Cohort Effects in Voting Sex Gaps




Notes: Figures plot coefficients from regressions where the dependent variable is voter turnout (Panel A) or the rate
of Democratic party identification (Panel B) at the election year x cohort x sex x state group level. All regressions
are weighted by the number of observations used to construct the dependent variable. The solid line ("Baseline")
plots the change in the sex gap in the outcome from the initial birth cohort (1860-84 in Panel A and 1969-84 in
Panel B), or coefficients on the interaction between a female dummy and cohort indicators from a version of the
regression described in the Data Appendix that also includes cohort fixed effects. Other lines show what would have
happened to the sex gap in voter turnout across cohorts holding constant high school graduation and some college
completion. Throughout, the sex gap is the female-male difference in the outcome.
Table 1
Trends in the Sex Gap in Voter Participation: Measures from the American National Election Studies


                                                                                    1950s                              2010s
                                                                               Mean      Sex Gap                  Mean      Sex Gap

 A. Turnout
    Voted in Last Presidential Election                                        0.735           -0.112             0.746            0.017

 B. Political Interest
    Cares a Lot About Which Party Wins Presidential
    Election                                                                   0.649           -0.047             0.813           0.000
    Somewhat or Very Interested in Elections                                   0.702           -0.064             0.844           -0.019
    Very Interested in Elections                                               0.334           -0.073             0.443           -0.066

 C. Mobilization
    Tried to Influence Someone's Vote                                          0.278           -0.121             0.435           -0.041
    Displayed Candidate Button/Sticker During Campaign                         0.155           -0.060             0.139           -0.008
    Donated Money to Party Candidate During Campaign                           0.072           -0.031             0.120           -0.024
    Attended Political Meetings/Rallies During Campaign                        0.069           -0.020             0.063           -0.008
    Worked for Party or Candidate During Campaign                              0.032           -0.011             0.033           -0.010


Notes: Data are from the American National Election Studies. Data for the 1950s pertain to the 1952 and 1956 (with the exception of the variable
"Displayed Candidate Button/Sticker During Campaign, which is only available for 1956). Data for the 2010s pertain to the 2012 and 2016 elections.
Statistics are weighted by ANES sampling weights.
Table 2
Trends in the Sex Gap in Issue Preferences: Evidence from the General Social Survey

                                                                 1977-1986                   2007-2016
                                                              Mean    Sex Gap             Mean    Sex Gap

   Voted in Last Presidential Election                        0.701         -0.009        0.698         0.024
   Identifies as a Democrat                                   0.388         0.050         0.325         0.072
   Voted for Democrat in Last Presidential Election           0.418         0.047         0.554         0.112

   Sexuality Attitudes Index                                  0.281         -0.066        0.512         0.022
                   Homosexual Relations Not Wrong             0.137         -0.004        0.457         0.097
                   Okay to have Sex Before Marriage           0.392         -0.112        0.569        -0.048

   Criminal Justice Index                                     0.277          0.069        0.376         0.049
                                    Courts too Harsh          0.032         -0.007        0.162        -0.039
                             Should need Gun Permit           0.723          0.125        0.737         0.110
                     Oppose Death Penalty for Murder          0.248          0.100        0.351         0.088

   Abortion Attitude Index                                    0.646         -0.024        0.613        -0.033
                          Abortion if Serious Defect          0.816         -0.013        0.739        -0.032
             Abortion if Married + Don't Want More            0.428         -0.040        0.458        -0.048
                     Abortion if Mom Health at Risk           0.904         -0.022        0.879        -0.010
                               Abortion if Very Poor          0.475         -0.019        0.440        -0.023
                     Abortion if Pregnant from Rape           0.829         -0.022        0.772        -0.044
           Abortion if Single + Don't Want to Marry           0.437         -0.027        0.417        -0.025

   Women's Public Roles Index                                 0.710          0.007        0.791         0.032
            Disagree Women not Suited to Politics             0.565          0.018        0.751         0.041
                           Vote Woman President               0.842         -0.020        0.951         0.003

   Family Gender Roles Index                                  0.481         0.097         0.697         0.099
                Disagree Woman Should Stay Home               0.453         0.043         0.676         0.050
            Agree Mom Working Doesn't Hurt Kids               0.574         0.133         0.743         0.122
          Disagree Pre-K Kids Suffer if Mom Works             0.419         0.121         0.676         0.128

   Progressive Government Index                               0.307          0.026        0.323         0.029
                           Govt. Should Help Poor             0.311          0.022        0.301         0.035
                           Govt. Should Help Sick             0.466         -0.006        0.478         0.043
                        Govt. Should Help Blacks              0.181         -0.001        0.189         0.009
                     Govt. Should Equalize Wealth             0.306          0.035        0.321         0.030

   Race Equality Index                                        0.533         0.022         0.569         0.026
                          Race Gap not due to Ability         0.780         0.041         0.905        -0.007
                             Race Gap due to Access           0.524         0.003         0.463         0.023
                       Race Gap not due to Motivation         0.390         0.023         0.526         0.026
                       Race Gap due to Discrimination         0.437         0.027         0.372         0.056
  Notes: Data are from the General Social Survey (GSS). Statistics are weighted by GSS sampling weights. The
  years in the column headers refer to survey years for preferences, and election years for voting outcomes. For
  voting outcomes shown in the first two rows of the table we also include the 2018 GSS, in which individuals report
  on voting behavior in the 2016 election.
Table 3
Trends in Party Polarization Within and Across Sex: Measures from the General Social Survey

                                                                   1977-1986              2007-2016
                                                                           Party                  Party
                                                               Dems.       Gap        Dems.       Gap

                                                                               A. Women

   Voted in Last Presidential Election                         0.723      -0.079       0.824     -0.022

   Voted for Democrat in Last Presidential Election            0.739       0.660       0.944      0.839

   Sexuality Attitudes Index                                   0.257       0.068       0.581      0.217
   Criminal Justice Index                                      0.330       0.075       0.479      0.210
   Abortion Attitude Index                                     0.628      -0.021       0.681      0.213
   Women's Public Roles Index                                  0.721       0.073       0.847      0.104
   Family Gender Roles Index                                   0.524       0.030       0.786      0.096
   Progressive Government Index                                0.403       0.214       0.464      0.319
   Race Equality Index                                         0.551       0.051       0.644      0.144

                                                                                B. Men

   Voted in Last Presidential Election                         0.734      -0.078       0.770     -0.060

   Voted for Democrat in Last Presidential Election            0.736       0.681       0.912      0.837

   Sexuality Attitudes Index                                   0.313       0.057       0.539      0.147
   Criminal Justice Index                                      0.263       0.065       0.440      0.225
   Abortion Attitude Index                                     0.641      -0.029       0.679      0.139
   Women's Public Roles Index                                  0.687       0.018       0.813      0.097
   Family Gender Roles Index                                   0.399      -0.006       0.680      0.081
   Progressive Government Index                                0.381       0.189       0.450      0.321
   Race Equality Index                                         0.505       0.008       0.617      0.145


  Notes: Data are from the General Social Survey (GSS). Statistics are weighted by GSS sampling
  weights. The years in the column headers refer to survey years for preferences, and election years for
  voting outcomes. "Dems." refers to individuals that report identifying as a Democrat, strongly or not
  strongly. "Party Gap" is the difference between views of those that identify as Democrats and those that
  identify as Republicans (strongly or not strongly). Appendix Table 2 contains a summary that includes
  each of the components of these indices
                Supplemental Online Appendix for

          A Century of the American Woman Voter:
Sex Gaps in Political Participation, Preferences, and Partisanship
                Since Women's Enfranchisement

             By Elizabeth U. Cascio and Na'ama Shenhav


                           January 2020
Administrative Data
Historical Voting Records

For the numerator of the administrative voter turnout rate, we calculate national (Figure 1) and
regional (Appendix Figure 2) vote tallies using data from David Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential
Elections (http://uselectionatlas.org). The original unit of analysis is the state, and we aggregate
to the national and (Census) region levels. We purchased an individual license for the 1900-
2012 data (US President - State-Level All-Time Vote Data Spreadsheet, version 1.3). We hand
entered key variables for 2016 election from an online table at this website. 15

Voting-Age Population

For the denominator of the administrative voter turnout rate, we estimate national (Figure 1) and
regional (Appendix Figure 2) voting-age population by multiplying published total Census
population counts by estimated population shares ages 21+ (1900-68) or ages 18+ (1972-2016).
The original unit of analysis for the published Census counts is the state, and we limit attention
to states with presidential election returns before aggregating up to the state or regional level. 16
We estimate voting-age population shares using Census and American Community Survey
(ACS) microdata (Ruggles et al., 2019), linearly interpolating in intercensal years. Voting-age is
defined as ages 21 and over through the 1968 presidential election and ages 18 and over for all
elections from 1972 forward.

Survey Data

Gallup Polling Data

Our main source for sex-specific voter turnout and preferences over hypothetical presidential
candidates prior to 1972, and for information on party identification throughout the period of
interest, is polling data from the Roper Center. Until the 1990s, almost all of the relevant polls
available through the Roper Center were conducted by the Gallup Organization. We therefore
focus on Gallup polls in our own data collection. However, the Roper data file provided in the
replication archive of Gillion, Ladd, and Meredith (2018), which provides the core data for our
analysis of trends in party identification, includes polls conducted by other organizations. 17


15
   <https://uselectionatlas.org/RESULTS/data.php? year=2016&datatype=national&def=1&f= 1&off =0&elect=0>
Our replication files provide the national and regional aggregate turnout figures and the code that we applied to the
state panel data to generate them. To run the code, you will need to purchase the 1900-2012 data from
http://uselectionatlas.org.
16
   We thus omit Alaska, Hawaii, and the District of Columbia prior to 1960. Population figures for 1900 through
1990 are available at http://data.nber.org/census/pop/. Population estimates as of July 1 for 2000-2009 and 2010-
2018 are available at https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/intercensal-2000-2010-state.html
and https://www.census.gov/data/tables/time-series/demo/popest/2010s-national-total.html, respectively. We
linearly interpolate population in intercensal years.
17
   However, unlike Gillion et al., who rely on Gallup-provided sampling weights, we use data from the Census and
ACS to weight Gallup demographics to the region x sex x education x race x cohort level. We describe this
weighting process below.
Gillion, Ladd, and Meredith's (2018) replication files include polls from 1953 to 2012, including
some not fielded by the Gallup Organization, which become more prevalent in the 1990s. To
maintain sufficiently large sample sizes, we also include these other polls in our estimation
sample. We extend this series backwards to 1948 using earlier Gallup polls not included in
Gillion, Ladd, and Meredith (2018). Gallup sporadically asked about party affiliation after the
1940 and 1944 elections, but the data are too sparse to be included in the present analysis. We
also extended forward to include polls from 2013 and the first quarter of 2014 (to correspond to
the 2012 election). We used a larger scale Gallup-Knight Foundation survey on Trust, Media,
and Democracy, fielded in 2017, to gain insight into party affiliation following the 2016 election,
though this particular survey lacks sufficient detail on age to be included in our later, more
detailed look at time and cohort effects on trends in the sex gap in Democratic party
identification.

For voter turnout and partisanship, we assign polls conducted within two years after a
presidential election to that particular election year. The number of available polls varies from
election to election. Following Kuziemko and Washington (2018), in our own read-in of the
data, we focus on polls for which data were not transferred by the Roper Center from binary to
ASCII format, as such data can contain stray characters. This data format arises as late as 1964
but is relatively common for earlier polls that could in principle be assigned to presidential
elections through 1960. To ensure sufficiently large sample sizes for the earliest presidential
elections, we use the Berinsky-Schickler Stata code to read in binary-to-ASCII files (Berinsky
and Schickler, 2011). In addition, we use all polls included in the Gillion, Ladd, and Meredith
(2018) replication file (which includes a variable on party identification but not voter turnout),
regardless of the original format. All elections have information from at least 8 polls, with the
lowest number of observations being for voter turnout in the 1952 election. 18

A particular challenge of using the Gallup data for our purposes is that the earliest polls were
collected using a "quota-controlled" sampling strategy. This approach targeted certain numbers
of individuals within strata defined by observable characteristics, such as region of residence,
sex, and race, with the goal of producing samples representative of the likely-voter population,
not the population overall (see Berinsky (2006) and Berinsky et al. (2011)). Reflecting Gallup's
views on the demographic make-up of likely voters, the earliest polls under-represented the
South, the non-white population, the less-educated population, and women, as shown in
Appendix Figure 1. Moreover, within strata, canvassers had significant discretion in who they
interviewed. These polls are thus not random samples. Starting in 1950, Gallup moved to a
national probability-based sampling scheme (see Appendix C of Farber, et al. (2018) for a full
description), but weights are not consistently provided in the microdata. 19

To produce statistics that are more representative of the population, we pursue a cell-based
reweighting strategy like that described in Berinsky (2006), Berinsky, et al. (2011), Kuziemko
and Washington (2018), and Farber, et al. (2018). 20 In particular, we adjust Gallup

18
   In later years, we do not use all available polls for expediency. Our microdata files contain a variable giving the
relevant survey number.
19
   We also drop duplicate observations, which were used as an implicit form of weighting in some Gallup polls.
20
   The weights described in Berinksy (2006) and Berinsky, et al. (2011) for Gallup polls spanning 1936 to 1945 are
available at the Roper Center through Berinsky and Schickler (2011).
demographics using population weights matched to cells defined by year, respondent sex
(female, male), race (nonwhite, white), region of residence (South, non-South, where South is
the southern census region), high school completion (yes or no), and birth cohort (matching the
nine roughly 16-year birth cohorts described in the text).

We do this across a number of steps:

       1. We estimate population counts and high school graduation rates by year, sex (female,
          male), race (nonwhite, white), region (South, non-South, where South is the southern
          census region), and single year of age using microdata from the Census (1940 through
          2000) and American Community Survey (2005 through 2016) (Ruggles et al., 2019).
       2. We linearly interpolate total population and high school graduation rates in intercensal
          years in the sex, race, region, age cells described in step 1.
       3. We multiply (interpolated) high school graduation rates by (interpolated) total population
          in the cell to obtain predicted numbers of high school graduates and non-graduates in
          each year, sex, race, region, age cell.
       4. We reshape the data so that the unit of observation is the year, sex, race, region, age, and
          high school completion status (yes or no).
       5. We restrict attention to individuals in the target age range (ages 18-80 for 1972+ and ages
          21-80 in earlier years.)
       6. We sum up population in the desired cells, defined by year, sex, race, region of residence,
          high school completion, and birth cohort (matching the nine roughly 16-year birth
          cohorts described in the text). We approximate year of birth as year minus age minus 1,
          given the April 1 timing of the Census). 21
       7. We calculate the share of the voting-age population (through age 80) in each cell c,
                                   
          separately by year t,     .
       8. We calculate the share of the voting-age sample (through age 80) in each cell c,
                                                
          separately by year t and survey s,       , treating each individual Gallup survey as distinct.
                                                                                            / 
       9. We calculate the weight by normalizing the ratio of these shares,        =          , with
          i representing the individual respondent, so as to average to one within each survey-year.
          That is, the weight for respondent i in cell c in survey s in year t is given by  =
                    
              /=1           ×  , where  is the number of observations in survey s in year t.

As shown in Appendix Figure 1 Panel B, which corresponds to the partisanship series where we
use our Gallup weighting strategy throughout, the weights do a very good job of reproducing the
trends in population shares residing in the South, nonwhite, female, with a high school degree,
and with some college (despite not including this variable in the weights) that are observed in the
Census/ACS. They also do a fairly good job capturing fluctuations in the average age of the
population.

November Current Population Survey

The Voter Supplement of the November Current Population Survey (CPS) asks about whether an
individual voted in the prior November election. While the supplement was fielded as early as

21
     Interview timing in the ACS is not provided in the public-use data.
1964, we were not able to locate microdata for 1964 and 1968, and personal correspondence with
Census statisticians suggests that they may have been lost. The 1972 microdata include a
question on voting in the 1968 presidential election, but we exclude information about this
election so as to be consistent in how questions about voter behavior are timed relative to
elections (within two years).

We thus use the November CPS Voter Supplements to estimate voter turnout in the elections
from 1972 forward. The 1972 data are available through ICPSR Study No. 60 (U.S. Bureau of
the Census, 1992). Data for the years 1976 through 2016 are available through IPUMS CPS
(Flood et al., 2018). State of residence is grouped into 27 categories in 1976 (only), precluding a
regression analysis at the state level. The universe of the data always includes those ages 18 and
over but otherwise changes over time. Through the 1988 election, the supplement was
administered only to those eligible to vote; likewise, for 2012 and 2016, the supplement was
restricted to citizens. For the 1992 through 2008 elections, there were no additional restrictions.
The rate of non-response to the voting question rises over time, but to a similar extent across sex.

We use the supplement weights for the November CPS, renormalizing them to average to one
within year as with the Gallup demographic weights. An interesting feature of these weights is
that they do not replicate the trends in population share nonwhite that we observe in the
Census/ACS, as suggested by Appendix Figure 1 Panel A, which corresponds to the voter
turnout series where the November CPS dominates in years 1972 and later.

American National Election Studies

The American National Election Studies (ANES) provide rich information on voting, other
measures of political participation, and public opinion for elections dating back to 1952. 22 We
use data from the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2016), available at
https://electionstudies.org/data-center/, as an additional source of information on both voter
turnout and party identification. The survey also allows us to calculate statistics related to other
measures of political participation (Table 1) and issue preferences (Appendix Table 2).

We use the weights provided in the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File, renormalizing
them to average to one within a year as with the Gallup demographic weights. Data for 1952,
1956, 1964, 1968, 1972, 1980, 1984, and 1988 are self-weighting.

General Social Survey

The General Social Survey (GSS) provide rich information on voting, other measures of political
participation, and public opinion for elections dating back to 1968. We use data from the GSS
1972-2018 Cross-Sectional Cumulative Data file (Release 1), available at http://gss.norc.org/get-
the-data/stata, as an additional source of information on both voter turnout and party
identification for 1972 forward. The survey also allows us to calculate statistics related to other
measures of issue preferences (Tables 2 and 3) and to continue the Gallup series on preferences
over hypothetical presidential candidates (Figure 4).

22
  There are a limited number of variables available for the 1948 presidential election. We focus on the 1952 through
2016 elections, where a more complete set of variables is available.
The GSS asks questions about voting in given presidential election typically across the three to
four years that followed. To be consistent about how questions about voting are timed relative to
the election, we restrict attention to the responses given within two years of an election (e.g., we
use 1973 and 1974 responses about the 1972 election, but not 1975 and 1976 responses).
Because the GSS began in 1972, we exclude responses about the 1968 election for the same
reason.

We use the weights provided in the GSS, renormalizing them to average to one within year as
with the Gallup demographic weights.

Appendix Table 1 summarizes the availability of each of our main voting and preference
measures in the GSS during our two sets of focal years in Tables 2 and 3 (1977-1986 and 2007-
2016). Although many of the questions were not included in each survey (particularly between
1978 and 1984), all of the questions were fielded at least three times during each of the periods
we analyze. This ensures that we have reasonable balance in the composition of questions
represented in the summary indices in each period.

Regressions
In the section, "Drivers of the Sex Gaps and the Growing Political Influence of Women," we
explore the extent to which generational replacement, or cohort effects, can explain time trends
in the sex gap in voter turnout and identification with the Democratic party. We also consider
the extent to which inter-cohort trends in educational attainment by age 25 (estimated from
Census/ACS data) can explain the cohort effects.

Specifically, we initially estimate a model of the form:
                                                                           
               =  +  +    ×  +  +    ×  +  +  ,

where  represents the voter turnout or Democratic party identification rate for individuals of
sex s in cohort c residing in CPS state group r in election year t in decade d;  is a female
                        
dummy variable and        is a decade indicator;  represents a vector of decade fixed effects, or
                                                       
coefficients on the vector of decade indicators; and     represents state group indicators and 
                          23
state group fixed effects. The interactions between the initial decade indicator for a given
variable, 0 , and  is omitted, so that the  represent changes in the sex gap between  and 0 .
The solid lines in each panel of Appendix Figure 7 show baseline trends in the sex gap, i.e.,
estimates of the  .

We first examined how estimates of the  changed with inclusion of cohort indicators and their
interaction with  . Estimates of the  with cohort effects included are represented by the dashed
lines in Appendix Figure 7. As shown in Panel A, the unadjusted, or baseline, sex gap in voter
turnout is increasing across decades, but the adjusted gap in much flatter. This implies that the
relative rise in women's turnout over time largely reflect generational replacement of older

23
  We work with "state groups," rather than individual states since the 1976 November Current Population Survey
does not report individual state, but rather groups of small states that are close geographically.
cohorts with younger cohorts. In contrast, the results in Panel B show that the unadjusted and the
adjusted sex gap in Democratic identification are quite similar, with both increasing across
decades. This implies that generational replacement cannot explain women's relative rise in
Democratic identification; rather, these effects were present across all cohorts.

The solid lines in Figure 7 of the paper show the baseline cohort effects (coefficients on the
interactions between  and the cohort indicators) that correspond to the adjusted year effects
represented by the dashed lines in Appendix Figure 7. Consistent with the Appendix Figure 7
findings, the inter-cohort changes in the sex gap are much more striking for voter turnout than
for Democratic party identification. The remaining lines show what happens to the estimated
cohort effects as cohort educational attainment, by level (high school and some college, both by
age 25) and without and with sex-specific coefficients, are then added to the model. Sex-specific
effects of high school completion explain the substantial cohort effects for voter turnout, and
controls for college attendance generate cohort effects. The corresponding regression
coefficients on the education variables are given in Appendix Table 3.
References
Berinsky, Adam J. 2006. "American Public Opinion in the 1930s and 1940s: The Analysis if
       Quota-Controlled Sample Survey Data." Public Opinion Quarterly 70(4): 499-529.

Berinsky, Adam J. and Eric Schickler. 2011. The American Mass Public in the 1930s and 1940s
       [Computer file]. Individual surveys conducted by the Gallup Organization [producers],
       1936-1945: Roper Center for Public Opinion Research, University of Connecticut
       [distributor], 2011.

Berinsky, Adam J., Eleanor Neff Powell, Eric Schickler, and Ian Brett Yohai. 2011. "Revisiting
       Public Opinion in the 1930s and 1940s." PS: Political Science and Politics 44(3): 515-
       520.

Farber, Henry S., Daniel Herbst, Ilyana Kuziemko, and Suresh Naidu. 2018. "Unions and
        Inequality Over the Twentieth Century: New Evidence from Survey Data." Manuscript.

Flood, Sarah, Miriam King, Renae Rodgers, Steven Ruggles and J. Robert Warren. Integrated
       Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset].
       Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2018. https://doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0

Gillion, Daniel Q., Jonathan M. Ladd, and Marc Meredith. 2018. "Party Polarization,
         Ideological Sorting and the Emergence of the U.S. Partisan Gender Gap." British
         Journal of Political Science 1-27.

Kuziemko, Ilyana and Ebonya Washington. 2018. "Why Did the Democrats Lose the South?
      Bringing New Data to an Old Debate." American Economic Review 108(10): 2830-2867.

Ruggles, Steven, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas and
      Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS,
      2019. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0

United States, Bureau of the Census. 1992. Current Population Survey: Voter Supplement File,
       1972. Ann Arbor, MI: [distributor], 1992-02-16. https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR00060.v1
Appendix Table 1
Availability of Voting and Preferences Measures in the General Social Survey, 1977-1986 and 2007-2016

                                                           77   78   80   82   83   84   85   86   08   10   12   14   16
 Voted in Last Presidential Election                       X              X              X              X         X

 Voted for Democrat in Last Presidential Election          X              X              X              X         X

 Sexuality Attitudes Index                                 X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X
                      Homosexual Relations Not Wrong       X         X    X         X    X         X    X    X    X    X
                      Okay to have Sex Before Marriage     X    X         X    X         X    X    X    X    X    X    X

 Criminal Justice Index                                    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X
                                      Courts too Harsh     X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X
                               Should need Gun Permit      X         X    X         X    X         X    X    X    X    X
                       Oppose Death Penalty for Murder     X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X    X

 Abortion Attitude Index                                   X    X    X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X    X    X
                              Abortion if Serious Defect   X    X    X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X    X    X
                Abortion if Married + Don't Want More      X    X    X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X    X    X
                        Abortion if Mom Health at Risk     X    X    X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X    X    X
                                   Abortion if Very Poor   X    X    X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X    X    X
                        Abortion if Pregnant from Rape     X    X    X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X    X    X
               Abortion if Single + Don't Want to Marry    X    X    X    X    X    X    X         X    X    X    X    X

 Women's Public Roles Index                                X    X         X    X         X    X    X    X    X    X    X
                Disagree Women not Suited to Politics      X    X         X    X         X    X    X    X    X    X    X
                             Vote Woman President          X    X         X    X         X    X    X    X

 Family Gender Roles Index                        X                                       X    X    X    X    X    X    X
                 Disagree Woman Should Stay Home X                                       X    X    X    X    X    X    X
             Agree Mom Working Doesn't Hurt Kids X                         X   X   X   X   X   X   X
           Disagree Pre-K Kids Suffer if Mom Works X                       X   X   X   X   X   X   X

Progressive Government Index                               X   X   X   X       X   X   X   X   X   X
                             Govt. Should Help Poor                X   X       X   X   X   X   X   X
                             Govt. Should Help Sick                X   X       X   X   X   X   X   X
                          Govt. Should Help Blacks                 X   X       X   X   X   X   X   X
                       Govt. Should Equalize Wealth        X   X   X   X       X   X   X   X   X   X

Race Equality Index                                    X                   X   X   X   X   X   X   X
                         Race Gap not due to Ability   X                   X   X   X   X   X   X   X
                            Race Gap due to Access     X                   X   X   X   X   X   X   X
                      Race Gap not due to Motivation   X                   X   X   X   X   X   X   X
                      Race Gap due to Discrimination   X                   X   X   X   X   X   X   X
Appendix Table 2
Trends in the Sex Gap in Issue Preferences: Measures from the American National Election Studies

                                                                               Earliest Decade                     Latest Decade
                                                                             Mean       Sex Gap                  Mean      Sex Gap

 A. Party Preferences and Ideology (Share)
    Identifies as a Democrat                                                 0.471           -0.003              0.349          0.074
    Voted for the Democrat in Last Presidential Election                     0.410           -0.040              0.509          0.064
    Slightly to Extremely Liberal                                            0.249           -0.041              0.281          0.024
    Slightly to Extremely Conservative                                       0.375           -0.046              0.395          -0.067

 B. Group Thermometers (scale of 0-97)
    Blacks                                                                    63.8            3.5                66.1             4.3
    Poor People                                                               72.1            3.4                69.5             2.9
    Big Business                                                              59.8            -1.3               49.1             -0.2
    Labor Unions                                                              56.9            -2.6               52.1             4.2
    Liberals                                                                  52.2            1.4                48.5             5.0
    Conservatives                                                             56.8            -1.2               54.9             0.4

 C. Issues (Share in At Top 3 Points on 7-Point Scale)
    Government Should Help Minority Groups/Blacks,**                         0.345           0.016               0.225           0.015
    Government Should Provide Many More Services                             0.368           0.070               0.333           0.049
    Women and Men Should Have An Equal Role,*                                0.519           -0.054              0.824           0.032


Notes: Data are from the American National Election Studies. Statistics are weighted by ANES sampling weights. otherwise noted, earliest
decade is the 1950s (1952 and 1956) and latest decade is the 2010s (2012 and 2016).  Earliest decade is 1960s (1964, 1968).  Earliest decade
is 1970s (1972 and 1976).  Earliest decade is 1980s (1980, 1984). * Latest decade is 2000s (2004, 2008). ** Latest decade includes 2016 only.
Appendix Table 3
Association between Cohort Educational Attainment and Voter Turnout and Party Identification

                                                           Voter Turnout                                 Democratic Party Identification
                                                (1)               (2)               (3)                  (4)               (5)               (6)

    High School Graduation                     0.186            0.051             0.034                 -0.068            -0.090           -0.232
                                              (0.031)          (0.042)           (0.044)               (0.029)           (0.042)          (0.050)
    High School x Female                                        0.248             0.271                                   0.041            0.077
                                                               (0.061)           (0.063)                                 (0.057)          (0.065)
    Some College Attendance                                                       0.059                                                    0.521
                                                                                 (0.071)                                                  (0.082)
    Some College x Female                                                         -0.103                                                   0.205
                                                                                 (0.103)                                                  (0.111)


    Number of observations
    (cells)                                    5072              5072              5072                 4150              4150              4150


Notes: The unit of analysis is a sex x Census region x birth cohort x election decade cell. The underlying regression includes sex fixed effects, sex x
decade fixed effects, sex x cohort fixed effects, sex x region fixed effects. Regressions are weighted by cell size, and standard errors (in parentheses)
are clustered on state group. All observed correlates are shares ranging from 0 to 1.
Appendix Figure 1
Comparison of Characteristics in Unweighted and Weighted Data




Data sources: We compile Gallup microdata from polls conducted from 1940-70 by the Gallup Organization and
November CPS Voter Supplement microdata from ICPSR Study #60 (for 1972) and IPUMS CPS (Flood et al.,
2018) (for 1976-2016). GSS data are drawn from the GSS 1972-2018 Cross-Sectional Cumulative Data file
(Release 1) and ANES data from the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2016). See Data Appendix.

Notes: Graphs show trends in average demographic characteristics in the raw voter turnout series ("unweighted");
the voter turnout series weighted using sampling weights that we construct from the Census/ACS, which adjust
Gallup demographics to the year x region x education x race x sex x birth cohort level and use survey-provided
weights for the November CPS, GSS, and ANES ("weighted"); and average demographic characteristics as
calculated from Census and ACS microdata (Ruggles et al., 2019).
Appendix Figure 1 (continued)
Comparison of Characteristics in Unweighted and Weighted Data




Data sources: Microdata on Democratic party identification are from the replication archive of Gillion, Ladd, and
Meredith (2018) (for 1953-2012), Gallup polls spanning 1948-52 and 2013-17 that we collected from the Roper
Center, the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2016), and the GSS Cross-Sectional Cumulative Data
1972-2018 (Release 1). See Data Appendix.

Notes: Graphs show trends in average demographic characteristics in the raw party identification series
("unweighted"); the party identification series weighted using sampling weights that we construct from the
Census/ACS, which adjust Gallup demographics to the year x region x education x race x sex x birth cohort level
and use survey-provided weights for the GSS and ANES ("weighted"); and average demographic characteristics as
calculated from Census and ACS microdata (Ruggles et al., 2019).
Appendix Figure 2
Voter Turnout in U.S. Presidential Elections, by Region: 1900-2016




Notes: The numerator of the series represented by the solid black line is the regional presidential vote count,
constructed by the authors from state-level vote tallies available at http://uselectionsatlas.org. The denominator of
this series is regional voting-age population (ages 18 and up for 1972 forward+ and ages 21 and up in all earlier
years), estimated from Decennial Census (1900-2000) and American Community Survey (ACS) (2005-16) Public
Use Microdata Samples (Ruggles et al., 2019) for the subsample of states in a region with election returns. See Data
Appendix. Regions are based on Census definitions.
Appendix Figure 3
Gaps in Voter Turnout by Race and Sex: Pooled Survey Data, 1940-2016




Notes: Survey data pool the Gallup, November CPS, GSS, and ANES series described in the notes to Figure 1.
Statistics are weighted by survey-provided weights (for the CPS, GSS, and ANES) or author-constructed weights
(for Gallup), with all weights re-normed to average to one within each survey-year. The figure plots the race gap in
voter turnout (non-white-white), separately by region, and the sex gap in voter turnout (female-male) in the South,
by race. South is the southern Census region.
Appendix Figure 4
Trends in Share of Votes for Democratic Candidate: Survey and Administrative Data,
1940-2016




Data Sources: The numerator and denominator of the series represented by the solid black line are the national
presidential vote count for the Democratic candidate and the national total presidential vote count, respectively,
constructed by the authors from state-level vote tallies available at http://uselectionsatlas.org. The series represented
by the dashed line is constructed from pooled survey data from Gallup (1940-68), the ANES (1952-2012), and the
GSS (1972-2012). See Data Appendix.

Notes: We weight statistics from the Gallup microdata using weights that we construct from the Census, which
adjust Gallup demographics to the year x region x education x race x sex x birth cohort level. (Birth cohorts are
defined as described in the paper.) We weight statistics from the ANES and GSS using survey-provided weights.
Appendix Figure 5
The Sex Gap in Republican Partisanship: Pooled Survey Data, 1940-2016




Data sources: Microdata on Republican party identification are from the replication archive of Gillion, Ladd, and
Meredith (2018) (for 1953-2012), Gallup polls spanning 1948-52 and 2013-17 that we collected from the Roper
Center, the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2016), and the GSS Cross-Sectional Cumulative Data
1972-2018 (Release 1). Microdata on voting for the Republican presidential candidate are from Gallup polls
spanning 1940-70, the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2016), and the GSS Cross-Sectional
Cumulative Data 1972-2018 (Release 1).

Notes: Statistics are weighted by survey-provided weights (for the GSS and ANES) or author-constructed weights
(for Gallup), with all weights re-normed to average to one within each survey-year.
Appendix Figure 6
The Sex Gap in Democratic Partisanship, by Region: Pooled Survey Data, 1948-2016




Data sources: Microdata on Democratic party identification are from the replication archive of Gillion, Ladd, and
Meredith (2018) (for 1953-2012), Gallup polls spanning 1948-52 and 2013-17 that we collected from the Roper
Center, the ANES Time Series Cumulative Data File (1948-2016), and the GSS Cross-Sectional Cumulative Data
1972-2018 (Release 1).

Notes: Statistics are weighted by survey-provided weights (for the GSS and ANES) or author-constructed weights
(for Gallup), with all weights re-normed to average to one within each survey-year.
Appendix Figure 7
Trends in the Sex Gaps in Voter Turnout, Without and With Adjustment for Cohort
Effects




Data sources: Survey data pool the Gallup, November CPS, GSS, and ANES as described in the notes to Figures 1
and 3, for panels A and B respectively. The geographic unit to which we collapse are the single states and groups of
states (27 total) identified in the 1976 November CPS.

Notes: The solid line in each panel plots change in the sex gap in the outcome from the base decade when we
regression-adjust for state-group-by-sex effects ("unadjusted"), while the dashed line shows the change in the sex
gap when we additionally include cohort-by-sex effects ("adjusted"). The sex gap is the female ­ male difference in
the outcome. All regressions are weighted by the number of observations used to construct the dependent variable.
