                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     ASK AND YOU SHALL RECEIVE? GENDER DIFFERENCES IN REGRADES IN
                              COLLEGE

                                      Cher Hsuehhsiang Li
                                          Basit Zafar

                                      Working Paper 26703
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26703


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We are grateful to Colorado State University for providing access to the administrative data. We
thank Christine Exley, participants in the Allied Social Science Association Annual Meeting,
Asian & Australasian Society of Labour Economics Conference, NBER Education Meeting,
Southern Economic Association Annual Meeting, University of Wisconsin-Madison Alumni
Conference, Colorado Summer Workshops, and seminar participants at San Francisco State
University and University of West Georgia for valuable comments. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Cher Hsuehhsiang Li and Basit Zafar. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Ask and You Shall Receive? Gender Differences in Regrades in College
Cher Hsuehhsiang Li and Basit Zafar
NBER Working Paper No. 26703
January 2020
JEL No. C40,C91,J01,J16

                                          ABSTRACT

Using administrative data from a large 4-year public university, we show that male students are
18.6 percent more likely than female students to receive favorable grade changes initiated by
instructors. These gender differences cannot be explained by observable characteristics of the
students, instructors, and the classes. To understand the mechanisms underlying these gendered
outcomes, we conduct surveys of students and instructors, which reveal that regrade requests are
prevalent, and that male students are more likely than female students to ask for regrades on the
intensive margin. Finally, we corroborate the gender differences in regrade requests in an
incentivized controlled experiment where participants receive noisy signals of their performance,
and where they can ask for regrades: we find that males have a higher willingness to pay (WTP)
to ask for regrades. Because students' payoff depends on their final grade and the cost of regrades,
male students' higher propensity to ask for regrades makes them financially better off only when
the cost is low. Males are more likely than females to become financially worse off when the
regrade cost is high. Almost half of the gender difference in the WTP is due to gender differences
in confidence, uncertainty in beliefs about ability, and the Big Five personality traits.


Cher Hsuehhsiang Li
Colorado State University
cher.hh.li@gmail.com

Basit Zafar
Department of Economics
Arizona State University
P.O. Box 879801
Tempe, AZ 85287
and NBER
basitak@gmail.com
1    Introduction
Women and men differ across a variety of behaviors, including their tendency to negoti-
ate (Bowles et al., 2007; Leibbrandt and List, 2014; Small et al., 2007). The difference in
propensity to negotiate has been argued to contribute to the gender gap in labor market
outcomes (Babcock and Laschever, 2003; Artz et al., 2018). This project examines whether
such gender differences have consequences when individuals are still in school, prior to entry
in the labor force. Specifically, we examine whether male and female students experience
different rates of successful grade changes in college. If men are more aggressive than women
in bargaining for better grades (either on the extensive or intensive margin), they may be
more likely to convince their instructors to alter their grades which serve as productivity
signals to potential employers. Gender differences in willingness to ask and to negotiate may
then put equally capable female students at a relative disadvantage in the job market.
    The starting point of our analysis is a unique administrative dataset that contains not
only the final grade records but also any grade changes related to the records from a large
4-year public university. The dataset includes different reasons of grade changes that allow
us to distinguish changes that are due to student actions, university rules, or instructor
initiations. Assuming that the distribution of grading errors is the same for both male and
female students, we would expect to observe a similar grade correction pattern initiated by
instructors for both male and female students. The overwhelming majority of grade changes
(95 percent) led to an improvement in the grade. Our analysis based on the administra-
tive records reveals that although women made up 53.4 percent of the grade records, they
represented only 49.1 percent of the favorable grade changes initiated by instructors. The
gender differences in students' grade changes persist across colleges and departments, and
are robust to inclusion of class and student characteristics.
    Grade changes in the administrative records are, unsurprisingly, rare events: less than
0.5 percent of grades are changed. The administrative data is not very informative of the
prevalence of regrading requests. By construction, it contains no information on any requests
that students made but resulted in no grade change. In addition, students might have
asked for regrades all along the semester--analysis of the administrative data by itself is
likely to underestimate the extent of regrading requests and gender differences in them.
Therefore, the small fraction (less than 0.5%) of grade changes and its consequential effects
on GPA (an increase of 0.0035 points for females and 0.0041 points for males) observed in the
administrative records should be considered a lower bound for regrade requests and changes
in GPA. Administrative data is also limited in what it can tell us about the origins of the
gender differences in regrades. For example, they may be a result of at least three distinct



                                                                                            2
scenarios: 1) male students are more likely than female students to ask instructors for grade
changes although instructors treat all requests equally (i.e., a gender difference in willingness
to ask); 2) the propensity to ask is the same for both male and female students, but the
outcomes are more favorable for males than for females when they ask (i.e., discrimination);
and 3) female students make regrade requests during the semester which in turn lowers
their demand for regrade requests at the end of the semester. Administrative records do
not contain any information that allows us to understand which scenario accounts for these
unequal outcomes. Knowing the origin of these differences is relevant for policy. For example,
evidence consistent with the second scenario would be indicative of some kind of preferential
treatment towards males. Evidence consistent with the first scenario would be suggestive of
a preference-based explanation.
    To understand these patterns, we next administered surveys to instructors and students.
These surveys elicited respondents' recollections on regrade requests in the past semesters.
Forty percent of students reported that they approached instructors for grade changes at
some point during their college life. We treat this high propensity of asking (i.e. 40%) as the
upper bound of regrade requests. Conditional on asking, over 60 percent of the requests lead
to an improvement in some grade component (e.g. exams, quizzes, and assignments), and
over 30 percent of these requests result in better final grade outcomes for students. Therefore,
these regrade requests may have a profound impact on grades for students. Indeed, using the
statistics reported by students, our back-of-the-envelope calculation shows that the upper
bound of the increase in GPA conditional on asking could be as high as 0.43 points for
females and 0.47 points for males. Importantly, the high prevalence of regrade requests in
college suggests that restricting the analysis to the administrative data would have shown
a very incomplete picture. The surveys reveal that there is little gender difference in the
propensity of males and females to ever ask (or consider asking) for regrades. However, male
students ask (or consider asking) for regrades in a larger number of classes. That is, there is
a gender difference on the intensive margin. We also find that these request patterns persist
throughout the semester. Hence, even if instructors change the grades for male and female
students at the same rate, the outcome may still favor male students simply because they
ask more frequently. We also find no gender difference in the expected change in grades,
conditional on asking.
    To investigate why men and women differ in their propensity to ask, we next rely on an
incentivized controlled experiment where payoff depends on one's revealed performance in a
quiz. Students are, however, initially given noisy signals of their quiz performance. They are
then given the option to request a regrade at varying levels of costs. Specifically, we used a
multiple-price-list variation of the Becker-DeGroot-Marschak method (Andersen et al., 2006)



                                                                                               3
to elicit the individual's willingness to pay (WTP) to ask for a regrade: individuals are asked
to decide whether they want to make a regrade request at 10 varying cost scenarios, with
the costs varying from the respondent paying $3.50 to -$1.00 (that is, getting paid $1.00)
in increments of $0.50. If a participant decides to pay a given cost to ask for a regrade, the
true grade is revealed. Regrades potentially affect not only the final shown grade but also
the student's monetary payoff. The laboratory setting is advantageous over observational
field evidence because it allows us to quantify gender differences in the WTP to ask, and to
investigate its correlates.
    Our results are striking. There are no gender differences in the willingness to ask when
the cost of doing so is zero or negative (that is, when the respondent is being paid to ask).
However, a large gender difference emerges once the cost of asking is positive: nearly half
of males are willing to pay a positive cost for regrades, versus only a third of females. As
a result, the average WTP differs by gender: it is $0.25 for males, compared with $0.05 for
females (the difference is significant at the 5-percent level). We also validate our experimental
measure of WTP by showing that it positively correlates with the survey data on regrade
considerations in actual courses, that is, students who exhibit a higher WTP to ask in the
experiment are also more likely to have considered asking their instructors for a regrade.
The higher willingness to ask on the part of men, however, does not necessarily translate
into increased monetary returns for them once the regrading costs are taken into account.
For low-cost values, men's higher propensity to ask for regrades does make them better off.
However, at high-cost values, men's higher propensity to ask can actually make them worse
off. As a result, males are both more likely than females to see a payoff increase when the
cost is low and a payoff decrease when the cost is high. This is consistent with the survey
evidence from instructors that male students are much more aggressive in their requests, and
with the survey evidence from the students themselves where male students are more likely
to report regrets for asking too aggressively for regrades.
    So what explains the gender difference in the WTP to ask? We see that females, relative
to males, have lower average beliefs about their score on the test. However, the gender gap
in beliefs mimics the gender gap in actual performance that we observe on the quiz. It is
worth noting that both genders overestimate their performance on the quiz. We find that
females are, on average, more under-confident and more uncertain about their performance
than males. This is consistent with prior evidence that men exhibit a greater degree of
overconfidence in their relative ability (Barber and Odean, 2001; Niederle and Vesterlund,
2007) or that females tend to be less confident (Sarsons and Xu, 2015). Likewise, consistent
with prior literature (Croson and Gneezy, 2009; Eckel and Grossman, 2008), we find that
females are more risk averse. Our survey data reveal systematic gender differences in the Big



                                                                                               4
Five personality traits, with females being more agreeable and neurotic; this is consistent
with prior literature (Costa Jr et al., 2001; Weisberg et al., 2011). We find that gender
differences in confidence, uncertainty in beliefs and personality traits can explain 43 percent
of the gender difference in the propensity to ask; we find a small role of risk preferences.
Nonetheless, the majority of the gender gap remains unexplained, suggestive of preference-
based explanations.
    Our survey provides further evidence on why females are less likely to ask. They are
significantly more likely to report higher psychic costs--specifically, fear of rejection and
stress--when having to ask an instructor for a regrade. Thus, policies that make regrading
policies explicit and lower the (psychic) costs of asking could reduce gender differences in
asking. In addition, reducing under-confidence and uncertainty in beliefs (through policies
that provide more accurate signals to individuals) is likely to reduce gender differences in
the WTP to ask.
    It is rather remarkable that across three very different types of data (administrative,
survey, and experimental), we get consistent results. We view that as a contribution in itself.
Our paper is related to the literature on gender differences in asking. Empirical findings
often show that women are much less likely than men to initiate negotiations and attain
less favorable outcomes when they do negotiate. For instance, Small et al. (2007) find that
women were more likely than men to accept a low reward for their participation in a study
without bargaining. Similarly, Babcock and Laschever (2003) find that among graduates
from a prestigious MBA program, only 7 percent of the women negotiated their wage offers,
while 57 percent of the men did so, contributing to the gender wage gap in the starting
salary of the MBA graduates. Leibbrandt and List (2014) conducted a field experiment by
posting job advertisements and observed the negotiation behaviors of real job applicants.
They find that when salaries were not explicitly made negotiable in the advertisement, men
were significantly more likely to negotiate for a higher wage. However, the gender differences
in wage negotiation disappeared when salaries were posted as negotiable. Exley et al. (2019)
find that women attain worse returns from negotiation when it is mandatory than when it is
optional, suggesting that women know when to ask. This has some parallels with our finding
that women are less likely to see a payoff decrease than men (for positive costs of asking).
However, we also find that females are less likely to experience payoff gains when the costs
of asking are low.
    We complement this literature by showing that females are simply less likely to ask,
especially when there is a positive cost for doing so. Our rich data also allow us to shed light
on the underlying reasons for the gender gap. Prior studies primarily focus on the impact of
gender differences in negotiations on outcomes after individuals enter the labor force. There



                                                                                              5
is little work on how gender differences in negotiations and willingness-to-ask prior to labor
market entry may impact outcomes. Our proposed project fills this gap by investigating
whether the gender differences in propensity to bargain have implications for outcomes in
college. These pre-market gender differences are important because they could have direct
implications in potential labor market outcomes for college graduates. Employers frequently
require candidates who apply for entry-level positions to provide their transcripts, and many
competitive positions require a minimum GPA. The difference in regrades by gender may
keep qualifying females below potential employers' GPA threshold. In fact, Kessler et al.
(2019) show that college GPAs play a critical role in employers' recruitment assessment--a
1 point increase in GPA results in an increase in employers' hiring interest by 0.8 standard
deviations. In an audit study, Quadlin (2018) also finds that the callback rate for job
applicants increases from 9.6 percent to 16.3 percent as their GPA increases from 2.50 to
3.59. Hence, gender gaps in regrades could place women in a relative disadvantaged position.1
     The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. The next section presents the
analysis of the administrative data. Section 3 analyzes the survey data that we collected from
instructors and students, while Section 4 presents the analysis of the laboratory experiment.
Finally, Section 5 concludes with a discussion of the results and their implications.


2       Analysis of Administrative Records

2.1     Data
We analyze a unique administrative dataset from Colorado State University (CSU), a large
4-year public university. CSU was ranked 129th among all public and private universities
nationwide in 2016 (US News and World Report, 2016). Fall 2016 enrollment at CSU con-
sisted of 23,768 on-campus undergraduate students. On average, the freshmen admitted in
Fall 2016 had a 3.6 high-school GPA, a 25.2 ACT composite score (compared to the national
average of 20.8), a 566.5 SAT critical reading score, and a 575.5 SAT math score (compared
to national averages of 494 and 508, respectively). Among these freshmen, approximately
56 percent were female and 25 percent were minorities (CSU, The Fact Book 2016­17). Al-
though the gender distribution of CSU freshmen was comparable to the national average (56
percent), CSU was less ethnically diverse than the average university (43 percent).2
    1
     We need not take a stand on what exactly grades measure. Whether grades serve as a proxy of unob-
servable cognitive skills or non-cognitive traits (including negotiation skill) is an interesting question but one
that is beyond the scope of this paper. What matters for the relevance of our findings is that grades have
consequences for outcomes, including labor market outcomes.
   2
     The national average test scores were published on the ACT and SAT websites (The ACT Profile
Report--National Graduating Class 2016 and 2016 College-Bound Seniors SAT Total Group Profile Report).




                                                                                                                6
    Key to our purposes, this administrative dataset records not only the final grades but also
any grade changes. In the case of a grade change, a reason code is also provided. We focus
primarily on the change reasons including grade entry errors, instructor corrections, and re-
calculations--the only three options available to instructors when they submit grade changes
in the computing system. The distribution of instructors' grade change reasons is: 26 percent
entry errors, 59 percent instructor corrections, and 15 percent recalculations. There are no
clear instructions on the choices of the grade change codes and no verification mechanism
in place to distinguish the assignment of regrade reasons. Therefore, instructors have the
flexibility in assigning the grade change reasons among the three options. For this reason, we
treat grade changes based on any of the three reasons as regrades by instructors. The results
are robust to exclusion of individual reasons among the three change codes one-at-a-time.3 If
the grade changes are based on students' own actions (e.g., taking a repeat-and-delete option
by re-taking the same course to override the original grade with a new grade or receiving
a final letter grade for initially incomplete credits) or university rules (e.g., grades were
automatically changed to F when students fail to meet the higher requirements for college
writing and mathematics courses), they are not considered regrades made by instructors.


2.2     Descriptive Statistics
The administrative dataset contains 1,341,552 credited student-class records with letter
grades of 64,857 students taught by 3,726 instructors during the years between 2010 and
2016. Excluding grade updates for the incomplete credits after students completed their
work, there were 6,225 grade changes (0.46 percent) made by instructors during this time.
Among the grade changes initiated by instructors, 94.6 percent (5,886 records) of the grades
were corrected upward (i.e., the initial grade was changed to a better grade). The over-
whelmingly large fraction of upward corrections among grade changes indicates that the
risk of receiving a downward grade change was relatively small when students made regrade
requests. Although women made up 53.4 percent of the grade records, they represented
only 49.2 percent of the upward grade changes initiated by instructors. Table 1 shows the
summary statistics by students' gender. Conditional on students' gender, the rate of upward
grade changes initiated by instructors was 0.479 percent (2,991 records) for male students
The source for the national enrollment rate by gender and race is the National Center for Education Statistics,
Table 306.10. Total fall enrollment in degree-granting postsecondary institutions, by the level of enrollment,
sex, attendance status, and race/ethnicity of student: Selected years, 1976 through 2016.
   3
     We also analyze gender differences in regrades by individual reasons (e.g., including only grade changes
due to "entry errors" (or "instructor corrections", or "recalculations") and grade records with no change),
and find that the gender gap in regrades persists for both "entry errors" and "instructor corrections" but
not for "recalculations".




                                                                                                             7
and 0.404 percent (2,895 records) for female students. Although grade changes were rare
events, among these upward changes, the 0.075 percentage points difference represented that
men were 18.6 percent more likely than women to receive an upward grade change by in-
structors. On the other hand, in the extremely sparse events (339 observations) of downward
grade corrections (i.e., the initial grade was changed to a lower grade), male students were
50-percent more likely than their female counterparts to receive such an adverse outcome
(0.03 percent versus 0.02 percent).
    Students showed additional differences in their course records by gender as presented in
Table 1. For instance, female students took half of their classes from female instructors,
while male students took classes from female instructors only 38.9 percent of the time ­
potentially due to gender sorting into different college majors where the gender distribution
of instructors is also uneven. For an average academic term, female students attained a
higher average GPA by 0.2 points when compared with their male counterparts. The gender
distribution of students also varies substantially across classes offered by different colleges.
Women were more likely than men to take classes offered by the Colleges of Agriculture,
Human Sciences, Liberal Arts, Veterinary Sciences, and Intra-University. Nevertheless, the
gender gap in grade changes was pervasive across colleges and departments.4
    Students may have different propensities to request regrades based on the grade they
originally received. Figure 1 shows that indeed students who received A+ or A ("A stu-
dents") as their initial grade are very unlikely to experience a positive grade change: this
is mechanical since their grade has already hit the upper bound. Students who received
an initial grade of D have the largest probability (1.49 percent) of getting a boost in their
final grade, followed by those with an initial grade of C+ (0.92 percent), B- (0.9 percent),
A- (0.79 percent) and F (0.72 percent). The relatively high frequencies observed for those
receiving an initial grade of D or F are not surprising. Some departments (e.g., Economics)
require students to complete their courses at a grade of C and above in order to fulfill the
major and/or minor requirements. Furthermore, if a student's average GPA falls below 2.0
(equivalent to a C), the student will be on academic probation and be dismissed if the proba-
tion has persisted for two semesters. However, the high relative frequencies of grade changes
for those receiving A-, B-, and C+ also indicate that the upward grade changes are not
limited to failing students. Frequently, students are motivated to argue for a better grade
when the grade they received is below their expectations. Indeed, the likelihood of favorable
regrades increases when a student's grade is below their average GPA.5 It is worth noting
   4
    The gender differences in grade changes by college are detailed in Appendix Tables B1.
   5
    We find that the upward grade changes were near zero when the student's performance in a given class
was better than her average performance in other classes. However, when the student's grade in a class is
below her average GPA, the propensity to receive an upward grade correction increases in the difference




                                                                                                       8
that the propensities of grade changes are similar in both large classes (i.e., defined as classes
with over 90 students) and small classes.6


2.3      Empirical Analysis
To examine whether gender differences are present in grade changes among college students,
we analyze our data with the following specification:

  Yijt = 0 + 1 M alei + 2 Wijt + 3 Xit + 4 Zjt + 5 Gradeijt × GP Ait × Deptjt +                                ijt ,   (1)

     In this equation, Yijt is a binary variable and takes the value of one if student i received
a grade change (e.g., a upward grade change or a downward grade change) in class j during
semester t and zero otherwise; Wijt includes time and class varying variables such as the initial
grade student i received in class j during semester t; Xit are characteristics of student i in
semester t, such as the student's class standing (i.e., freshman, sophomore, junior, and senior)
and cumulative GPA;7 Zjt captures class-specific information, such as the instructor's gender
and rank (i.e., tenure-track assistant professor, tenure-track associate professor, tenure-track
full professor, non-tenure-track instructor, graduate teaching assistant), department, and
college; Gradeijt × GP Ait × Deptjt includes the full interactions of indicators of students'
initial grades, discretized cumulative GPAs, and the indicator of departments. We saturate
the model with these interactions because the incentive to ask for a regrade may vary across
departments (since many majors have certain GPA and course grade requirements); and
 ijt is an error term. M alei is an indicator for male students and 1 captures any gender

differences in the regrades. This is the parameter of interest.
     We first present the analysis of equation 1 for upward grade changes in Panel A of Table
2 (i.e., the dependent variable is an indicator that equals 1 if the individual experiences
a favorable grade change). Column 1 shows that the raw gender difference (that is, the
estimate of 1 without any controls) in upward grade change is 0.0748 percentage points.
This raw gender difference implies that the male-to-female odds ratio of a favorable regrade
outcome is 1.186 (reported in square brackets in the table). In other words, for a male, the
odds of receiving an upward grade change are 1.186 times as large as the odds for a female
between the GPA and the class grade.
    6
      Approximately 28-percent of administrative records were from large classes (i.e., classes of more than
90 students) where grade changes occurred 0.45 percent of the time, compared with 0.47 percent for the
remaining classes.
    7
      In our primary analysis, cumulative GPAs are discretized into 8 intervals corresponding to letter grades:
[0, 1), [1, 2), [2, 2.334), [2.334, 2.667), [2.667, 3), [3, 3.334), [3.334, 3.667), and [3.667, 4]. Results are robust to
alternative continuous values.




                                                                                                                        9
receiving such an outcome.8 Controlling for students' characteristics (i.e., initial grade, GPA,
and class standing) that are unequal across gender (e.g., females tend to have higher grades
and GPA and shorter time-to-graduation than males), Column 2 shows that the gender gap
reduces to 0.0665 percentage points. In Column 3, controlling for class characteristics (i.e.,
colleges and departments in which the courses were offered, and the instructors' gender and
rank) reduces the gender gap to 0.0685 percentage points which is mainly attributable to the
differential rates of grade changes by departments and students' gender-sorting into different
majors. In Column 4, controlling for both student and class characteristics fails to explain
the gender gap in regrade results. The specification in Column 4 implicitly assumes that the
grade change rates are similar for students with the same grade/GPA regardless of which
departments offered the courses. This assumption may not hold when the grading standards
and major requirements vary across departments.9 In Column 5, we fully interact discretized
GPA, initial grade, and the department in which the class is offered--the triple interactions
create 4,500 mutually exclusive cells--to control for varying regrade consideration across the
interaction dimensions. The gender gap estimate is reduced slightly to 0.0698 percentage
points. Thus, the finding that males are more likely to have a favorable grade change is
remarkably robust.
    We analyze the same equation with downward regrades as the outcome in Panel B of
Table 2. As stated earlier, male students were also more likely (by 0.0102 percentage points
as reported in Column 1 of Panel B) than female students to receive a downward regrade.
Although the result is insensitive to the inclusion of the student's class standing, GPA, and
initial grades, the relative adverse outcome for males disappears when we control for the
class characteristics.
    Including all the aforementioned control variables (i.e., colleges, departments, instructors'
gender and rank, students' class standing, grade, and GPA, and the interactions of students'
GPA, initial grades, and departments in which the classes are offered), Column 1 of Panel
A in Table 3 reports the baseline estimate of a 0.0698 percentage points male advantage in
upward regrades that cannot be explained by class and student observable characteristics.
To investigate the sensitivity of the analysis, we estimate the model using a logit regression
in Column 2. Because a large number of observations in the triple interaction cells do not
have any grade change records, we are unable to reliably estimate the gender differences in
regrades because these observations will be dropped from the logit regression. Alternatively,
we use the continuous values of GPA and initial grade for the logit regression analysis. The
   8                                   P rM ale (Y =1)/P rM ale (Y =0)
     The odds ratio is calculated as P rF emale (Y =1)/P rF emale (Y =0)
                                                                         , holding all else at the mean values.
   9
     For example, students majoring in economics have to pass core economics courses with a minimum grade
of C to receive the bachelor's degree, while students majoring in agricultural economics only need to pass
these courses to meet their degree requirements.




                                                                                                            10
gender gap remains significant at the value of 0.0829 percentage points from the logit model
in Column 2. We then remove students who received multiple upward regrades from the
analysis. We find that the gender gap reduces but remains substantial at 0.0583 percentage
points in Column 3 of Panel A. This result suggests that approximately 18 percent of the
male advantage was due to the fact that male students were more likely (8.03 percent) to
receive multiple upward grade changes than were their female counterparts (7.29 percent)
during their time in college.
    If male class enrollment is correlated with instructor leniency in regrades (e.g., through
knowledge of instructor reputation), a concern may be that gender differences in regrades are
driven by a handful of instructors who make frequent grade changes. Column 4 of Panel A in
Table 3 examines the sensitivity of the result by removing observations if the instructor made
more than 10 percent changes in grades; we see the exclusion explains little of the gender
difference (i.e., the gender difference reduces slightly from 0.0698 to 0.0565 percentage points
and remains significant).
    Next, we consider that students whose grade has hit the upper bound (A+ and A) may
not need to request grade changes. We remove them from the analysis in Column 5 of
Panel A in Table 3. The gender gap actually increases to 0.105 percentage points because
female students are over-represented in this high-end grade group. On the other end of
the grade spectrum, students who hit the lower bound (F) may have greater incentives to
request regrades because they face no downside risks. By removing students who received a
failing grade, the gender gap in Column 6 becomes 0.0715 percentage points--similar to the
magnitude in the baseline model. In Column 7, we restrict the sample to large classes (i.e.,
classes with more than 90 students), and the magnitude of gender gap is 0.0724 percentage
points--statistically indistinguishable from the gender gap in smaller classes.
    We conduct a similar sensitivity analysis for downward grade changes in Panel B of
Table 3. When we control for all these aforementioned independent variables, the gender
difference in downward regrades becomes trivial (-0.0008 percentage points) and insignificant
as presented in the baseline model in Column 1 of Panel B in Table 3. The absence of gender
differences in downward regrades is persistent across the sensitivity analyses (Columns 2
through 7).
    In summary, we find robust gender differences in regrades, with males significantly more
likely to experience upward grade changes. The underlying mechanisms are not clear. For
example, the gender differences in regrades may be a result of at least three distinct scenarios:
1) male students are more likely than female students to ask instructors for grade changes
although instructors treat all requests equally (i.e., a gender difference in willingness to ask);
2) the propensity to ask is the same for both male and female students, but the outcomes are



                                                                                               11
more favorable for males than for females when they ask (i.e., discrimination); and 3) female
students make regrade requests during the semester which in turn lowers their demand for
regrade requests at the end of the semester. Understanding the mechanisms is relevant for
appropriate policy recommendations. For example, if these patterns were driven by the third
explanation, the observed patterns should not be reason for concern. Administrative records
do not contain any information that allows us to understand which scenario accounts for
these unequal outcomes. The administrative data also are limited in informing us about the
prevalence of regrade requests in college--students might have asked all along during the
semester. In addition, the data contain no information on any requests that were made but
resulted in no grade change.
   To investigate the prevalence of regrade requests more generally and understand the
gendered patterns, we next report results from surveys that we administered to instructors
and students. These surveys elicited respondents' recollections on regrade requests in the
past semesters. Then, in the subsequent section, we report results from an experimental
study that further allows us to quantify the underlying mechanisms.


3     Surveys of Instructors and Students

3.1    Samples
For the instructor survey (Appendix A1), invitational emails were disseminated to all faculty
members and graduate students across all colleges at CSU. For eligibility, instructors must
have taught at least one undergraduate course and experienced regrade requests at the end of
a semester. The email contained an online survey link. 154 instructors (including graduate
teaching assistants) completed the instructor survey between October and December, 2018.
The average (median) time taken to complete the survey was 11.94 (8.71) minutes. The
respondents were over-represented by female instructors (58 percent female in the survey
compared to 48 percent in the administrative records) and under-represented by non-tenure
tracked instructors (26 percent non-tenure tracked instructors in the survey as opposed to 49
percent in the administrative records). Weighted by class sizes, male students represented
52.5 percent of the classes in the sample which was slightly higher than the 46.6 percent in
the administrative records. Instructors reported that 5.94 percent of their students requested
to change their final grade at the end of the semester, and 11.2 percent of students requested
regrades during the semester. Weighted by class sizes, instructors who had experienced
regrade requests reported that 0.727 percent of the grades were corrected to a better grade
at the end of the semester. The reported upward corrections were more frequent than the



                                                                                           12
corresponding proportion of 0.439 percent in administrative records because the instructor
survey only elicited participation of instructors who had experienced regrade requests.10
    For the student survey (Appendix A2), recruiting emails were sent to all undergraduate
students on campus. The email mentioned that the survey was about gauging students'
experiences with courses, and that the student must have completed at least three courses
with letter grades at the time of survey. To prevent selection on our outcome of interest, the
invitation did not mention the focus on regrade requests. The email contained the online
survey link. As an incentive, respondents were offered a chance to win one out of the ten
prizes of $100.11 The average (median) time taken to complete the survey was 9.44 (7.99)
minutes.12
    1,295 students completed the online student survey during April­May, 2019 (459 respon-
dents started the survey but did not complete it, and hence are not included in the analysis).
In the student survey, we asked students about their past behaviors, subjective beliefs, and
outcomes regarding grade change requests. The student survey, similar to the administrative
records, show a monotonic increase in the share of students by class standing.13 Although
the student survey was over-represented by female students (67 percent), the course-taking
patterns appear to be comparable to the underlying population. Similar to the adminis-
trative records, among the reported courses, 50 percent of female students were taught by
female instructors, while only 35 percent of male students were taught by female instruc-
tors. For students who indicated consideration of regrade requests during past semesters,
we further elicited the frequencies of such a consideration and collected information about
the instructor and grade outcomes for up to three classes. Importantly, we collected data
on students' perception regarding the outcomes of a regrade request: specifically, we elicited
students' subjective beliefs about the regrade requests that result in favorable outcomes (a
better grade) and unfavorable outcomes. This allows us to understand if male and female
students have substantially different beliefs--that is, whether students assess the upside and
downside risks differently by gender, and whether the fear of backlash (i.e., students receiv-
  10
      In the sub-sample collected between November 30 and December 9, 2018, we allowed all instructors to
participate. The reported upward regrades comprises 0.354 percent of the students in the sub-sample--close
to the statistic from the administrative records. This exercise confirms that the difference between the
instructor survey and the administrative records is due to the exclusion of instructors who had never expe-
rienced regrade requests in the survey. To keep the sample consistent, we report all the results conditional
on instructors who had experienced some regrade requests at the end of the semester.
   11
      The payments are made in in Ram Cash or Amazon electronic gift cards, depending on students' choices.
Ram Cash is a near-cash payment credited to the CSU student accounts that participants can use for
consumption on campus.
   12
      Time spent on a page is truncated at 10 minutes. The truncation affects fewer than 1% of the pages.
   13
      The distribution of participants in the student survey (administrative records) is as follows: 16.5%
(9.86%) freshmen, 24.4% (20%) sophomores, 28.8% (25%) juniors, and 30.3% (45.1%) seniors. Any student
who has not graduated beyond the fourth year in college is counted as a senior.




                                                                                                         13
ing a lower grade after requesting a grade change) is a factor driving gender differences in
making grade change requests.
   Students reported high frequencies of ever requested regrades--16.8 percent of students
reported that they requested regrades at the end of a semester and 29.9 percent during the
semester at some point. These statistics are not comparable to those from the instructor sur-
vey--the statistics in the student survey measure students' extensive margin of ever making
regrade requests in any past semesters, while the statistics in the instructor survey measure
the average regrade-request rate in a class.14


3.2     Analysis
3.2.1    Are men more likely than women to ask?

We first examine the instructor survey by comparing the gender distribution among regrade
requests against the gender distribution in class. Panel A of Table 4 shows that male students
made up 57.1 percent of regrade requests at the end of the semester--a larger proportion
than the male class representation in the instructor survey (52.5 percent).
    Results from the student survey offer further insights into gender differences in asking.
First of all, asking for grade changes is fairly common among college students. Panel A1 of
Table 5 shows that a sizable proportion of students have asked an instructor for a regrade at
some point. Among the 1,295 student participants, 39 percent of females and 41 percent of
males ever asked for regrades during or at the end of a semester (the difference is statistically
insignificant). Turning the focus to the number of classes students considered (asked) for
regrades, a gender difference emerges: male students considered asking (actually asked)
for regrades in 1.30 classes (0.65 classes) versus 1.04 classes (0.56 classes) for females; the
gender difference is significant at the 1-percent (10-percent) level. These differences are
driven by the gender gap on the intensive margin (Panel A2 of Table 5). Conditional on
considering (asking) for regrades, females considered (asked) regrades requests in 1.78 (1.43)
classes which is lower than the 2.14 (1.59) classes considered (asked) by male students.
Figure 2 shows the gender-specific distributions of regrade consideration; the distributions
are statistically different by gender. Note that the number of classes students could have
reported for regrade consideration in the survey was capped at "5 or more classes", and
  14
    To make the student survey's statistics comparable to those in the instructor survey, we multiply the
fraction of students who reported ever asking for regrades at the end of/during the semester (0.168/0.299)
by the fraction of the courses (up to three courses considered for regrades) in which they made such requests
(0.209/0.392) to get the average student requests at the end of/during the semester as 3.5% (0.168 × 0.209 =
0.035)/11.7% (0.299 × 0.392 = 0.117). The regrade request rates from the student survey using this back-of-
the-envelop calculation are close to the statistics (5.94 percent at the end of the semester and 11.2 percent
during the semester) reported by instructors.




                                                                                                          14
we only collected information on whether students actually asked for regrades in up to 3
classes. Hence, the gender difference in the reported regrade requests is likely under-stated.
To mitigate this issue, we imputed the number of classes where students asked for regrades
if students reported that they considered asking for regrades in four or more classes.15 The
unconditional (conditional) imputed number of classes in which students actually asked for
regrades is 0.97 (1.65) for females and 1.12 (1.84) for males, and the difference is significant
at the 5-percent level. This result indicates that the gender difference in propensity to ask
is primarily driven by the difference on the intensive margin.
    The survey data reveal that (1) regrade requests are very prevalent, and (2) while there
is little gender difference in asking on the extensive margin, males are significantly more
likely to ask on the intensive margin; using the three different measures (the number of
classes considered for regrades, the number of classes reported for regrade requests, and
the imputed number of classes of regrade requests), we see that males request (or consider
requesting) about 16 to 25 percent more than females do. Interestingly, the magnitude is
similar to the evidence from the administrative records where male students are 18.5 percent
more likely than their female counterparts to receive favorable regrade outcomes.

3.2.2    Do male students have more favorable outcomes when they ask?

To answer this question, we turn to the instructor survey. The survey asked the following
questions: "Now consider all regrade requests that are made by [female/male] students
[DURING/at the END of] the semester. On average, what percent of them result in an
improvement, no change, and a deterioration of the grade? Please note that your answers
need to sum to 100." With regards to the outcomes of regrade requests, Figure 3 shows that
the change patterns conditional on student requests were indistinguishable for male and
female students at the end of the semester in the instructor survey. Although the regrade
outcome distributions are different for male and female students during the semester (Panels
C and D), the outcomes are actually more favorable for female than for male students.
    The student survey presents a consistent pattern in regrade outcomes that are observed
in the instructor survey. Summarized in Panel B of Table 5, conditional on asking, students
experienced a higher success rate in a grade increase during the semester than at the end of
the semester regardless of students' gender. During the semester, over 60 percent of regrade
  15
     Because we only have information for up to three classes, we focus on the subsample where the
number of classes students considered for regrades is between 1 and 3 to calculate the request ratio
  number of classes students actually asked for regrades
(                                                        ) by students' gender. We then impute the requests
    number of classes students considered for regrades
by multiplying the gender-specific ratio by the number of classes considered for regrades that is greater than
three (i.e., 4 or 5).




                                                                                                           15
requests (65 percent of male requests and 60 percent female requests) resulted in an increase
in the grade component (e.g., quiz, midterm, homework assignments) and less than 2 percent
of requests led to an adverse outcome (0 percent of male requests and 1.44 percent for female
requests). At the end of the semester, male (female) students reported that 32 percent (31
percent) of the cases resulted in final grade increases and 6 percent (3 percent) of the cases led
to a lower grade. The gender differences in regrade outcomes are not statistically significant
for grade improvements. Although women reported a higher rate of receiving a decrease
in their grade component, men experienced a higher rate of grade decreases in the final
grade. Note that the fractions of grade changes reported in the student survey are higher
than those reported in the instructor survey because we only collected information from up
to 3 courses. If the remaining (imputed) classes in which the students asked for regrades
result in no grade changes, the statistics across the instructor and student surveys would be
very similar.16 Furthermore, Panel A3 of Table 5 shows that the subjective beliefs about
potential outcomes of regrade requests were also very similar across gender. On average,
male (female) students reported a 38.3 percent (37.0 percent) probability of receiving a
grade increase, a 55.9 percent (57.2 percent) probability of the grade remaining unchanged,
and a 5.83 percent (5.74 percent) probability of receiving a grade decrease.17 The subjective
probability distributions in regrade outcomes are statistically indistinguishable between male
and female students. It is, for example, not the case that female students perceive a higher
downside risk of asking. As far as perceptions are concerned, it does not seem that the
two genders differ in terms of how they believe their requests would be treated. However,
female students report a significantly higher stress level than males do for having to ask the
instructor for a grade change: an average response of 5.01 (on a 1­7 scale) versus 3.88 for
males.18 This suggests that females have higher psychic costs of asking. We discuss the
implications of gender differences in stress and personality traits on regrades in Sections 4.4
and 5.
  16
      If the remaining (imputed) classes in which the stduents asked for regrades result in no grade change,
students would experience grade increases in 18% of the time at the end of the semester and 37% of the
time during the semester conditional on asking--very close to the change rates (17% for males and 17.9%
for females at the end of the semester, and 32.8% for males and and 37.2% for females during the semester)
reported by instructors.
   17
      Each student was asked about the likelihood of potential regrade outcomes conditional on making a
regrade request, regardless of whether the student actually ever made or considered making a regrade request.
We take each student's average subjective probabilities for the three potential regrade outcomes (i.e., increase,
no change, or decrease in grade) across all scenarios.
   18
      Students were either asked "On a scale from 1 (not stressed at all) to 7 (extremely stressed), how stressed
would you have felt if you had asked the instructor for a regrade? " or "On a scale from 1 (not stressed at
all) to 7 (extremely stressed), how stressed did you feel when you asked the instructor for a regrade? " The
former was asked to students who did not ask (or never considered asking) an instructor for a regrade.




                                                                                                              16
3.2.3     Does the timing of regrade requests differ by gender?

The gender differential outcomes at the end of the semester may be a result of differences
in the timing of regrade requests by students' gender. For example, it could be that males
are more likely than females to procrastinate, and put off such requests until the end of
the semester; the literature on gender differences in procrastination has found mixed results
(Balkis and Duru, 2009; Haycock et al., 1998; Milgram et al., 1995; Onwuegbuzie, 2004;
Senecal et al., 1995; Solomon and Rothblum, 1984).
    The surveys do not show any evidence of this. In the instructor survey (Panel A of Table
4), male students were still over-represented in the regrade requests during the semester (58
percent of the requests versus 52.5 percent of their representation in class). In the student
survey (Panel A of Table 5), 29 percent of females and 32 percent of males reported ever
requesting regrades during the semester.
    The instructor and student surveys indicate that the most likely explanation of the gender
gap in regrades is that male students are more likely than female students to ask for regrades
on the intensive margin, and that these request patterns persist throughout the semester.
Hence, even if instructors change the grades for male and female students at the same
rate, the outcome may still favor male students simply because they ask more frequently.
The survey data also show that regrade requests are quite prevalent and may have serious
implications for final grades. These data in fact can give us an upper bound of GPA changes
as a result of regrade requests--assuming that 1) the ratio of classes reported for regrade
requests to classes considered for such requests (up to 3 courses) represents students' average
requesting intensity, and 2) the magnitudes of grade changes students reported in their final
grade also apply to the (unobserved) changes made during the semester. The average effects
of regrade requests on GPA are 0.11 points for females and 0.13 points for males. Conditional
on asking, the upper bounds of the GPA increases are 0.43 points for females and 0.47 points
for males.19
  19
     We calculate the upper bound of the unconditional effect of regrade requests on GPA by gender as the
likelihood of the student ever having asked for a regrade × fraction of courses asked for regrades × grade
                                             ClassesAskedgt
change:     t P r (EverAskedgt = 1) × ClassesConsideredgt |EverAskedgt =1 × [    s P r (Outcome = s|Askedgt =1 ) ×
Gradegts ], where P r(EverAskedgt ) is the fraction of students in the gender group g  {male, f emale}
ever asking for regrades in time t  {mt, f n} either during the semester (mt) or at the end of semester (f n),
    ClassesAskedgt
ClasseesConsideredgt is the ratio of the number of classes students reported that they actually asked for regrades
to those they considered for regrade requests--up to the 3 courses reported, and P r(Outcome = s|Askedgt =1 )
is the probability the outcome for gender g conditional on asking at time t resulting in either an increase
or decrease (s) in the grade, and Gradegts is the average reported final grade changes given the outcome
scenario s at time t for group g --assuming the same magnitude of the final grade change also applies to
the grade changes during (mt) the semester. We calculate the regrade effects on GPA conditional on asking
           ClassesAskedgt
as: t ClassesConsidered   gt
                             |EverAskedgt =1 × [ s P r(Outcome = s|Askedgt =1 ) × Gradegts ] following the same
definitions of the terms described above.




                                                                                                               17
    Using the student survey, Appendix Table B2 offers some insights into the reasons for why
students asked or did not ask for regrades. The reasons for regrade requests are mostly similar
across gender, except that females are more likely than males to ask when they received a
grade relatively lower than their performance in other classes and when the low grade is
likely to delay their graduation. The primary reasons for the gender difference in not asking
for regrades include females more likely to report that: (1) instructors would never change
the grade, (2) a higher stress level resulting from asking, and (3) a stronger fear for rejection
("I would have been embarrassed if the instructor had rejected my request.") or punishment
("I was worried the instructor might lower the grade further, or punish me in some other
way."). To investigate why men and women differ in their propensity to ask, we next rely
on an incentivized controlled experiment to help us disentangle how a variety of factors,
such as gender differences in risk attitudes, confidence, optimism, perceived uncertainty, and
personality traits affect behavior.


4     Laboratory Experiment
To understand what gives rise to gender differences in regrade requests, we designed a labora-
tory experiment where grades serve as imperfect and noisy signals of individual performance
in a task, and allow participants to request a regrade at varying levels of costs. The shown
grade matters for the individual's monetary payoff. If a participant decides to pay a given
cost to ask for a regrade, the true grade is revealed and the payoff is adjusted accordingly.
The laboratory setting is advantageous over observational field evidence because we are able
to control and eliminate factors, such as fear of backlash, dynamics of gender interactions,
or gender differences in negotiation skills, that may contribute to the gender differences in
regrade requests. In addition, behavior in this setting is incentivized (since a regrade re-
quest may impact not only the revealed final score but also the payoff), so if we find results
consistent with our survey evidence, it would give us more confidence in the conclusions.
    We first examine whether male and female participants differ in asking for regrades.
Because participants' risk preferences and subjective beliefs about potential outcomes may
dictate their regrade decisions, we elicit the measures via incentivized question designs.
We further elicit students' beliefs about their performance in the experiment to construct
measures of over-confidence, under-confidence, over-optimism, uncertainty, and downside risk
in beliefs. These measures allow us to quantify the effects of the various factors on the gender
differences in asking. At the end of the experiment, participants also completed the student
survey which collected their regrade experience in class and psychological characteristics such
as the Big Five personality traits. As a result, we are able to investigate how participants'



                                                                                              18
choices in the laboratory setting relate to their actual regrade experience in class and whether
additional psychological factors help explain the gender differences.


4.1     Laboratory Experiment Design
The experiment consists of 5 tasks:20
    Task 1 (risk preferences): Following Eckel and Grossman (2008), we ask participants
to choose their most favorable option from the following five lottery choices:
1) 50% chance of receiving $2 (Event A) and 50% chance of receiving $2 (Event B),
2) 50% chance of receiving $3 (Event A) and 50% chance of receiving $1.50 (Event B),
3) 50% chance of receiving $4 (Event A) and 50% chance of receiving $1 (Event B),
4) 50% chance of receiving $5 (Event A) and 50% chance of receiving $0.5 (Event B),
5) 50% chance of receiving $6 (Event A) and 50% chance of receiving $0 (Event B).
A random draw decides whether the event A or B occurs, and participants are paid according
to their lottery choice.
    Task 2 (performance): Students complete a quiz by answering 20 multiple-choice IQ
questions derived primarily from Russell and Carter (2006).21 Questions appear one at a
time, and students have 45 seconds to answer each question. Students are informed about
the payoff scheme before taking the quiz: a piece rate of $0.50 for each answer graded as
correct, and an additional $2.00 bonus when their grade exceeds a threshold (i.e., a bonus
payment of $2 for getting 6­10 correct answers, $4 for getting 11­15 correct answers, and
$6 for getting 16­20 correct answers) that resembles the step function of letter grades. As a
result, the total payoff for the quiz could range from $0 to $16.
    When taking the quiz, after each question, students are also asked to provide their best
guess (on a 0­100 scale) of the chance they think the answer is correct. One of the 20
guesses is randomly chosen to reward the accuracy of the guess for a bonus payment up to
$1, following the formula in Witkowski et al. (2018).
    Task 3 (prior beliefs): After completing the quiz, students are asked for 1) their "prior"
belief about the number of questions (out of 20) they thought they answered correctly; and 2)
the uncertainty around the prior belief--students are asked for the likelihood that the actual
grade is in five intervals centered around their guess (i.e., the actual grade is 5 or more
questions below their guess, 2­4 questions below their guess, between -1 to +1 question of
their guess, 2­4 questions above their guess, and 5 or more questions above their guess). The
  20
     In the experiment, we break each of Tasks 3 and 5 into two decisions, and hence participants were asked
to complete 7 tasks. Task 3 here corresponds to Tasks 3 and 4, Task 4 corresponds to Task 5, and Task 5
corresponds to Tasks 6 and 7 in the experiment instrument.
  21
     We sample few questions online and shorten some questions in Russell and Carter (2006) to allow
participants to answer them within the time limit for each question.




                                                                                                         19
probabilities assigned to the five bins have to sum to 100. These guesses are also incentivized
for up to a $5 payment depending on the accuracy of the guesses following the formula in
Witkowski et al. (2018).
    Task 4 (willingness to ask for regrades): Before the score is revealed to the student,
she is informed that 3 out of the 20 questions would be drawn and graded randomly, and
therefore the score she would be shown may be higher, lower, or the same as her true
performance. To imitate the asymmetric upward and downward regrade patterns we observe
in the administrative records, we assigned the noise in the score as follows: for each of these
three randomly drawn questions, if a student's answer is actually correct, there is a 1/3 chance
that it would be graded as correct and 2/3 chance that it would be graded as incorrect. In
contrast, if the student's answer is incorrect, there would be a 2/3 chance that it would
be graded as incorrect and 1/3 chance that it would be graded as correct. In other words,
for these three questions, a correct answer has twice as much chance of being graded as
incorrect (false outcome) than as correct (true outcome), and an incorrect answer has twice
as much chance of being graded as incorrect (true outcome) than as correct (false outcome).
Therefore, when a student requests a regrade, in expectation, the chance of receiving a higher
grade is higher than the chance of receiving a lower grade.
    Once the initial score is revealed, the detailed grading (i.e., graded as correct or incorrect)
and the subjective probability that the student assigns to each answer being correct is shown
on the screen for each of the 20 questions. The student is then informed that she could make
a regrade request. Specifically, we use a multiple-price-list variation of the Becker-DeGroot-
Marschak method to elicit the individual's willingness to ask for a regrade: the participant
is asked to decide whether she wants to make a regrade request at 10 varying cost scenarios.
The costs vary from paying $3.50 to getting paid $1.00.22 One of the cost scenarios is
randomly drawn for implementation. If the student chooses to request a regrade, she pays
the associated regrade cost (deducted from the show-up fee) and the true grade is revealed
as her final grade. If the student chooses not to request a regrade, she pays zero cost and
the initial grade becomes the final grade.
    Task 5 (posterior beliefs): Using the same approach as for Task 3, we re-elicit partic-
ipants' "posterior" beliefs about the number of accurate answers and the uncertainty around
the posterior belief. By construction, the posterior uncertainty is within 3 questions above
  22
     The 10 regrade cost scenarios are having to pay $3.50, $3.00, $2.50, $2.00, $1.50, $1.00, $0.50, $0.00,
-$0.50 (that is, getting paid $0.50), and -$1.00 (getting paid $1.00). This set-up allows us to estimate the
respondent's willingness to pay (WTP) to ask for a regrade. For example, if the individual chose to make a
regrade request for costs of up to $2.00, then her WTP must be at least $2.00 but less than $2.50. In this
case, we assign the lowest possible value $2 as her WTP. Note that the highest possible gain from asking for
a regrade is $3.5 (which happens if all three correct answers were graded as incorrect, and the score change
is around a jump in the step function).




                                                                                                         20
and below the initially revealed score. Therefore, students are asked for the likelihood that
the actual grade is in seven bins centered around the initial score (i.e., the actual grade is
3 questions below the initial score, 2 questions below, 1 question below, same as the initial
score, 1 question above the initial score, 2 questions above, and 3 questions above). The
incentives formula is the same as for the prior beliefs mentioned earlier. One of the four
subjective beliefs (the two beliefs in each of Tasks 3 and 5) is randomly drawn to determine
a bonus payment of up to $5.00.
   The experiment also had built-in checks and test questions to make sure that participants
understood the instructions. Appendix A3 shows the instrument of the experiment.


4.2     Sample and Administration
The experiment was created using oTree (Chen et al., 2016). We recruited participants by
sending emails to all undergraduate students on campus to invite them to take part in an
incentivized experiment of economic decision-making and a survey related to college course
experiences. 563 CSU undergraduate students participated in the online experiment during
April­May 2019. After the conclusion of the experiment, respondents were automatically
forwarded to the survey. Thus, for these respondents, we have both experimental and survey
data.
    The experiment (excluding the survey) took 24.5 minutes, on average, to complete (see
footnote 12 for details). Combining the payoff for the quiz, bonuses for guesses, and a $5
guaranteed payment for completing the experiment, participants could earn between $5 and
$34. The average compensation was $20.14, with the 10th percentile being $14.50 and the
90th percentile being $26.
    We remove 47 observations (8.35 percent) where students made inconsistent regrade
requests (for example, asking for a regrade at $3 but then choosing not to ask for a regrade
at a cost of $2.5).23 The results of our analyses are robust to inclusion of these students (see
Appendix Tables B3 and B4). The final sample consists of 516 participants, with 283 female
students (55 percent) and 233 male students (45 percent). The gender distribution closely
mirrors the gender distribution of the CSU undergraduate population.
  23
    This inconsistency is within the range of other studies that use multiple price list elicitation methods.
For instance, Holt and Laury (2002) find that up to 10% of participants switched their lottery choices.
The share of inconsistent respondents was about 2% in Allcott and Kessler (2015) and 15% in Cullen and
Perez-Truglia (2018).




                                                                                                          21
4.3     Key Measures
4.3.1    Risk aversion

We assume that participants' utility function is constant relative risk averse (CRRA): U =
C 1-
1-
     , where  measures the CRRA coefficient and C is the payment the participant receives.
                                                                        C 1-               C 1-
The expected utility from the chosen option is E (U ) = 0.5 × 1A    -
                                                                         + 0.5 × 1B  -
                                                                                         , where
CA and CB are the payments from the two events A and B, respectively. Participants'
lottery choices reveal the range of risk aversion coefficients that are consistent with the
utility maximization assumption. For simplicity, we take the midpoint of each interval as
the risk aversion coefficient for each corresponding lottery choice.24 Consistent with findings
in prior literature, Panel A of Table 6 shows that female participants are more risk averse
than males (an average risk aversion coefficient of 1.12 versus 0.86 for males), with the gender
difference significant at the 1-percent level.

4.3.2    Over-confidence and under-confidence

After answering each question, respondents were asked to assign a probability that their an-
swer is correct. Over-confidence is constructed using the questions the respondent answered
incorrectly. It is defined as the average belief assigned to these questions of the answers being
correct, and takes a value between 0 and 1 (beliefs are elicited on a 0­100 scale, but we scale
them down here). This measure will be 0 (1) for an individual who guesses that there is a 0
(100) percent chance of her being correct for each question that she ends up actually answer-
ing incorrectly. Under-confidence is similarly constructed by using only correct answers for
the measure and is the average absolute gap between the reported belief and 1 (that is, the
answer was correct). Thus, if the participant guesses that there is a 100 percent chance that
she answered all these questions correctly, the value of her under-confidence measure would
be 0. In contrast, if the participant has no confidence in her correct answers and assigns the
probability of being correct as 0, the under-confidence value would be 1. These variables are
conditional on the accuracy of the question. In the analysis, as we discuss below, we also
control for the beliefs regarding the number of questions answered correctly.
    Panel A of Table 6 shows that male and female participants appear to be similarly
overconfident when their answers were wrong, while females are more likely than males to
be under-confident when their answers are actually correct. This is consistent with the
finding by Sarsons and Xu (2015) that tenured female economists tend to be less confident
  24
   See Table 1 of Eckel and Grossman (2008) for the CRRA ranges. The mid-point values of risk aversion
coefficient are 2, 1.335, 0.525, 0.29, and 0.2 for the lottery choices 1 through 5 in the ascending order.




                                                                                                       22
in the accuracy of their answers to survey questions about the economy, relative to their
male counterparts. This also seems to be in line with ?, who find that females rate their
performance less favorably than equally performing men.

4.3.3    Over-optimism, uncertainty, and downside risk in beliefs

We elicited participants' prior belief about their performance: Panel A of Table 6 shows that
the average prior belief is higher for males (14.35 versus 13.21 for females, with the difference
statistically significant at the 1-percent level). Panel C shows that the true score was 12.98
for males and 11.57 for females. Thus, the average belief is higher than the actual score for
both genders by about 1.5 points. Note that the objective performance gap between males
and females in the quiz plays an immaterial role in the regrade decisions. As long as male
and female participants are similarly optimistic (i.e., their expected score is higher than their
true score), they face similar incentives for regrade requests. Appendix Figure C1 shows the
relationship between the prior guess and actual performance. Beliefs are indeed positively
related with actual performance for both genders. Each additional point of guessed score is
associated with 0.47 (0.55) points in actual score for female (male) students, and the gender
difference is statistically insignificant.
    We use participants' prior belief of the number of questions they thought they answered
correctly to construct our measure of over-optimism. Specifically, it is the gap between
the prior guessed score and the actual score. Most participants are over-optimistic about
their performance in the quiz. Table 6 shows that both genders are, on average, equally
over-optimistic: female (male) students believed they answered 1.64 (1.37) more questions
correctly than their true score.
    In addition, the experiment elicited the probability that the participant believes the
actual score was within one point of the guessed outcome. If the participant is absolutely
certain about their guess, they should assign a probability close to 100%.25 We capture
the uncertainty in beliefs as the gap between 1 and the assigned probability (scaled down
to 0-1) to the predicted outcome. Hence, the measure takes values between 0 and 1, with
a value closer to 1 indicative of the participant being very uncertain about her prediction.
Table 6 shows that, on average, female participants are more uncertain (0.51) than their
male counterparts (0.47), and the gender difference is significant at the 10-percent level.
    We also consider that participants may respond differently to upside risk (probability of
favorable outcomes) versus downside risk (probability of unfavorable outcomes) as suggested
by Comeig et al. (2018). Note that the probability of the guessed outcome, favorable outcome
  25
    We also consider an alternative uncertainty measure using the variance of their expectations based on
the subjective probability distributions. Results are insensitive to the choice of uncertainty measures.




                                                                                                      23
(i.e., the actual score is more than one point higher than the guessed score), and unfavorable
outcome (i.e., the actual score is more than one point lower than the guessed score) sum
to 1 (100%). As a result, we include only the uncertainty measure for the guessed outcome
and the downside risk measure to avoid perfect multi-collinearity. We capture the prior
downside risk as the summation of probabilities (between 0 and 1) participants assigned to
the scenarios where the actual score is: 5 questions below the guessed score, or 2-4 questions
below the guessed score before the revelation of the initial score. Table 6 shows that female
students perceive a higher downside risk in their prior beliefs than male students do (0.33
versus 0.29, and the difference is significant at the 5-percent level).
    Posterior beliefs and uncertainty were elicited in a similar way. Panel A of Table 6 shows
that the posterior belief is lower than the prior for both males and females. Both genders
revised their guessed score downward by a similar magnitude after receiving the initial grade
signals (1.07 for males and 1.11 for females, and the difference is statistically insignificant).
Posterior beliefs, on average, remain higher than the true score (12.10 for females compared
to their true score of 11.57, and 13.28 for males compared to their true score of 12.98). We
see that the posterior downside risk (that is, the probability assigned to the actual score
being 1-3 questions below the noisy shown score) is significantly higher for females than for
males (an average probability of 0.28 versus 0.22 for males). This could be consistent with
gender differences in response to noisy feedback (see, for example, ?).

4.3.4   Personality traits

We also collected data on the Big Five personality traits--extroversion, agreeableness, con-
scientiousness, neuroticism, and openness. These traits were collected using standard survey
methods (Rammstedt and John, 2007). Panel B of Table 6 shows the average values of these
traits by gender. Consistent with prior literature findings (Costa et al., 2001; Weisberg et
al., 2011), we find that females are significantly more agreeable, neurotic, and open. For
example, the gender difference in neuroticism is 0.63, almost 61% of the standard deviation
(1.04) in this measure. These personality traits could have direct connections to individuals'
negotiation and conflict management styles. For instance, individuals with high degrees of
agreeableness and neuroticism tend to avoid confrontations (Antonioni, 1998), and the high
level of agreeableness is particularly detrimental in bargaining outcomes in zero-sum negoti-
ations (Barry and Friedman, 1998). Based on these findings, there is good reason to believe
that students with higher levels of agreeableness and neuroticism may be less likely to ask.




                                                                                              24
4.4     Analysis
Figure 4 shows interesting gender differences in the willingness to ask for regrades. When
the cost is zero or negative (i.e., participants are getting paid for requesting regrades), there
is no discernible gender difference in the willingness-to-pay (WTP) for regrades. However,
females are much more reluctant than males to request regrades when the cost is positive. For
instance, when the regrade cost is $0.50, 47 percent of male students asked for regrades, while
only 36 percent of female students asked for regrades. This 10-percentage-point difference
(significant at the 5-percent level) shows that males are 28.5 percent more likely than females
to request regrades. The fraction of students asking for regrades declines monotonically as
the cost increases. We take the highest value of the cost a participant is willing to pay for
regrades as the measure of her WTP.26 Table 6 shows that the average WTP is higher for
males ($0.25) than for females ($0.05) and the difference is significant at the 5-percent level.
In addition, while nearly half (47%) of males are willing to pay a positive cost for regrades,
only a third of females are willing to do so. Participants' WTP is positively correlated with
their perceived performance relative to the initial scores they receive. Figure 5 shows that
the WTP increases as the gap between the guessed score (prior belief) and the initial score
widens. The slope coefficients are similar across gender.
    We next investigate the drivers of gender differences in the WTP. Column 1 of Table 7
regresses the indicator of willing to pay a positive cost for regrades on respondents' gender.
Men are 10.3 percentage points more likely than women to pay a positive cost for regrades.
While we find that risk preferences differ by gender, it explains little of the gender difference
in willingness to pay for regrades (Column 2 of Table 7). Columns 3 and 4 show that over-
confidence and under-confidence explain about 4.9 percent and 19.4 percent of the gender
gap, respectively. Because women are less confident about their answers when they are
actually correct, under-confidence can explain a non-trivial fraction of the gender difference
in the willingness to pay.
    Column 5 of Table 7 shows that over-optimism, uncertainty in prior beliefs of quiz perfor-
mance, prior guessed score and prior downside risk combined also explain about 30 percent
of the gender gap. Column 6 controls for the posterior guessed score and the posterior
downside risk measure; the gender coefficient remains similar to the coefficient in Column
5 where we only include the measures based on prior beliefs. We also find that the effect
of downside risk on WTP is similar for both male and female students (results available
from the authors). Column 7 shows that all the aforementioned covariates combined explain
  26
     If a person always chooses not to request regrades, we know her WTP should be lower than -$1.00. In
this case, we assign the WTP to be -$1.50. If a participant always chooses to ask, her WTP must be $3.50
or higher. We assign her WTP to be $3.50. Results are robust to other values.




                                                                                                     25
about 34 percent of the gender gap in willingness to pay for regrades, and the gender gap
becomes statistically insignificant.
    Column 8 examines whether the Big Five personality traits help explain the gender
differences in regrade requests. Controlling for the Big Five personality traits, the gender
difference in asking for regrade at a positive cost reduces to 8.2 percentage points (although
the coefficients on the personality traits are imprecise and insignificant). Finally, the last
column shows that including all the covariates and the Big Five personality traits explains
45.6 percent of the gender gap. Thus, the majority of the gender gap in the willingness to
pay persists even after controlling for a rich and extensive set of controls. Appendix Table
B5 shows similar patterns when we use the WTP as the dependent variable instead.
    The high willingness to ask on the part of men, however, does not necessarily translate
into increased monetary returns for men, once the regrading costs are taken into account.
Panel A of Figure 6 shows that indeed male students become better off financially when the
regrading cost is positive but low (i.e., $0.50). However, panel B shows that the fraction of
male students who become worse off monetarily exceeds the fraction of female students facing
such an adverse outcome when the costs are greater than $1.00. Averaging over the 10 cost
scenarios, Panel C of Table 6 shows that the fraction of students becoming better (worse)
off is higher for males, though the gender differences are not statistically significant. In
summary, the laboratory analysis corroborates the evidence from the instructor and student
surveys that males have a higher propensity than females to ask for regrades. In particular,
women are less likely to ask for regrades when they face positive costs. For low cost values,
this hurts women relative to men. However, at high cost values, the higher propensity of
men to ask can actually make them worse off.
    Finally, a natural question to ask is whether our experimental measure of WTP to ask
correlates with actual regrade requests by students. Figure 7 shows that it is indeed the
case: the experiment-based WTP is positively correlated with the consideration for regrades
in classes, on both the extensive and intensive margins.


5    Conclusion
Women's lower tendency to ask (for promotions, salary increases, etc.) has been considered
as one explanation for gender differences in labor market outcomes (Babcock and Laschever,
2003; Rigdon, 2012; Card et al., 2016). Here, our focus is on whether this tendency could
lead to differential outcomes prior to individuals' entry in the labor market.
    We start out by documenting the empirical fact that males are significantly more likely to
have grade changes on their transcripts. The overwhelming majority of these grade changes



                                                                                           26
are grade improvements. Class and student characteristics hardly explain the favorable
regrade outcomes that male students enjoy in the administrative records. This empirical
fact by itself does not necessarily mean that men are more likely to ask, nor does it tell
us about the prevalence of asking for regrades in college. To shed further light on this, we
conduct surveys of students and instructors. The surveys show that regrade/grade change
requests are prevalent in college with 40 percent of students reporting that they approached
instructors for grade changes which subsequently result in a better grade 30 percent of the
time conditional on asking. The surveys further show that there is no gender difference in
asking on the extensive margin. However, male students are disproportionately more likely
than female students to make regrade requests in more classes (the intensive margin).
    To shed light on the potential mechanisms, we rely on an incentivized laboratory experi-
ment where initial performance is graded with error. The student's monetary payoff depends
on the grade in the experiment. Students are then given the choice to request a regrade at
different costs. A regrade request may subsequently affect the final grade and payoff. Our
experiment reveals that males have a higher propensity to ask, both in cases where it makes
economic sense to do so and where it does not. This is consistent with the findings from the
surveys: instructors report that male students are more aggressive than female students in
asking for regrades (Panel B of Table 4), and male students also indicate stronger regrets for
asking too aggressively for regrades (Panel A3 of Table 5). Thus, a coherent picture emerges:
men are simply more willing to ask. When the regrade cost is low, male students benefit
more. However, such male advantage diminishes quickly as the cost of regrades increases.
    Why is it that females are less willing to ask? Although fear of backlash, the dynamics
of gender interactions, and gender differences in negotiation skills may play some roles in
the gender differences in regrades in real life, we purposely eliminate these factors in the
laboratory setting. Our experimental evidence suggests that gender differences in risk pref-
erences and over-confidence explain little of the gender gap in asking. In contrast, we find
that under-confidence and uncertainty, guessed score, and perceived downside risk in (prior
and posterior) subjective beliefs explain 23 to 30 percent of the gender differences in asking.
Interestingly, we find that personality traits also explain a large fraction (20 percent) of the
gender differences in asking. All of the above measures combined account for over 45 percent
of the gender differences in asking.
    Thus, the majority of the gap remains unexplained even after controlling for a rich
set of variables. Our survey data shed further light on the unexplained part of the gap.
The survey asked students how stressed they felt on a 1­7 scale (1: not stressed at all; 7:
extremely stressed) when/if they asked instructors to reconsider their grade. On average,
female students indicate a higher stress level than males do (5.01 versus 3.88, as shown in



                                                                                             27
Table 5). Stress explains nearly half of the gender difference in the number of classes students
considered for regrades. We find that one's stress level is negatively correlated to the control
one perceives they have over the direction of their life and positively correlated to the measure
of neuroticism (one of the Big Five personality traits). If women have internalized gender
norms that "nice girls don't ask"(Babcock et al., 2003), their deviation from such norms
could lead to a high stress level (Reidy et al., 2018). Future work that sheds light on why
females find the process of asking stressful would be valuable.
    While we intentionally shut down these channels in the experiment, the survey data also
reveal that, as reasons for not asking for a regrade, females are more likely to report that
instructors would never change the grade, or that instructors may lower the grade further
or punish them in some other ways. Females were also more likely to cite embarrassment
if the instructor had rejected their request as a reason for not asking. These all suggest
higher psychic costs on part of females for asking. One policy implication of our results is
clear: given the aversion of females to ask when costs of doing so are positive, the perceived
cost of asking needs to be lowered. For example, instructors should make regarding policies
explicit.27 It should, however, be pointed out that in our experiment, the gains from asking
are positive in expectation­that need not be the case in all environments. We certainly do
not want to push individuals into over-asking (Exley et al., 2019). Even in our setting, we
find that the greater willingness of males to ask works both against and in favor of them,
depending on the associated financial costs. In addition, we find that higher levels of under-
confidence and uncertainty in beliefs of females can explain 20 to 30 percent of the gender
gap in asking. Policies that provide stronger signals to individuals about their ability could
also allow them to make informed decisions about when to ask.
  27
    Consistent with this idea, Leibbrandt and List (2014) find that men and women are similarly likely to
negotiate when salaries are explicitly made negotiable in the job postings, but gender differences in asking
emerge when the negotiability is not explicit.




                                                                                                         28
References
Allcott, H. and J. Kessler (2015). The welfare effects of nudges: A case study of energy use
  social comparisions. no. w21671.

Andersen, S., G. W. Harrison, M. I. Lau, and E. E. Rutstr¨   om (2006). Elicitation using
 multiple price list formats. Experimental Economics 9 (4), 383­405.

Antonioni, D. (1998). Relationship between the big five personality factors and conflict
 management styles. International journal of conflict management 9 (4), 336­355.

Artz, B., A. H. Goodall, and A. J. Oswald (2018). Do women ask? Industrial Relations: A
  Journal of Economy and Society 57 (4), 611­636.

Babcock, L. and S. Laschever (2003). Women don't ask: Negotiation and the gender divide.
  Princeton University Press.

Babcock, L., S. Laschever, M. Gelfand, and D. Small (2003). Nice girls don't ask. Harvard
  Business Review 81 (10), 14­16.

Balkis, M. and E. Duru (2009). Prevalence of academic procrastination behavior among
  pre-service teachers, and its relationship with demographics and individual preferences.
  Journal of Theory & Practice in Education (JTPE) 5 (1).

Barber, B. M. and T. Odean (2001). Boys will be boys: Gender, overconfidence, and common
  stock investment. The quarterly journal of economics 116 (1), 261­292.

Barry, B. and R. A. Friedman (1998). Bargainer characteristics in distributive and integrative
  negotiation. Journal of personality and social psychology 74 (2), 345.

Bowles, H. R., L. Babcock, and L. Lai (2007). Social incentives for gender differences in
  the propensity to initiate negotiations: Sometimes it does hurt to ask. Organizational
  Behavior and human decision Processes 103 (1), 84­103.

Card, D., A. R. Cardoso, and P. Kline (2016). Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage gap:
  Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women. The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131 (2), 633­686.

Chen, D. L., M. Schonger, and C. Wickens (2016). otree--an open-source platform for labo-
 ratory, online, and field experiments. Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance 9,
 88­97.



                                                                                           29
Comeig, I., C. Holt, and A. Jaramillo-Guti´
                                          errez (2018). Upside versus downside risk: Gender,
  stakes, and skewness.

Costa Jr, P. T., A. Terracciano, and R. R. McCrae (2001). Gender differences in personality
  traits across cultures: robust and surprising findings. Journal of personality and social
  psychology 81 (2), 322.

Cullen, Z. and R. Perez-Truglia (2018). How much does your boss make? the effects of salary
 comparisons. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eckel, C. C. and P. J. Grossman (2008). Forecasting risk attitudes: An experimental study
  using actual and forecast gamble choices. Journal of Economic Behavior & Organiza-
  tion 68 (1), 1­17.

Exley, C. L., M. Niederle, and L. Vesterlund (2019). Knowing when to ask: The cost of
  leaning in. Journal of Political Economy Forthcoming.

Haycock, L. A., P. McCarthy, and C. L. Skay (1998). Procrastination in college students:
  The role of self-efficacy and anxiety. Journal of counseling & development 76 (3), 317­324.

Holt, C. A. and S. K. Laury (2002). Risk aversion and incentive effects. American economic
  review 92 (5), 1644­1655.

Kessler, J. B., C. Low, and C. D. Sullivan (2019). Incentivized resume rating: Eliciting
  employer preferences without deception. American Economic Review 109 (11), 3713­3744.

Leibbrandt, A. and J. A. List (2014). Do women avoid salary negotiations? evidence from
  a large-scale natural field experiment. Management Science 61 (9), 2016­2024.

Milgram, N., S. Marshevsky, and C. Sadeh (1995). Correlates of academic procrastination:
 Discomfort, task aversiveness, and task capability. The Journal of psychology 129 (2),
 145­155.

Niederle, M. and L. Vesterlund (2007). Do women shy away from competition? do men
  compete too much? The quarterly journal of economics 122 (3), 1067­1101.

Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (2004). Academic procrastination and statistics anxiety. Assessment &
 Evaluation in Higher Education 29 (1), 3­19.

Quadlin, N. (2018). The mark of a woman's record: Gender and academic performance in
 hiring. American Sociological Review 83 (2), 331­360.




                                                                                          30
Rammstedt, B. and O. P. John (2007). Measuring personality in one minute or less: A
  10-item short version of the big five inventory in english and german. Journal of research
  in Personality 41 (1), 203­212.

Reidy, D. E., P. D. Kernsmith, C. A. Malone, A. M. Vivolo-Kantor, and J. P. Smith-Darden
  (2018). Feminine discrepancy stress and psychosocial maladjustment among adolescent
  girls. Child Psychiatry & Human Development 49 (2), 176­186.

Rigdon, M. L. (2012). An experimental investigation of gender differences in wage negotia-
  tions. Available at SSRN 2165253 .

Russell, K. and P. Carter (2006). Discover Your IQ Potential: Over 500 Tests of Your
 Mental Agility. Arcturus Publishing.

Sarsons, H. and G. Xu (2015). Confidence men? gender and confidence: Evidence among
  top economists. Harvard University, Department of Economics, Littauer Center , 1­26.

Senecal, C., R. Koestner, and R. J. Vallerand (1995). Self-regulation and academic procras-
  tination. The journal of social psychology 135 (5), 607­619.

Small, D. A., M. Gelfand, L. Babcock, and H. Gettman (2007). Who goes to the bargaining
  table? the influence of gender and framing on the initiation of negotiation. Journal of
  personality and social psychology 93 (4), 600.

Solomon, L. J. and E. D. Rothblum (1984). Academic procrastination: Frequency and
  cognitive-behavioral correlates. Journal of counseling psychology 31 (4), 503.

Weisberg, Y. J., C. G. DeYoung, and J. B. Hirsh (2011). Gender differences in personality
 across the ten aspects of the big five. Frontiers in psychology 2, 178.

Witkowski, J., R. Freeman, J. W. Vaughan, D. M. Pennock, and A. Krause (2018). Incentive-
 compatible forecasting competitions. In Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artificial
 Intelligence.




                                                                                         31
Figure 1: Percent upward grade changes conditional on initial grades




                                                                       32
Figure 2: Student survey: number of classes students considered for regrade requests by
students' gender




                                                                                    33
Figure 3: Instructor survey: regrade results by timing and students' gender




                                                                              34
Figure 4: Regrade requests at varying costs by students' gender




                                                                  35
Figure 5: Binscatter plot of WTP($) against the gap between prior guessed score and intial
score




                                                                                       36
Figure 6: Percent grade/payoff increase/decrease at varying regrade costs by students' gender




                                                                                          37
Figure 7: Correlation between the WTP and regrade experience in class




                                                                        38
                    Table 1: Summary statistics of administrative data


                                      Students
                                         All      Female     Male     Gender Difference
   Percent (%) of records               100        53.4      46.6
   Percent (%) grades with a...
     Grade change                      0.464      0.424     0.509         -0.085***
                                       (6.80)     (6.50)    (7.12)          [0.012]
      Positive grade change            0.439      0.404     0.479         -0.075***
                                       (6.61)     (6.34)    (6.90)          [0.011]
      Negative grade change            0.025      0.021     0.031         -0.010***
                                       (1.59)     (1.43)    (1.75)          [0.003]
      Female instructora                44.9       50.0      38.9          11.1***
                                       (49.7)     (50.0)    (48.8)          [0.088]
   Days between grade changes           25.8       24.9      26.7            -1.80
                                       (56.6)     (55.0)    (58.0)           [1.43]
   GPA                                  3.04       3.13      2.94          0.18***
                                       (0.59)     (0.57)    (0.60)           [0.01]
   Percent (%) in...
     College of Agriculture               4.5       4.9       4.0          0.87***
     College of Business                 10.8       8.6      13.2         -4.58***
     College of Engineering               4.8       1.9       8.2         -6.35***
     College of Human Sciences           12.6      15.5       9.1         6.40***
     College of Liberal Arts             32.2       33.6      30.6         3.07***
     College of Natural Resources        4.6        3.5       5.9         -2.32***
     College of Natural Sciences         23.3      23.2      23.4         -0.25***
     College of Veterinary Sciences      3.4        4.4       2.3          2.07***
     Intra-University                    3.9        4.4       3.3         1.07***
   N                                  1,341,552   716,772   624,780

*p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Standard
errors are in the square brackets. a. 85,250 administrative records have missing values for
instructors' gender. Excluding these data points, the numbers of observations are 671,276
and 585,026 for female and male student records, respectively.




                                                                                          39
                                    Table 2: Linear probability regression analysis of administrative data


                                               [1]         [2]         [3]         [4]                              [5]
                      A. Dependent variable: Upward grade change Y  {0, 1}
                      Male student        0.000748*** 0.000665*** 0.000685*** 0.000763***                      0.000698***
                                           (0.000118)  (0.000120)  (0.000127)  (0.000129)                       (0.000128)
                                             [1.186]     [1.164]     [1.167]     [1.188]                          [1.171]
                      Observations          1,341,552   1,341,552   1,256,302   1,256,302                        1,256,302
                      B. Dependent variable: Downward grade change Y  {0, 1}
                      Male student        0.000102*** 0.000085***   0.000023    0.000001                         -0.000008
                                           (0.000029)  (0.000028)  (0.000028)  (0.000028)                       (0.000028)
                                             [1.499]     [1.399]     [1.091]     [1.005]                           [0.969]
                      Observations          1,341,552   1,341,552   1,256,302   1,256,302                        1,256,302
                      Student controls         No          Yes         No          Yes                               Yes
                      Class controls           No          No          Yes         Yes                               Yes
                      GPA × Grade × Dept       No          No          No          No                                Yes

     *p < 0.1; **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the student level and reported in parentheses.
                                                    rM ale (Y =1)/P rM ale (Y =0)
     Male-to-female odds ratios (calculated as P rPF emale (Y =1)/P rF emale (Y =0)
                                                                                    assuming the mean values for all variables other than Male
     student are reported in brackets.
     a. Student controls include: students' class standing (i.e., freshman, sophomore, junior, senior), discretized GPA (corresponding
     to letter grades), and initial grade.
     b. Class controls include: college, department, and instructors' gender and rank.
     c. GPA × Grade × Dept includes 4,500 indicators for the full interactions of discretized GPAs (corresponding to letter grades),
     initial grades, and departments.




40
                             Table 3: Sensitivity analysis of linear probability model using administrative data


                           [1]            [2]     [3]             [4]                                [5]               [6]            [7]
                         Baseline        Logita
                                           Excl. students Excl. instructors                   Excl. A+ and A         Excl. F      Large classb
                                           w/2+ changes w/10%+ changes
      A. Dependent variable: Upward grade changes Y  {0, 1}
      Male student 0.000698*** 0.000829***  0.000583***     0.000565***                         0.001045***       0.000715***     0.000724***
                    (0.000128)  (0.000132)   (0.000112)      (0.000122)                          (0.000191)        (0.000128)      (0.000219)
                       [1.171]    [1.208]       [1.165]         [1.152]                            [1.170]           [1.179]         [1.188]
      Observations   1,256,302   1,255,910    1,243,781       1,252,854                           819,624           1,212,024        360,618
      B. Dependent variable: Downward grade changes Y  {0, 1}
      Male student   -0.000008   0.000008     -0.000016       -0.000019                           0.000016          -0.000008       0.000024
                    (0.000028)  (0.000038)   (0.000028)      (0.000023)                          (0.000033)        (0.000029)      (0.000063)
                       [0.969]    [1.025]       [0.938]         [0.899]                            [1.064]            [0.969]        [1.080]
      Observations   1,256,302   1,028,958    1,255,987       1,252,854                           819,624           1,212,024        360,618

     *p < 0.1; **p < 0.05; ***p < 0.01. Standard errors are clustered at the student level and reported in parentheses.
                                                     rM ale (Y =1)/P rM ale (Y =0)
     Male-to-female odds ratios (calculated as P rP F emale (Y =1)/P rF emale (Y =0)
                                                                                     assuming the mean values for all variables other than Male
     student are reported in brackets.
     All models control for students' class standing (i.e., freshman, sophomore, junior, senior), discretized GPA (corresponding to
     letter grades), and initial grade, college, department, and instructors' gender and rank, and 4,500 fully interacted indicators of
     GPA × Grade × Department.
     a. Logit regression uses continuous values of GPA and Grade for convergence consideration.
     b. Classes with more than 90 students.




41
                   Table 4: Summary statistics of the instructor survey


                                             End of semester    During semester    Difference
 A. Regrade requests
 Percent requested regrades in a class (%)   5.94            11.17     5.23***
                                            (7.18)          (11.32)      [1.01]
 Male students among requests (%)          57.08+          58.01++        0.93
                                           (24.69)          (21.44)      [2.09]
 B. Instructors' report on students aggressiveness in regrade requests
 Males more aggressive (%)                  51.18            37.70     -13.48**
                                           (50.19)          (48.66)      [5.68]
 Similarly aggressive (%)                   37.77            48.40      10.63*
                                           (48.68)          (50.18)      [5.69]
 Females more aggressive (%)                11.05            13.90        2.85
                                           (31.48)          (34.74)      [2.95]

*p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01 indicate the significance level of the differences between
end of the semester and during semester.
+
  p < 0.10, ++ p < 0.05, +++ p < 0.01 indicate the significance level of differences between
regrade requests at the end of/during the semester against the male representation (52.5%)
in the class. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Standard errors are in square brackets.
All statistics are weighted by class size.




                                                                                           42
                        Table 5: Summary statistics of the student survey
           A. All students                                         Female     Male     Difference
           A1. Regrade requests
           Percent ever considered regrades (%)                     58.76     60.66        -1.90
                                                                   (49.26)   (48.91)      [2.90]
           Percent ever asked for regrades (%)                      38.94     40.98        -2.04
                                                                   (48.79)   (49.24)      [2.89]
           Percent ever asked for regrades, end of semester (%)     16.47     17.33        -0.86
                                                                   (37.12)   (37.90)      [2.21]
           Percent ever asked for regrades, during semester (%)     29.03     31.62        -2.58
                                                                   (45.42)   (46.55)      [2.71]
           Number of classes considered regrades                     1.04      1.30     -0.25***
                                                                    (1.17)    (1.41)      [0.07]
           Number of classes asked for regrades                      0.56      0.65       -0.09*
                                                                    (0.81)    (0.91)      [0.05]
           Imputed number of classes asked for regrades              0.97      1.12      -0.15**
                                                                    (0.99)    (1.07)      [0.06]
           A2. Conditional on considered/asked for regrades
           Number of classes considered regrades                     1.78      2.14     -0.25***
                                                                    (1.02)    (1.22)      [0.07]
           Number of classes asked for regrades                      1.43      1.59       -0.09*
                                                                    (0.66)    (0.73)      [0.05]
           Imputed number of classes asked for regrades              1.65      1.84      -0.15**
                                                                    (0.74)    (0.74)      [0.06]
           A3. Student Perceptions
           Probability of grade increased if asked (%)              37.04     38.25       -1.21
                                                                   (28.51)   (27.98)     [1.68]
           Probability of grade unchanged if asked (%)              57.22     55.91        1.31
                                                                   (28.32)   (28.50)     [1.68]
           Probability of grade decreased if asked (%)               5.74      5.83       -0.10
                                                                   (11.72)   (11.45)     [0.69]
           Regret asking aggressively, during semestera              1.49      1.63     -0.14**
                                                                    (1.09)    (1.22)     [0.07]
           Regret asking aggressively, end of semestera              1.44      1.60     -0.15**
                                                                    (1.07)    (1.22)     [0.07]
           Control over direction of lifeb                           5.14      5.28      -0.14*
                                                                    (1.23)    (1.33)     [0.07]
           Stress from asking for regradesc                          5.01      3.88     1.12***
                                                                    (1.63)    (1.89)     [0.10]
           Number of participants                                    868       427
           B. Sub-sample of regrade requests                       Female      Male    Difference
           Percent grade component increased (%)                    59.59     65.23      -5.65
                                                                   (49.12)   (47.71)     [3.65]
           Percent grade component decreased (%)                     1.44      0.00     1.44**
                                                                   (11.94)    (0.00)     [0.71]
           Percent final grade increased (%)                        31.34     31.54      -0.20
                                                                   (46.44)   (46.55)     [3.49]
           Percent final grade decreased (%)                         2.68      6.09     -3.41**
                                                                   (16.17)   (23.96)     [1.46]
           Number of participants                                    338       175
           Number of observations                                    485       279

*p < 0.10, **p < 0.05, ***p < 0.01 indicate the significance level of gender differences. Standard deviations
are in parentheses. Standard errors are in square brackets. a. Scale ranges between 1 (never true to me)
and 7 (always true to me). b. Scale ranges between 1 (I don't have any control) and 7 (I have full control).
c. Scale ranges between 1 (not stressed at all) and 7 (extremely stressed).
                                                                                                          43
                         Table 6: Summary statistics of the experiment
                                                                Female      Male      Difference
                  A.    Risk aversion coefficient                 1.12       0.86      0.25***
                                                                (0.75)     (0.73)       [0.07]
                        Over-confidencea                          0.53       0.54        -0.02
                                                                (0.19)     (0.18)       [0.02]
                        Under-confidenceb                         0.21       0.17      0.04***
                                                                (0.16)     (0.14)       [0.01]
                        Over-optimismc                            1.64       1.37         0.27
                                                                (3.28)     (2.73)       [0.27]
                        Uncertaintyd                              0.51       0.47        0.04*
                                                                (0.23)     (0.21)       [0.02]
                        Prior guessed score                      13.21     14.35      -1.14***
                                                                (3.30)     (2.69)       [0.27]
                        Prior downside riske                      0.33       0.29       0.04**
                                                                (0.23)     (0.20)       [0.02]
                        Posterior guessed score                  12.10     13.28      -1.19***
                                                                (3.11)     (2.90)       [0.27]
                        Posterior downside riske                  0.28       0.22       0.05**
                                                                (0.26)     (0.23)       [0.02]
                        Belief revisionf                         -1.11      -1.07        -0.04
                                                                (2.73)     (2.33)       [0.23]
                  B.    Big 5 trait: Extroversiong                3.03       2.96         0.07
                                                                (0.97)     (0.94)       [0.08]
                        Big 5 trait: Agreeablenessg               3.62       3.48        0.13*
                                                                (0.85)     (0.82)       [0.07]
                        Big 5 trait: Conscientiousnessg           3.74       3.64         0.10
                                                                (0.77)     (0.80)       [0.07]
                        Big 5 trait: Neuroticismg                 3.52       2.89      0.63***
                                                                (1.03)     (0.94)       [0.09]
                        Big 5 trait: Opennessg                    3.71       3.47      0.24***
                                                                (0.90)     (0.83)       [0.08]
                  C.    True score of the quiz                   11.57     12.98      -1.41***
                                                                (3.19)     (2.87)       [0.27]
                        Original score of the quiz               10.84     12.08      -1.24***
                                                                (2.87)     (2.69)       [0.25]
                        Final score of the quiz                  11.13     12.45      -1.32***
                                                                (3.00)     (2.91)       [0.26]
                        WTP ($)                                   0.05       0.25       -0.19*
                                                                (1.22)     (1.38)       [0.11]
                        % Willing to Pay Positive Cost           36.40     46.78      -10.39**
                        Percent payoff increased (%)h            20.85     22.92         -2.07
                        Percent payoff decreased (%)h             6.68       7.98        -1.30
                        Observations                              283        233

* p < 0.10; ** p < 0.05, *** p < 0.01. Standard deviations are in parentheses. Standard errors are in square
brackets. a. Over-confidence measures participants' probability assignments to the wrong answers in the quiz (0
= zero over-confidence to 1 = completely over-confident). b. Under-confidence measures the gap (between 0 and
1) between participants' probability assignments and 1 (100%) of the correct answers in the quiz (0 = zero under-
confidence to 1 = completely under-confident). c. Over-optimism measures the gap between participants' guessed
score (prior belief) and true score of the quiz. d. Uncertainty measures how certain (in probability) they are about
their guessed outcome (0 = completely certain to 1 = completely uncertain). e. Prior (posterior ) downside risk
measures the prior (posterior) probability (between 0 and 1) participants assigned to adverse outcomes (i.e., true
score is below the guessed score). f. Belief updates measures the updates in the guessed score (posterior guessed
score - prior guessed score). g. Extroversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Neuroticism, Openness are the Big
Five personal traits with the value ranging between 1 and 5. h. Mean value over the 10 cost scenarios.

                                                                                                                44
                             Table 7: Logit regression of willingness to pay a positive cost for regrades


                                      Dependent Variable: Participants who are willing to pay a positive cost for regrades  {0, 1}
                                         [1]         [2]       [3]        [4]       [5]       [6]       [7]       [8]         [9]
         Male student                 0.103** 0.098** 0.095**           0.083*    0.072*    0.079*    0.068    0.082*       0.056
                                      (0.042) (0.043)        (0.042)   (0.043)   (0.043) (0.043) (0.043) (0.046)          (0.046)
         Risk aversiona                            -0.018                                            -0.013                -0.014
                                                  (0.029)                                           (0.029)               (0.029)
         Over-confidenceb                                   0.345***                                  0.219                0.235*
                                                             (0.113)                                (0.133)               (0.134)
         Under-confidencec                                            -0.450***                      -0.035                -0.036
                                                                       (0.152)                      (0.188)               (0.189)
         Over-optimismd                                                           0.001              -0.003                -0.003
                                                                                 (0.008)            (0.012)               (0.012)
         Uncertaintye                                                            -0.289*             -0.276                -0.271
                                                                                 (0.167)            (0.170)               (0.170)
         Prior guessed score                                                      0.017*              0.017                 0.016
                                                                                 (0.009)            (0.016)               (0.016)
         Prior downside riskf                                                     -0.038             -0.014                -0.021
                                                                                 (0.172)            (0.174)               (0.175)
         Posterior guessed score                                                            0.013*   -0.004                -0.005
                                                                                           (0.008) (0.013)                (0.013)
         Posterior downside riskf                                                          -0.166* -0.011                  -0.003
                                                                                           (0.094) (0.103)                (0.104)
         Extroversiong                                                                                          -0.008     -0.000
                                                                                                               (0.024)    (0.024)
         Agreeablenessg                                                                                         -0.025     -0.028
                                                                                                               (0.026)    (0.026)
         Conscientiousnessg                                                                                     -0.007     -0.010
                                                                                                               (0.028)    (0.028)
         Neuroticismg                                                                                           -0.020     -0.007
                                                                                                               (0.023)    (0.023)
         Opennessg                                                                                              -0.014     -0.015
                                                                                                               (0.025)    (0.024)
         Observations                   516         516        515       516        516       516      515       516         515
               F-test (p-value): all coefficients (other than Male student and Constant) = 0          .0065      .842        .041

     * p < 0.1, ** p < 0.05, and *** p < 0.01 indicate the significance level of gender differences. Marginal effects are reported in the table. Standard
     errors are reported in parentheses. a. Risk aversion measures the risk aversion coefficient. b. Over-confidence measures participants' probability




45
     assignments to the wrong answers in the quiz (0 = zero over-confidence to 1 = completely over-confident). c. Under-confidence measures the gap
     (between 0 and 1) between participants' probability assignments and 1 (100%) of the correct answers in the quiz (0 = zero under-confidence to 1 =
     completely under-confident). d. Over-optimism measures the gap between participants' guessed score (prior belief) and true score of the quiz. e.
     Uncertainty measures how certain (in probability) they are about their guessed outcome (0 = completely certain to 1 = completely uncertain). f.
     Prior (posterior ) downside risk measures the prior (posterior) probability (between 0 and 1) participants assigned to adverse outcomes (i.e., true score
     is below the guessed score). g. Extroversion, Agreeableness, Conscientiousness, Neuroticism, Openness are the Big Five personal traits with the value
     ranging between 1 and 5.
