                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   DYNAMIC TAXATION

                                      Stefanie Stantcheva

                                      Working Paper 26704
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26704


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




I thank Clément Herman, Julia Paul-Venturine, and Yannic Rehm for outstanding research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Stefanie Stantcheva. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Dynamic Taxation
Stefanie Stantcheva
NBER Working Paper No. 26704
January 2020
JEL No. H2,H21,H23,H24,H25

                                           ABSTRACT

This paper reviews recent advances in the study of dynamic taxation, considering three main
approaches: the dynamic Mirrlees, the parametric Ramsey, and the sufficient statistics
approaches. In the first approach, agents' heterogeneous abilities to earn income are private
information and evolve stochastically over time. Dynamic taxes are not ex ante restricted and are
set for redistribution and insurance considerations. Capital is taxed only in order to improve
incentives to work. Human capital is optimally subsidized if it reduces post-tax inequality and
risk on balance. The Ramsey approach specifies ex ante restricted tax instruments and adopts
quantitative methods, which allows it to consider more complex and realistic economies. Capital
taxes are optimal when age-dependent labor income taxes are not possible. The newer and
tractable sufficient statistics approach derives robust tax formulas that depend on estimable
elasticities and features of the income distributions. It simplifies the transitional dynamics thanks
to a newly defined criterion, the "utility-based steady state approach" that prevents the
government from exploiting sluggish responses in the short-run. Capital taxes are here based on
the standard equity-efficiency trade-off.


Stefanie Stantcheva
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 232
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu
1    Introduction
This paper reviews recent advances in the study of dynamic taxation. Dynamic taxation has been addressed
using three approaches in the literature: the dynamic Mirrlees, the parametric Ramsey, and the sufficient
statistics approaches. Considering each in turn, I describe some of their main methods, derivations, and
results, review some key papers, and discuss various extensions.
    The dynamic Mirrlees approach covered in Section 2 adopts the static Mirrlees' (1971) idea that agents'
heterogeneous abilities to earn income are private information and lets productive ability evolve stochastically
over time. The ability to earn income can be stochastic among others because of health shocks, shocks to
one's human capital, individual labor market idiosyncrasies, or luck. Thus, agents not only start with
heterogeneous skills; they also face uncertainty over their life cycle. The dynamic optimal tax problem is
a mix between an optimal redistribution across initial heterogeneity and an optimal insurance problem to
smooth consumption over time. The tax instruments are not restricted a priori; rather, the goal is to solve
for the optimal constrained efficient allocations subject to the informational constraints, and then look for
possible decentralized, tax implementations. Section 3 describes recent extensions to the dynamic Mirrlees
approach that endogenize wages through human capital investments.
    The parametric and quantitative Ramsey approach covered in Section 4 parametrically specifies the tax
instruments to use and quantitatively (or, more rarely, analytically) solves for the optimal policies. The
environments considered are often more complex than in dynamic Mirrlees models, featuring overlapping
generations, credit constraints and incomplete markets, public goods, or human capital investments. Some
questions answered are what forces quantitatively matter for the optimal levels and progressivity of taxes,
how important tagging by age is, and whether positive capital taxes are optimal.
    The newer sufficient statistics approach to dynamic taxation in Section 5 derives robust tax formulas
that depend on estimable factors such as the elasticity of supply of capital or labor income with respect
to their tax rate, the shape of the capital and labor income distributions, and the social welfare weights at
different levels of labor or capital income. This approach also simplifies the transitional dynamics thanks to
a newly defined criterion, the "utility-based steady state approach" that essentially prevents the government
from exploiting sluggish responses in the short-run, which is normatively more appealing and circumvents
commitment issues. This approach is very tractable and empirically applicable. It allows addressing policy-
relevant questions, which are much harder to answer in more complex models: These are, for instance,
nonlinear capital taxation, income shifting between the capital and labor tax bases, different types of capital
assets and heterogeneity in individual returns to capital or preferences, or broader social fairness and equity
concerns.
    Some of the main findings from the dynamic Mirrlees literature are that, first, taxes will be optimally
smoothed over the lifecycle, featuring a persistent component that depends on last period's taxes and a drift
term that captures the insurance motive. Their mean-reversion or persistence will closely mimic that of
the underlying stochastic skill process. In many settings, although the full implementations are complex,
age-dependent linear taxes appear to reap most of the welfare gains from the constrained efficient allocations
although it is not clear how robust this result would be to different stochastic processes, preferences, or social
objectives than those typically studied in the literature. Savings are typically discouraged at the optimum
relative to the free-savings case because higher levels of assets and lower work effort are complements. This
is the inverse Euler logic that arises when labor effort is not observed and needs to be incentivized.
    With human capital added to the dynamic Mirrlees model, it is optimal to subsidize human capital

                                                        2
investments on net if and only if they do not benefit high ability agents disproportionately; if human capi-
tal investments disproportionately benefit already high-ability agents, they increase post-tax inequality and
tighten high-ability agents' incentive constraints and should be taxed on net. When human capital invest-
ments take the form of time (training) rather than resource (money) investments, the key parameter is how
substitutable or complementary they are to labor effort, i.e., whether there is "learning-and-doing" or rather
"learning-or-doing."
    The sufficient statistics approach delivers the key insight that the same linear or nonlinear formulas as in
a static setting apply, but using the long-run elasticities in lieu of short-run ones. This greatly simplifies the
study of dynamic taxation and permits making use of the many results already derived for income taxation
in static settings. To give some examples, a restricted, comprehensive income tax that does not differentiate
between capital and labor income is optimally set as in the static Mirrlees case, simply using the elasticities
and distribution of total income. Such a tax system is optimal if there is a lot of income shifting between
capital and labor income. Similarly, one can directly "plug in" different generalized social welfare weights
that directly capture a broad set of justice and fairness considerations as in the static Saez and Stantcheva
(2016) framework. For instance, if the wealth distribution is considered fair, a zero capital tax rate will be
optimal for equity reasons. If, on the other hand, wealth is a tag for parental background and equality of
opportunity is valued, then a positive capital tax will be optimal.
    These different approaches offer very distinct reasons for taxing or not taxing capital, among others. With
restricted instruments in the parametric-Ramsey approach, capital taxation is often an imperfect substitute
for missing age-dependent taxes and transfers. In the dynamic Mirrlees approach, capital is taxed in order to
provide more efficient labor supply incentives when there is imperfect information and as part of the optimal
insurance scheme against stochastic earnings abilities. In the sufficient statistics approach, it is made clear
that capital income is taxed based on the standard equity-efficiency trade-off familiar from the static income
tax literature. Capital taxes will be positive for redistribution (equity) reasons as long as capital income is
concentrated among agents with relatively lower social welfare weights (typically, higher-income agents) and
the elasticity of capital to taxes (the efficiency cost) is not infinite. This is the case for instance in a model
with wealth in the utility that generates finite elasticities of capital income to taxes and a non-degenerate
steady state with heterogeneous wealth holdings that depend on heterogeneous returns and preferences for
wealth.



2       The Dynamic Mirrleesian Approach
This section is based on the core models and methods developed in Farhi and Werning (2013), Golosov et al.
(2016) and Kapicka (2013) and will characterize the optimal labor and savings distortions over the lifecycle.
We start with a dynamic life cycle model that features a Markov skill process. The persistence of types poses
particular challenges and also significantly affects the shape of the optimal policies.1 The methodology is
laid out in some detail to provide intuition.
   The early papers in the dynamic Mirrlees literature focused on the savings distortion. Golosov et al.
(2003) demonstrated that it is optimal to distort savings downwards for a general class of economies with
stochastic skills. This follows the core inverse Euler logic described below and already apparent in the more
specialized settings by Diamond and Mirrlees (1978) and Rogerson (1985). Kocherlakota (2005) shows that it
    1 All   detailed derivations can be found in the Appendix of Farhi and Werning (2013) or Stantcheva (2017).


                                                                 3
also holds with aggregate shocks. Farhi and Werning (2010) highlight that the capital distortions prescribed
by the inverse Euler logic play only a quantitatively small role in improving welfare once general equilibrium
effects are taken into account. For labor taxes, Werning (2002) derives an optimal smoothing result for
income taxes across time and states.


2.1     A Dynamic Life Cycle Model
The economy consists of agents who live for T years, during which they work and consume.2 Agents who
work lt  0 hours in period t at a wage rate wt make income yt = wt lt . The disutility cost to an agent
of supplying labor effort lt is t (lt ). t is strictly increasing and convex. The wage rate wt is simply equal
to "ability" t , a catch-all term to capture the ability to earn income, such as innate ability, skill, or labor
market opportunities. For generality, I will often maintain the notation wt (t ), which will facilitate the
transition to extensions, such as endogenous wages through human capital accumulation. There is a physical
capital asset that yields a fixed gross interest rate R. Investments in this physical capital are called "savings."
The analysis is in partial equilibrium in that the wage function and the interest rate are taken as given.
     Agents are born at time t = 1 with a heterogeneous earning ability 1 that has distribution f 1 (1 ).
Earning ability evolves according to a Markov process with a possibly time-varying transition function
f t (t |t-1 ) , over a fixed support   , ¯.
    Agents' per period utility is separable in consumption and labor:

                                                                               yt
                                            ~t (ct , yt ; t ) = ut (ct ) - t
                                            u                                                                              (1)
                                                                               t

ut is increasing, twice continuously differentiable, and concave. More complicated tax formulas arise in the
case where utility is non-separable in consumption and labor.
    Denote by t the history of ability shocks up to period t, by t the set of possible histories at t,
and by P (t ) the probability of a history t , P (t )  f t (t |t-1 ) ...f 2 (2 |1 ) f 1 (1 ) . An allocation {xt }t
specifies consumption and output, for each period t, conditional on the history t , i.e., xt = {x (t )}t =
{c (t ) , y (t )}t . The expected lifetime utility from an allocation, discounted by a factor  , is given by:

                                                  T
                                                                                    y t
                        U    c t , y t        =          t-1 ut c t        - t              P t dt                         (2)
                                                  t=1
                                                                                     t

where dt  dt ...d1 .


2.2     The Planning Problem
Every period, the planner can observe agents' output yt and consumption choice ct , but ability t is never
observable and neither is labor supply lt = yt /t . Hence, if an agent produces low output, the planner does
not know whether it was labor effort or ability which were low.
   In this technical part, I will walk through a typical dynamic asymmetric information problem. Starting
from the full sequential problem with incentive compatibility constraints, two key steps are taken:
   (i) First, the problem is turned into a "relaxed problem" using a first-order approach that replaces the
(infinite) set of incentive compatibility constraints with agents' envelope conditions.
   2 A retirement period, during which agents only consume is typically also added. It only changes the results quantitatively,

as consumption is simply smoothed during this period, with no uncertainty and no labor supply decisions.


                                                               4
   (ii) The relaxed program is made recursive, using as state variables the promised utility and its gradient.


Incentive compatibility in a dynamic setting

Imagine a direct revelation mechanism, in which, each period, agents report their current ability t . Denote
                                                                                           T
a reporting strategy, specifying a reported type rt after each history by r = {rt (t )}t=1 with R the set of all
possible reporting strategies and rt = {r1 (1 ) , ..., rt (t )} the history of reports from this reporting strategy
r. Allocations are specified as functions of the history of reports by the planner. Let the continuation value
after history t under a reporting strategy r, denoted by  r (t ), be the solution to:

                                                      y (rt (t ))
                     r (t ) = ut (c(rt (t ))) - t                       +     r t+1 f t+1 (t+1 |t ) dt+1
                                                          t
The continuation value under truthful revelation,  (t ) , is solution to:

                                                      y (rt (t ))
                           t = ut c  t        - t                       +    t+1 f t+1 (t+1 |t ) dt+1
                                                          t
 Incentive compatibility means imposing that truth-telling yields at least weakly higher continuation utility
than any other reporting strategy:

                                             (IC ) :  (1 )   r (1 )           1 , r                             (3)

Let X IC be the set of incentive compatible allocations. To solve this dynamic problem, a version of the first
order approach is used.3
   Consider a history t and one special deviation strategy r    ~t , under which the agent reports truthfully
                rs (s ) = s s  t - 1), but reports r
until period t (~                                     ~t (t ) =  = t in period t. Under this strategy, the
continuation utility is the solution to:

                                                    y (t-1 ,  )
                   r ( ) = ut (c(t-1 ,  )) - t
                   ~ t
                                                                        +   r
                                                                            ~
                                                                              t-1 ,  , t+1 f t (t+1 |t ) dt+1
                                                        t

Incentive compatibility in (3) implies that, after almost all t , the temporal incentive constraint holds:

                                                     t = max  r
                                                              ~
                                                                t                                               (4)
                                                                    


Inversely, if (4) holds after all t-1 and for almost al t , then (3) also holds (see (Kapicka, 2013), Lemma
1). If we take the derivative of promised utility with respect to (true) ability, there are two direct effects,
namely on the wage (higher types have higher wages) and on the Markov transition f t (t |t-1 ), and indirect
effects on the allocation through the report. By the first-order condition of the agent, all indirect effects are
jointly zero and only the two direct effects remain. This leads to the envelope condition of the agent, which
is necessary for incentive compatibility.4

                               (t )   w,t                                              f t+1 (t+1 |t )
                    t :=            =     l t l,t l t                   +      t+1                     dt+1     (5)
                              t       wt                                                    t
    This envelope condition describes how the promised utility (or, equivalently, the informational rent) has
to vary with respect to the true type for allocations to be incentive compatible. The first term is the same
  3 See   the set of assumptions in Farhi and Werning (2013) and Stantcheva (2017).
  4 An    application of Theorem 2 in Milgrom and Segal (2002).


                                                                    5
as in the static screening model (Mirrlees, 1971). It ensures that more able types in the current period need
to be compensated to reveal their information to the planner. The second is the future component of the
information rent. An agent that reveals their type to the planner today not only needs to be compensated
for the gain that they could extract by pretending to be another type today, but also for the gain they could
extract in the future from doing so. This is due to the persistence in types: today's type realization brings
the agent information about their type tomorrow. In particular, this second term would disappear under iid
shocks, when today's type realization carries no information about future realizations.
    The planner's objective is to minimize the expected discounted cost of providing an allocation, subject to
incentive compatibility as defined in (3), and to expected lifetime utility of each (initial) type  being above
a threshold U (). Let U ({c, y }; ) be lifetime utility as defined in (2) for agents with initial type . The
relaxed planning problem, denoted by P F OA replaces the incentive constraint by the envelope condition,
and is given by:

                                                        T        t-1
                                                             1
           [P F OA ] :   min  ({c, y } ; U () )   =                         c t - y t    P t dt              (6)
                         {c,y }
                                                       t=1
                                                             R          t


                                                      s.t. : U ({c, y } ; )  U ()
                                                      y t  0, c t  0
                                                      {c, y }  X F OA


     The envelope condition is necessary, but not sufficient for optimality. Unlike in the static Mirrlees model,
it is not easy to find conditions on the primitives that guarantee that the first-order approach will deliver the
optimum (Pavan et al., 2014)). In general, incentive compatibility of the candidate allocation, as well as any
omitted non-negativity constraints, are checked numerically (see Farhi and Werning (2013) or Stantcheva
(2017)).




Recursive formulation of the relaxed program

Without persistent types, writing the planning problem recursively requires specifying the promised utility
as a state variable. This ensures that in period t, the continuation value provided to the agent remains
consistent with what was "promised" to the agent by the planner in period t - 1 (and, working backwards,
in earlier periods too). Let v (t ) be the expected future continuation utility:

                                    v t            t+1 f t+1 (t+1 |t ) dt+1                                  (7)


Continuation utility  (t ) can hence be rewritten as:

                                                              y (t )
                                   t = ut c t          - t              + v t                                (8)
                                                                t

With persistence in types, this is not sufficient since the agent is promised not only a level of continuation
value, but also a variation in that continuation value with their type. Thus, we need to define the future

                                                         6
marginal rent (the second term in the envelope condition) as:

                                                              f t+1 (t+1 |t )
                                    t              t+1                        dt+1                           (9)
                                                                   t

The envelope condition can then be rewritten as:

                                              w,t
                                      t =
                                                  l t l,t l t            +   t                              (10)
                                              wt

The state variables in any given period t are then the promised utility, the promised marginal utility, and
the previous period's type realization vt-1 , t-1 , t-1 . Because the shock process is Markov, t-1 is all that
needs to be known for the continuation of the problem. The full history t-1 is not needed. The expected
continuation cost of the planner at time t given these states is:
                                                  T           -t
                                                        1
                 K (vt-1 , t-1 , t-1 , t) = min                      (c ( ) - y ( )) P  -t d -t
                                                   =t
                                                        R

where, with some abuse of notation, d -t = d d -1 ...dt , and P ( -t ) = f  ( | -1 ) ...f t (t |t-1 ). A
recursive formulation of the relaxed program is then for t  2:

                                                                   1
              K (v, , - , t) = min    (c () - wt () l () +           K (v () ,  () , , t + 1))f t (|- ) d   (11)
                                                                   R

subject to:

                                       () = ut (c ()) - t (l ()) + v ()
                                            w,t
                                       () =      l () l,t (l ()) +   ()
                                             wt
                                          v=        () f t (|- ) d

                                                            f t (|- )
                                         =          ()                d
                                                              -

where the maximization is over the functions (c () , l () ,  () , v () ,  ()).
   To incorporate redistribution concerns, we can interpret the initial type 1 as an arbitrary heterogeneity
that agents start with. For each type 1 , the planner specifies a target utility to be reached: (U ()) . In
period t = 1, the planner's problem takes these target utilities as constraints.



Wedges

To characterize the optimal allocations, obtained as solutions to the relaxed program above, the literature
has relied on "wedges," which are implicit taxes and subsidies. For any allocation, define the intratemporal
wedge on labor L (t ) and the intertemporal wedge on savings (also called capital wedge) K (t ) as follows:

                                                        l,t (lt )
                                       L t          1-                                                      (12)
                                                       wt ut (ct )
                                                        1        ut (ct )
                                       K t          1-                                                      (13)
                                                       R Et (ut (ct+1 ))

                                                             7
    These wedges can be thought of as locally linear taxes. Absent government intervention, they would
be equal to zero. They are thus a measure of the distortion at an allocation relative to the laissez-faire
allocation. For instance, the labor wedge is defined as the gap between the marginal rate of substitution and
the marginal rate of transformation between consumption and labor, which would be zero in the laissez-faire
when an agent optimizes their labor supply. Imagine the Planner imposing a linear tax equal to L (t )
and letting an agent of type t choose their labor supply locally around l(t ). Equation (12) is a necessary
condition for the agent's labor supply choice. A positive labor wedge means that labor supply is distorted
downwards. Similarly, the savings wedge K measures the difference between the expected marginal rate of
intertemporal substitution and the return on savings.
    For the exposition, denote by xy,t the elasticity of a variable xt to another variable yt , xyt  d log (xt ) /d log (yt ).
Let u                              c
     t be the uncompensated and t the compensated labor supply elasticities to the net wage, holding savings
fixed.


2.3        Labor Income Taxation: Tax Smoothing, Persistence, and Age-Patterns
The next proposition highlights the insurance and redistribution forces that drive the labor wedge.

Proposition 1. i) At the optimum, the labor wedge is equal to:

                                               
                                              Lt (t )    µ (t ) ut (c (t )) w,t 1 + ut
                                                       =                                                                              (14)
                                            1 - L ( )t     f t (t |t-1 )    t     ct


with µ (t ) =  (t ) +  (t ), where

                                        t-1                                                         ¯
                                                                                                    
                                Lt -1             R        ct-1   t-1                                   f (s |t-1 )
                    t =                                                                                             ds
                              1 - L,t-1 ( ) ut-1 (c ( )) 1 + u
                                          t- 1       t - 1       
                                                              t-1 w,t-1                            t      t-1

and
                                     ¯
                                     
                                                            1
                    t        =           (1 - gs )                     f (s |t-1 ) ds                                                 (15)
                                    t                ut (c (t-1 , s ))
                                                                                    ¯
                                                                                    
                                                                                               1
                  with gs    = ut c t-1 , s               t-1 and t-1 =                                     f (m |t-1 ) dm
                                                                                        ut (c (t-1 , m ))

    The insurance motive is captured in  (t ). gs is the marginal social welfare weight on an agent of type
s , measuring the social value of one more dollar transferred to that individual, and 1/t-1 is the social
cost of public funds at time t. The insurance motive would be zero with linear utility. The redistributive
term  (t ) can be written recursively in terms of the previous period's labor wedge weighted by a measure
of ability persistence. Recall that there can be a redistributive motive in the first period if there is initial
heterogeneity.5 This motive persists through  (t ) and the more so if types are more persistent. In one
polar case, if t is iid, only the contemporaneous insurance motive  (t ) plays a role. If, in addition to iid
   5 In   the first period, heterogeneity in 1 leads to:
                                                      ¯
                                                               1
                                         µ (1 ) =                      1 - 0 (s ) u1 (c1 (s )) f (s )
                                                     1    u1 (c1 (s ))
                                                                                                                 ¯
                                                                                                                 
where 0 (s ) is the multiplier (scaled by f (s )) on type s target utility. With linear utility: 1 =              0   (s ) f (s ) .


                                                                        8
shocks, utility is linear in consumption, the optimal labor wedge is zero in all periods, except in the first one
if there are different utility thresholds (i.e., different social welfare weights) for different agents.
    We can also immediately see the counterpart to the classic "zero distortions at the top and bottom" result
in the static literature, which, here, holds in every period, i.e., Lt   
                                                                            t-1 , ¯ =   t-1 ,  = 0, t. This
                                                                                         Lt
result no longer holds if there is moving support, i.e., if the upper and lower bounds         ¯t (t-1 ) and  (t-1 )
                                                                                                             t
depend on the past type realization (Farhi and Werning, 2013).

Age-patterns: A special case is the log autoregressive process with persistence p such that:

                                           log (t ) = p log (t-1 ) + t                                                   (16)

where t has density f  ( |t-1 ) , with E ( |t-1 ) = 0. In this case, we can rewrite the evolution of the
labor wedge over time as:

             Lt    w,t-1 c t   1 + ut-1         1 ut-1
  Et-1
          (1 - Lt ) w,t 1 + ut   ct-1          R ut
                                                                     1 + ut-1        1 ut-1                   Lt-1
                                                           = w,t-1            Cov           , log (t ) + p               (17)
                                                                       ct-1         R ut                   (1 - Lt-1 )

   The risk-adjusted expectation for the labor wedge (on the left-hand side) depends on the past period's
wedge weighted by the persistence in types p. Thus, the labor wedge's persistence or mean reversion reflects
that of the stochastic ability process. In addition, the labor wedge evolves over the life of agents according to
a drift term that captures the insurance motive; if there is no risk in consumption, i.e., perfect consumption
smoothing over time, the drift term is zero. Dynamic incentive compatibility implies a positive covariance
between the growth of consumption of an agent and their productivity, because the government induces high
productivity agents to reveal their type by promising them higher consumption growth. As a result, the
value of insurance increases and so does the labor wedge.


2.4      Capital Taxation: the Inverse Euler Equation Logic
The dynamic Mirrlees framework has strong implications for how capital and savings should be treated.
The uncertainty in types over time and the inability to control labor supply force the planner to impose a
distortion on savings to improve the provision of incentives to work.

Proposition 2. At the optimum, the inverse Euler Equation holds:
                                                   ¯
                                                   
                                   R                          1
                                           =                           f t+1 (t+1 |t ) dt+1                              (18)
                               ut (c (t ))             ut+1 (c (t+1 ))

   Thus, at the optimum, the inverse marginal utility in the current period is equal to the expected inverse
marginal utility in the next period. By the concavity of marginal utility and Jensen's inequality, it is thus
the case that:
                                                       ¯
                                                       
                            ut c t      < R                ut+1 c t+1     f t+1 (t+1 |t ) dt+1                           (19)
                                                   

i.e., agents are off their Euler equation and, in particular, would like to save more than they made to save at
the optimal allocation. Savings are downward distorted and there is a positive savings wedge K . Another
way to see this is that the desired labor supply at the optimal allocation is incompatible with free savings.

                                                                9
Increasing savings in period t increases disposable income in period t + 1. Unless utility is quasilinear, this
implies an income effect on labor supply, and the agent is then tempted to work less. More savings in period
t and lower labor supply in period t + 1 are complements. Ruling out such a deviation requires discouraging
savings below the level that would occur at the free market rate.
    Another way to understand the inverse Euler equation is to consider the cost of providing utility ­ rather
than consumption­ in every period and state. Providing different utility in different (reported) states is
how incentives are provided. Switching to this utility metric, consider the change in the planner's expected
resource cost above of moving resources from one period to the next. Pick a history t and leave all allocations
unchanged, except at node t , where we perturb the utility by providing  · less utility in period t, and
more for all t+1 after history (t ), i.e, let perturbed utilities be ut (c(t )) -  and ut+1 (c(t , t+1 )) + .
If the original allocation is optimal, it has to minimize the resource cost of providing utility across time at
   = 0. That cost is:

                                             ¯
                                             
                                      1
                       c (ut -  ) +              c ut+1 (t , t+1 ) +   )f t t+1 |t dt+1
                                      R   

Its FOC evaluated at zero equates the inverse marginal utility in period t (which is the resource cost of
providing utility in period t) to the expected inverse marginal utility in period t + 1 (which is the expected
resource cost of providing utility in period t + 1). This is exactly the inverse Euler equation. The standard
Euler equation, on the other hand, equates the marginal utility of allocating resources across time, which
is what a consumption-smoothing agent would do in the laissez-faire, but not a planner under incentive
constraints, who seeks to efficiently allocate incentives.
    Note that in the special case where there is uncertainty in the first period, but not thereafter, we recover
the Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) result that capital should not be taxed. As soon as shocks are introduced
from the second period (or some period t) onwards as well, we obtain the inverse Euler equation.


2.5    Implementation and Approximation
Implementation: Concepts and Examples

The issue of implementation can be formulated as follows: given the structure of the private market, are there
(possibly complicated) tax functions that, if agents were left in the decentralized economy facing these taxes,
they would choose the allocations of the planner's problem? In the static Mirrlees problem, the answer is
immediate under some regularity conditions: a nonlinear income tax can implement the constrained efficient
allocation.
    In the dynamic problem, although it is very helpful for the intuition to think about wedges as implicit
taxes and subsidies, the link between these implicit taxes and explicit tax functions is not immediate. This
is because each wedge characterizes the distortion in one of the actions of the agent, holding the others fixed
at the optimum; they are distortions along a single dimension. When an agent has several actions to take,
there is scope for joint deviations.
    In the case of the savings wedge, it may be intuitive to think that a savings tax equal to the wedge at
each history as defined in (13) would implement the allocation. But the savings wedge characterizes the
marginal intertemporal distortion, holding labor supply constant at its optimal level. It would implement
the right amount of savings if the agent was choosing the optimal level of labor in period t + 1. If the capital
or savings tax was truly set to K (t ), the agent could jointly choose another level of savings and another

                                                         10
level of labor supply in period t + 1, according to the logic described to provide intuition for the inverse
Euler equation.
   Albanesi and Sleet (2006) propose a simple implementation that works only in the case where types
are independent and identically distributed (iid), namely a nonlinear income tax that depends on the stock
of wealth accumulated to date. With iid shocks, wealth acts as a sufficient statistic for the past history,
providing all the information needed to give an agent their planned allocation.
    Kocherlakota (2005) proposes an implementation with a nonlinear, fully history-contingent labor income
tax and a linear capital tax rate in period t that conditions not only on the past history of income, but also
on next period's t +1 income. This rules out a joint deviation in savings and income. Although Kocherlakota
shows that this savings tax raises on average no revenues, it acts by making the return to savings stochastic.
In fact, the return to savings is made higher for good realizations of the type. Thus, savings is made a worse
hedge by the tax system, which discourages savings, as the inverse Euler equation requires.
   With more structure on the type process, other implementations can be found. In Golosov and Tsyvinski
(2007), agents face the risk of permanent disability, which is an absorbing state. The optimal allocation is
implemented with a transfer to agents with assets below a certain threshold, which is essentially a disability
insurance scheme that has an asset test for benefits.
    The implementation of a given allocation is in general not unique; however, all possible implementations
generate the same marginal distortions as characterized by the wedges. Second, an implementation is always
relative to a given market structure in the laissez-faire economy. For instance, in the planning problem, it can
be ignored that agents face credit constraints because the incentive compatible allocations specify directly
private borrowing and saving. However, if the laissez-faire economy features credit constraints, the taxes
and transfers that will implement the planner's allocation will be different from the ones that will implement
it in the absence of credit constraints.


Approximations

Because the decentralized policies that implement an allocation are in general quite complex, the literature
has sought to find simpler, parametric approximations to the optimal policies. A recurring theme has been
that linear, age-dependent tax rates can reap a large share of the welfare gain from the constrained efficient
allocations. Weinzierl (2011) shows that moving from age-independent to age-dependent policies generates
sizable welfare gains.
   In practice, tax and transfer policies feature a non-trivial amount of age-dependence. Sometimes this
dependence is explicit, as is the case for old-age pensions. In other cases, it is implicit and due to factors
that naturally evolve over the life cycle, such as marital status, children, and the life cycle shape of income.
Table A-1 summarizes the many age-dependent features in tax policy in several OECD countries.
    Farhi and Werning (2013) go further and show that linear age-dependent policies approximates the
optimal policies well in their lifecycle model; Stantcheva (2017) shows that this holds true even when there is
endogenous human capital investment (in which case, a linear age-dependent human capital subsidy is also
required). The linearity result is, however, likely not valid for all types of skill processes and may depend
on the log-autoregressive processes assumed in the literature. While this has not been shown formally, the
approximation with linear policies is likely to do more poorly if the variance of shocks is larger, if the planner
is more redistributive, and if the agents are more risk averse. In a new model applying dynamic tax methods
to the design of corporate taxation and innovation policies, with spillovers between firms, a linear corporate

                                                       11
profit tax combined with a non-linear R&D subsidy also does very well (Akcigit, Hanley, and Stantcheva,
2016).


2.6    Extensions of the Core Model

Further lifecycle considerations. Some papers have tried to incorporate a more realistic and complex life
cycle in the dynamic Mirrlees problem, while simplifying the model above along other dimensions, such as
focusing on a two-period model only or simpler shock structures. Best and Kleven (2016) incorporate career
effects, whereby current work effort also affects future wages. Without age-dependent taxes, this tends to
make the optimal tax schedule much less progressive; with age-dependent taxes, taxes at older ages should
be lowered. In a model with endogenous retirement age, Ndiaye (2017) shows that retirement benefits that
are increasing with age are needed in addition to the age-dependent linear taxes in order to achieve the
welfare gain from the constrained efficient allocations.

Hidden savings. Abraham et al. (2016) propose a pure insurance model, in which agents are ex ante
identical and each period the type is realized after the labor choice has been made. In this case, labor and
capital taxes would be complements: a higher capital tax, by the inverse Euler logic helps provide incentives
for work more efficiently. Thus, if private savings cannot be taxed because they are unobservable, optimal
labor taxes become less progressive (see also Abraham and Pavoni (2008) and Abraham et al. (2011)).

Restrictions on asset taxes. A less stark case of restriction on capital taxes is to rule out non-linear
taxes, which happens if individual borrowing and lending are not observable, but it is possible to (linearly)
tax the observable overall capital stock as in da Costa (2009), da Costa and Werning (2002), and Golosov
and Tsyvinski (2007). In Golosov and Tsyvinski (2007), agents can privately trade in assets markets in order
to self-insure. Whether capital should be taxed a (linear) positive rate depends on the shock process. With
iid shocks or absorbing disability shocks this is the case. But with more general skill processes, where the
current skill realization grants the agent significant advance information about their future skill, it may be
optimal to subsidize capital. Chang and Park (2018) derive a fully nonlinear income tax schedule in the
presence of private endogenous insurance and find that the optimal nonlinear tax rates can be very different
from those with no private insurance.

Innovation and Externalities. A very recent development in this literature is to consider the taxation of
firms. Akcigit, Hanley, and Stantcheva (2016) build a new and general framework to study the taxation of
firms that captures key elements such as market power, investments, production, heterogeneity in produc-
tivity, intellectual property, and asymmetric information. In their model, firms invest in innovation, which
has spillovers on other firms. Firms have heterogeneous research productivities, i.e., abilities to convert a
given set of research inputs into innovation. Productivities are stochastic and private information. Theoret-
ically, they show how the Pigouvian subsidies on R&D and taxes on corporate income should be increased
or decreased due to screening considerations and depending on the relative complementarities between ob-
servable R&D investments, unobservable R&D inputs, and firm productivity. Quantitatively, the model is
estimated on the Census' longitudinal business data matched to patent data and shows that implementing
the constrained efficient allocation only requires using very simple policies. In particular, a nonlinear, sep-
arable Heathcote-Storesletten-Violante (HSV) type subsidy (as described in Section 4) combined with an

                                                      12
HSV-type profit tax reaps almost all of the benefits of the full optimum. It features lower marginal taxes
for more profitable firms and lower marginal subsidies at higher R&D investment levels. In fact, making the
profit tax linear only generates a small additional welfare loss.



3     Adding Human Capital to the Dynamic Mirrlees Model
As in the static Mirrlees model, the work presented in the previous section assumes that agents' wages are
exogenous. A major development in dynamic life cycle tax models has been to make the wages endogenous
by modeling human capital accumulation. Investments in human capital ­ whether it is through money,
time, or a mix of both ­ play a key role in shaping the skill and income distribution that ultimately drive
the revenue-raising, redistribution, and insurance motives behind taxation. In turn, investments in human
capital depend on their net return, which is affected by the tax and transfer system. In this section, I describe
recent work that incorporates human capital and skill acquisition into the dynamic life cycle tax model.


3.1    Literature
A first strand of the literature has focused on dynamic models with persistent heterogeneity across agents and
without uncertainty or risk (Bohacek and Kapicka, 2008; Kapicka, 2013). Other papers have rather focused
on the risk aspects of human capital, without incorporating heterogeneity (Anderberg, 2009; Grochulski and
Piskorski, 2010). Findeisen and Sachs (2016) include both heterogeneity and uncertainty, and focus on a
one-shot investment during "college," before the work life of the agent starts, with a one-time realization
of uncertainty. Stantcheva (2017) extends the core dynamic Mirrlees model above, with heterogeneity and
uncertainty, to include monetary (resource) investments in human capital over the lifecycle; Stantcheva
(2015a) instead considers time investment in human capital. Kapicka and Neira (2014) propose a human
capital accumulation process with time investments and a fixed ability, and consider the case in which
effort spent to acquire human capital is unobservable. Perrault (2015) considers loss of human capital from
unemployment. Kapicka (2015) studies at a Ben-Porath economy in which both ability and human capital are
unobservable. Stantcheva (2015b) considers an intergenerational setting in which parents invest in children's
human capital and can choose to transfer resources in the form of bequests and human capital. Koeniger and
Prat (2018) study a very similar setting and provide quantitative results. Makris and Pavan (2019) consider
income taxation when there is learning-by-doing, i.e., human capital acquisition happens as a by-product of
working.


3.2    Model
The general setup is as in Section 2. But the wage that an agent receives is now not only a function of their
stochastic type, but also their human capital. Each period, agents can build their stock of human capital
st by spending money; below we also consider time investments. A monetary investment Mt (et ) increases
human capital by et  0. The cost function is increasing, convex and Mt (0) = 0. Human capital st evolves
according to st = st-1 + et . The wage wt is determined by the stock of human capital built until time t and
stochastic ability t :
                                               wt = wt (t , st )

                                                       13
wt is strictly increasing and concave in each of its arguments, but no restrictions are placed on the cross-
partials. As the wage can depend on age, human capital could yield different returns at different ages.
    Let wm,t denote the partial of the wage function with respect to argument m (m  {, s}), and wmn,t
the second order partial with respect to arguments m,n  {, s} × {, s}. A key parameter turns out to be
the Hicksian coefficient of complementarity between ability and human capital in the wage function at time
t (Hicks, 1970; Samuelson, 1974), denoted by s,t

                                                                  ws w
                                                          s                                                                    (20)
                                                                  ws w

    A positive s means that higher ability agents reap higher marginal benefits from human capital, but also
means that human capital increases the exposure of the agent to stochastic ability and risk. A s > 1 means
that higher ability agents reap proportionally higher returns from human capital, i.e., the wage elasticity
with respect to human capital is increasing in ability. A separable wage function of the form wt = t + ht (st )
for some function ht implies that s,t = 0. A multiplicative form wt = t ht (s), the one typically used in
                                                                                                                           1
                                                                                       -t                                1-t
the taxation literature, implies that s,t = 1. A CES wage function wt = 1t 1-t + 2t s1
                                                                                     t                                         has
s,t = t .
    The planning problem is as above, except that an allocation now also specifies a desired level of human
capital per period, in addition to consumption and output. Ability t and labor supply are unobservable in
any period. The envelope condition above was written more generally in terms of the wage function, and
it hence is still valid, but the wage is now explicitly a function of human capital as well. In addition, the
recursive problem now has an extra state variable, which is human capital in the last period.
    The recursive formulation of the relaxed objective is then for t  2:


  K (v, , - , s- , t) = min         (c () + Mt (s () - s- ) - wt (, s ()) l ()
                                                                            1
                                                                        +     K (v () ,  () , , s () , t + 1))f t (|- ) d
                                                                            R

where the maximization is over the functions (c () , l () , s () ,  () , v () ,  ()), subject to the same con-
straints as in (11). As above, the formulation is modified for period t = 1 to capture redistributive concerns.


3.3     Optimal Human Capital Policies
Similarly to the labor and the savings wedges above, we can define the human capital wedge

                                                                             ut+1 (ct+1 )
          S t             - 1 - L t          ws,t lt + Mt (et ) - Et                          Mt+1 (et+1 ) - St+1              (21)
                                                                               ut (ct )

as the gap between marginal costs and marginal benefits from human capital investments. Implicitly, the
agent's net marginal cost of investing in human capital is locally reduced to Mt (et ) - St .6
   There are many simultaneous distortions here, and thus a zero human capital wedge does not mean
that human capital is not distorted: part of this subsidy is simply undoing some of the effects of the labor
and capital distortions on human capital investments. A useful object is the net human capital subsidy,
   6 Human capital yields flows of returns in all future periods. It is written recursively here, replacing the latter stream by the

next period's marginal cost.


                                                                14
which ensures that the tax system is neutral with respect to human capital, i.e., that, conditional on the
labor choice, the human capital decision is chosen as in the first-best with perfect consumption smoothing.
                                               1
Formally, lt wst (st , t ) = Mt (st - st-1 ) - R Et (Mt+1 (st+1 - st )).
   To build some intuition, consider a one-period version of the model, with s = e and linear taxes and
subsidies. An agent of type  solves maxs,l u(w(s, )l(1 - L ) - M (s) + S s) - (l). If we set the subsidy to
be S = L M (s), the agent chooses human capital as in the first-best (1 - L )(ws l - M (s)) = 0. This is
equivalent to making human capital expenses fully tax deductible, i.e., taxable income is only wl - M (s).
The net subsidy on human capital is (appropriately scaled)

                                                    S - L M (s)
                                         tst                         .
                                                 (S - M (s))(1 - L )

It is zero when there is full deductibility, and positive when human capital is encouraged more than at full
deductibility.
    In this more complex multi-period model, I introduce a similar concept of full dynamic, risk-adjusted
deductibility, taking into account that (i) marginal utility varies across states due to imperfect insurance,
(ii) there is a stream of benefits from human capital, (iii) savings are distorted, (iv) there are also human
capital subsidies in future periods. Hence, I define the "net wedge," as the gross wedge from which I filter
out all the parts just explained that only go toward compensating for the other distortions.
   First, define for any variable x, define the "insurance factor" of x, x,t+1 :

                                             ut+1             u
                          x,t+1  -Cov             , xt+1 / Et  t+1         Et (xt+1 )
                                              ut               ut

with x,t+1  [-1, 1]. If x is a flow to the agent, it is a good hedge if  < 0, and a bad hedge otherwise.
With some abuse of notation, define also:

                                      ut+1  1                     ut+1   1
                    x,t+1  -Cov            - , xt+1 / Et               -           Et (xt+1 )
                                      ut    R                     ut     R

which, up to an additive constant, captures the same risk properties as x,t+1 .

Definition 1. Define the net wedge on human capital expenses, tst , as:

                                                   d
                                                  St  - Lt Mt d + Pt
                                          tst                                                               (22)
                                                  Mt d - St
                                                         d (1 -  )
                                                                   Lt


d          (1-S )
St  St -  R(1-K ) Et (St+1 ) is the dynamic risk-adjusted subsidy.
             (1-M )
Mt d  Mt - R  (1-K ) Et Mt+1 denotes the dynamic, risk-adjusted cost.
Pt  R(1-
       K
         K ) (1 - Lt ) (1 - M ) Et Mt+1 captures the risk-adjusted savings          distortion.
                        (1-   )
If St = Lt Mt d - Pt + R(1-   K ) Et (St+1 ), such that for every marginal investment et a locally linear subsidy
                               S


St et is received, there is full dynamic risk-adjusted deductibility.

Proposition 3. At the optimum and at each history, the labor and human capital wedges need to satisfy the
following relation:
                                            
                                          Lt         c
                                 tst =        
                                                      t
                                                          (1 - s,t )                                 (23)
                                        1 - Lt 1 + u    t


                                                       15
   Despite the complexity of the model, Formula (23) gives us a clear link between the labor wedge and the
net human capital wedge. This relation can be used to simply check for the optimality of a given existing
tax and subsidy system. The two wedges need to co-move if and only if s < 1.7
     If the wage is a CES function as above with t constant and disutility is separable and isoelastic  (l) =
1 
l      ( > 1), the ratio of the net human capital and labor wedges is constant cross-sectionally and over time:

                                                             
                                                            Lt           (1 - )
                                                 tst /               =
                                                          1 - Lt            

   The sign of the net human capital wedge is determined by the Hicksian coefficient of complementarity,
s : the net human capital wedge is positive if and only if s < 1.

                                                     
Proposition 4. When there is a positive labor wedge, Lt (t )  0, we have that:

                                                  tst 
                                                       t
                                                          0  s,t  1

    The optimal net wedge results from the balance of two effects. First, it increases human capital and the
returns to work, this encouraging labor supply, which is a beneficial "Labor Supply Effect," given that there
is a positive labor wedge. Second, it affects the pre-tax income distribution. If s > 0, i.e., if ability is
complementary to human capital in the wage, human capital mostly benefits already able agents, and hence
compounds existing pre-tax inequality due to intrinsic differences in t . The opposite occurs if s < 0,
in which case human capital reduces inequality. This effect will be labeled the "Inequality effect." What
happens on net is determined by the gap between s and 1. If s < 1, the positive labor supply effect
outweighs the inequality effect, i.e., on net post-tax inequality is reduced. Human capital then has a positive
insurance and redistributive effect on after-tax income inequality.
    Intuitively, the inequality effect comes from agents' incentive compatibility constraints. If high produc-
tivity agents benefit more from a marginal increase in human capital (s > 0), an increase in their human
capital tightens their incentive constraints. What is relevant for social welfare is whether the overall increase
in resources from more labor is completely eaten up by the information rent forfeited to high productivity
agents or not. When s < 1 human capital investments generate positive net resources to be used for
redistribution and insurance of all agents.
   With a multiplicatively separable wage w = h(s) for some function h, s = 1 a null net wedge is
optimal. This is an application of the Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) result on the non-optimality of differential
commodity taxation under preference separability.
    If there were several types of human capital, s1 , .., sJ with different Hicksian coefficients of complemen-
tarity sj , j = 1, ..., J , formula (23) applies to each, so that at the optimum:

                                                  tsj t            tsi t
                                                            =             (i, j )                                           (24)
                                               1 - sj ,t        1 - si ,t

It is thus optimal to subsidize at higher rates the human capital types that have the highest redistributive
and insurance effects.
     It is also possible to rewrite the net human capital wedge recursively to show that it inherits the persistence
  7 Note that the zero distortion at the bottom and top result, familiar for the labor wedge holds here for the net human capital

wedge. It does not hold for the gross wedge St underscoring again that the true incentive effects are captured by tst , not St .


                                                                16
of the shock process and also features a drift term, the sign of which is driven by (1 - s ). When human
capital has a positive redistributive or insurance value, it is optimally increasing with age as it provides
valuable insurance against the compounding skill shocks (see Stantcheva (2017)).


Implementation. The optimal policies can be implement with a system of income-contingent loans,
whereby agents receive loans throughout life in order to invest in their human capital and repay the loan in
an income-contingent way, repaying more in periods and after histories in which their income realizations
are better.


Unobservable Human Capital Investments. If human capital investments are unobservable, as shown
in Stantcheva (2014), the labor wedge will be used to indirectly incentivize the right amount of human capital
investments, but the labor wedge need not be smaller with unobservable human capital than with observable
one. When the desired net wedge on human capital (were it observable) is negative, the labor wedge could be
higher with unobservable human capital. In addition, as hidden human capital investments are an alternative
to physical capital (savings) for transferring resources to the future, their presence invalidates the standard
inverse Euler equation. While the planner does control total financial resources allocated per period, they do
not control how these resources are allocated by the agent between consumption and human capital expenses.
The agent's standard Euler equation in human capital holds, which imposes a restriction on the marginal
utilities from consumption in different periods and modifies the inverse Euler equation for physical capital.


3.4    Training
In addition to spending resources, people spend a lot of time acquiring human capital throughout their
life, whether through formal college, continuing education, online degrees, on-the-job training, or vocational
training. The peculiarity of time investments in human capital is that they are immutably linked to a given
agent: not only do their returns depend on an agent's ability, but their costs also depend on the agent's
labor supply. In this section, we present a model based on Stantcheva (2015a) where agents can invest in
training and work every period and the disutility from training depends on labor supply. Two concepts are
introduced "Learning-or-doing" and "Learning-and-doing." The former indicates that labor and training
time are substitutes because time spent working cannot be spent training. The limit case of this is the
standard opportunity cost of time model as in Ben-Porath (1967) where agents have a given set of hours
to allocate between training and working. "Learning-and-doing" is the case in which labor and training are
complements, the limit case of which is the canonical "learning-by-doing" model of Arrow (1962) in which
training is a direct by-product of labor.
    Let zt denote the stock of training time, or the stock of human capital of an agent, at time t and it the
incremental training time acquired in period t. Human capital zt , evolves according to

                                                zt = zt-1 + it .

    The disutility cost to an agent who provides lt  0 units of work and spends it  0 units in training
is t (lt , it ), strictly increasing and convex in each of its arguments. The wage wt is determined by the
training acquired as of time t and by a stochastic ability t : wt = wt (t , zt ). Define   lz to be the Hicksian
complementarity coefficient between labor and training in the disutility function :            lz 
                                                                                         lz  l z .


                                                      17
   Let's illustrate the optimal policies in a simple one-time investment framework before generalizing the
results. For any type , define the training wedge Z (), or implicit subsidy on training, as follows:

                                                           z
                                          Z ()                  - (1 - L ())wz l                           (25)
                                                          u (c)

    The implicit subsidy on training Z can be thought of as the incremental pay received by an agent for
training for one more unit of time. Following the same logic as above, it is useful to find a measure of the
net distortion on human capital, the one that goes beyond just compensating for the presence of a labor
distortion. The net wedge on training time tz is defined as:

                                                            Z - L ( u(zc) )
                                                 tz                                                        (26)
                                                       (( u(zc) ) - Z )(1 - L )

Proposition 5. At the optimum, the net subsidy for training and the labor wedge are set according to:
                                                    
                                                   L ()     c             z 
                                      tz ( ) =                   (1 - z -    )                             (27)
                                                 1 - L () 1 +  u          wz lz

where: z  d log()/d log(z ) is the elasticity of disutility and wz  d log(w)/d log(z ) the elasticity of the
wage with respect to training.

    In this simple one-period model, there are three effects from subsidizing training that are balanced at the
optimum. The labor supply effect and inequality effect are the same as described for resource investments in
human capital in the previous section. The third and new effect is the direct interaction with labor supply
through the disutility function, i.e., either learning-or-doing or learning-and-doing. Rearranging this, we can
see that the total effect of a training subsidy on labor is positive if and only if

                                      wz > l z with l z   log (l ) / log (z )

i.e., if and only if the wage is more sensitive to training than the marginal disutility of work is.8
     The question then is, whether the increase in total resources from the total labor effect of training more
than makes up for the increased rent transfers (the inequality effect). The net subsidy on training will be
positive if and only if the answer to this question is yes, i.e., if and only if:

                                                            z 
                                                       1-      > z                                         (28)
                                                            wz lz

    With learning-and-doing (    lz < 0), as long as ability and human capital are not too complementary (say,
z < 1), the net subsidy on training is positive. Intuitively, training does not distract from labor effort,
and so it's good to encourage it as long as high types do not disproportionately benefit from it. However,
if there is learning-or-doing, training makes labor supply more costly. In this case, even if the coefficient of
complementarity z is small, it might not be sufficiently small to compensate for the lost work effort.
    In the special case in which the wage is multiplicatively separable and  is additively separable with
(l, z ) = 1 (l) + 2 (z ), an application of the Atkinson-Stiglitz theorem (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1976) to the
two "commodities" c and z yields tz = 0 (through a simple variational argument).
  8 Note   that:   z,t /wz,t lz,t = l z,t /wz,t .



                                                               18
    I point out some additional special cases, which will also hold in the dynamic model, if human capital
fully depreciates between periods: (i) if the wage is multiplicatively separable w(, z ) = z and the disutility
                           1  
is Cobb-Douglas (l, z ) =    l z , we obtain a simple negative relation between the optimal labor wedge and
                                                                                              ( )
the optimal training wedge at any point in the skill distribution, such that tz ( ) = - 1-L
                                                                                          L      
                                                                                             ( )  and tz ( ) < 0

at any interior type.
                                                                 1
   (ii) If the wage takes a CES form w(, z ) = (1- + z 1- ) 1- and the disutility is separable with (l, z ) =
                               
                              L ( )   c
1 (l)+ 2 (z ), then t                                                                                    1      1 
                     z ( ) = 1-  ( ) 1+u (1 - ). If, in addition, disutility is isoelastic in labor with  (l) =  l ,
                                L
                  ( )  (1-)
then tz ( ) = 1-L
                L
                   ( )    . Hence, the net wedge on training is positive if and only if z < 1, i.e., if ability
and training are not too complementary in generating earnings.
    (iii) If the wage is separable with w(, z ) =  + z and the disutility is again Cobb-Douglas as above,
             
            L ( ) (1-)
tz ) = 1-  ( )
  (                  . In this case, the optimal wedge is again negative since  > 1.
            L
   Note that, in general, with asymmetric information, money and time investments are not equivalent ­
one cannot be perfectly converted in the other one because training time interacts with unobservable labor
supply. It is only when the disutility is separable in labor and training that we exactly recover the same
formulas and results as for the monetary investments above.
   In the full-fledged dynamic model, the subsidy on training time has an additional direct interaction
with future labor supply through the disutility function (in addition to all aforementioned static effects).
Even if training diverts time away from contemporaneous labor supply, the effects on future labor supply
can motivate a positive net subsidy. If contemporaneous labor supply and training are complements, then
current training and future labor supply are substitutes and vice-versa because investing in human capital
today means having to invest less tomorrow to reach any given level of it.
   With learning-or-doing, the net wedge co-moves positively with the future income tax rate Lt+1 , but
negatively with the current tax rate Lt . When there is a higher current wedge on labor, training that is a
substitute to labor will be fostered indirectly, with less need to subsidize it directly. The opposite holds for
the future labor wedge.


3.5    Intergenerational Concerns
We can also consider human capital policies in an intergenerational model, where each t is a generation as
is done in Stantcheva (2015b). Parent i in generation t can buy an education amount st+1 for their child
of generation t + 1. This setup reflects the fact that most investments in human capital occur before and
during college and are in large part paid by parents.
    The wage wti of agent i in generation t is determined by their stock of human capital and their stochastic
ability ti :
                                               wti (s)  w (s, ti )

Ability ti is drawn from a stationary, ergodic distribution that allows for correlation between generations.
Unless there is perfect persistence, parents face some uncertainty regarding their children's ability realizations
at the time when they are making education investment decisions. In addition to financing their education,
parents can also leave financial bequests to their children. Bequests left by generation t are denoted by bt+1i
and earn a generational gross rate of interest R. Thus, generation t inherits a pre-tax bequest of Rbti from
their parents. The initial generation 1 has an exogenously given distribution of bequests b1i .
   First, by the Inverse Euler logic described above, there is optimally a positive wedge on bequests, B > 0.

                                                        19
In addition, the relation between tax treatment of bequests and human capital at the optimum is as follows:

Proposition 6. At the optimum, the following relation needs to be satisfied:

                                                                  ct+1
                             R = E ws,t+1 lt+1 (1 + Lt+1                 (1 - s,t+1 ))
                                                                1 + ut+1


    The left-hand side is simply the (social) return on bequests and it is equated to the right-hand side which
is the social return to education. The first part of the social return to education is just the wage increase
of the next generation from education. The second part captures the incentive implications of education
for the next generation. Education has two effects on the incentives of children. First, it encourages their
work effort, which relaxes their incentive constraints. This is the so-called "labor supply effect." Second,
depending on the sign of the complementarity between human capital and ability, education may increase or
decrease pre-tax inequality. If s > 0, education increases pre-tax inequality and benefits mostly able kids.
This tends to reduce the effective incentive-adjusted benefit of education and is called the "inequality effect."
The net effect on children's incentives depends on the sign of (1 - s ), i.e., the redistributive and insurance
effect of human capital. This is scaled by a multiple of the labor wedge, which captures the efficiency cost
of taxation, i.e., the value of relaxing children's incentive constraints.
    At the optimum, the return on bequests is not equated to the return on human capital investments:
instead, it needs to be equated to the expected, incentive-adjusted return on education that takes into
account the direct increase in earnings and the labor supply effect and the inequality effect on the incentive
constraint. While bequests benefit all types uniformly in marginal terms, human capital investments have
redistributive incentive effects.9
    If education is highly complementary to ability with s > 1, which is equivalent to high ability chil-
dren benefitting more in proportional terms from their parents' education investments, then the return to
education investments will be reduced below that on bequests. Put differently, education investments by
parents will be taxed relative to bequests. The opposite happens when education is not too complementary
to children's ability (s < 1), in which case parental education investments should be subsidized relative to
bequests. With the separable wage function, that has s = 1, parental education investments and bequest
choices should not be distorted relative to each other, i.e.: R = E (ws,t+1 lt+1 ).



4     The Quantitative Ramsey Approach
A middle-of-the road approach between the fully unrestricted dynamic Mirrlees one in the previous section
and the sufficient statistics one in the next section is the parametric and quantitative Ramsey-style approach.
This framework ex ante parametrically specifies the type of tax instruments to be used and quantitatively
(more rarely, analytically) assesses optimal policies. The key advantage is that thanks to the restrictions on
instruments and the use of quantitative methods, more complex and realistic economies can be studied.
    It is impossible to do justice to the very long-standing Ramsey tax literature and the very large number
of papers studying either tax reform or optimal tax policy in very different settings. In the interest of space,
I only present some very recent studies and findings using a quantitative Ramsey approach. The key foci of
   9 Bequests would have income effects that would interact with agents' types if utility were not separable in consumption and

labor.


                                                              20
this recent quantitative literature have been on the optimality of age-dependent taxes, on when a positive
capital tax is optimal, and on what shapes the progressivity and level of income taxes.
     Heathcote, Storesletten, and Violante (2017) propose a parsimonious 2-parameter tax function ­ already
used in Benabou (2002) ­ that captures the level and progressivity of taxes: T (y ) = y -  · y (1- ) . In a
lifecycle model with skill investment, heterogeneous tastes for work, a public good and wealth in zero net
supply, they study what factors shape the progressivity of the tax and transfer system. Quantitatively,
the disincentives that taxes have on endogenous skill investment and labor supply, as well as the desire to
finance government purchases matter to similar extents. The progressivity in the actual U.S. tax system
can be obtained as optimal in a version of their model where credit constraints at low-income levels prevent
efficient investments in skills. Karabarbounis (2016) shows that tagging the level of taxes by age, household
assets and filing status (married versus single) improves the efficiency of the tax system. Heathcote et al.
(2019) also study age-dependent taxation in their parametric setting, allowing both the level and progressivity
of taxes to vary by age.
    Using a quite general parametric tax function, Conesa and Krueger (2006) show that the optimal income
tax system for the U.S. (that does not differentiate between labor and capital income) is well-approximated
by a flat tax of 17.2% combined with a fixed deduction of $9,400. Allowing for a distinction between capital
and labor income, Conesa, Kitao, and Krueger (2009) develop an OLG lifecycle model with uninsurable
idiosyncratic labor income risk and show that, in the absence of age-dependent labor income taxes, positive
capital taxes are optimal as they imperfectly mimic the age-dependency that would be needed. They thus
generalize the same finding in Erosa and Gervais (2002) to a case with idiosyncratic risk. Findeisen and Sachs
(2017) focus on a lifecycle model with heterogeneity and risk in skills and solve for the optimal nonlinear
labor income tax that only depends on current income and the optimal linear capital tax. Insurance against
idiosyncratic skill shocks drive the labor income tax and the capital tax is optimally positive. Guvenen et al.
(2019) show that with heterogeneous returns a wealth tax will target the unproductive entrepreneurs and
increase the savings rate of productive ones relative to a capital income tax. Quantitatively, it can raise
productivity while also reducing consumption inequality.
    Some recent papers also adopt this parametric approach to study human capital policies. Benabou (2002)
concludes that financing education produces more growth than using taxes and transfer to alleviate credit
constraints that prevent efficient investments in education, but at the cost of providing less consumption
insurance. Krueger and Ludwig (2013) incorporate education investments in the form of college into a large-
scale OLG model with uninsurable idiosyncratic income risk, borrowing constraints, and intergenerational
transmission of wealth and ability, and incomplete financial markets. They show that the optimal tax and
transfer system features substantial progressivity in labor income taxes complemented with a large subsidy
for college education



5    The Sufficient Statistics Approach
The goal of the sufficient statistics approach to dynamic taxation is to better connect the theory of optimal
capital taxation to the policy debate by providing a tractable framework to address many policy questions.
The goal is to derive robust optimal capital tax formulas expressed in terms of elasticities of capital and
labor supply with respect to the net-of-tax rates that can be estimated in the data, and distributional
considerations which society may have.

                                                      21
   When it comes to studying capital taxation more specifically, the aim is also to build a model which
generates an empirically realistic response of capital to taxes (unlike the infinite elasticities obtained in
Chamley-Judd), is sufficiently tractable to yield results for a variety of policy topics related to capital
taxation, and general enough for these results to be robust to a broader set of models.
    Some examples of the policy topics that have traditionally been hard to deal with in dynamic optimal
capital tax models and that can be dealt with here include, among others, income shifting between capital
and labor, economic growth, heterogeneous returns to capital across individuals, and different types of capital
assets and heterogeneous tastes for each of them. This approach is also very amenable to incorporating a
broader range of justice and fairness principles related to capital and labor taxation, through the use of
generalized social welfare weights as in Saez and Stantcheva (2016). In short, the optimal tax for different
justice and fairness principles can be obtained by simply plugging into the formulas derived the corresponding
generalized social welfare weights.
    The analysis in this Section is based on Saez and Stantcheva (2018). Golosov, Tsyvinski, and Werquin
(2014) provide a more general and formal analysis of dynamic taxation using perturbation and sufficient
statistics methods.


5.1     Setup
Individual i has instantaneous utility with functional form ui (c, k, z ) = c + ai (k ) - hi (z ), linear in consumption
c, increasing in wealth k with ai (k ) increasing and concave, and with a disutility cost hi (z ) of earning income
z increasing and convex in z . One strength of this framework is that the index i can represent any arbitrary
heterogeneity in the preferences for work and wealth, or in the discount rate i . The discounted utility of i
from an allocation {ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t0 is:
                                                                
                   Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t0 ) = i ·          [ci (t) + ai (ki (t)) - hi (zi (t))]e-i t dt.          (29)
                                                            0

                                                                       init
The net return on capital is r. The initial wealth of individual i is ki    . Consider a given time-invariant tax
schedule T (z, rk ) based on labor and capital incomes. The budget constraint of individual i is:

                                  dki (t)
                                          = rki (t) + zi (t) - T (zi (t), rki (t)) - ci (t).                              (30)
                                    dt

TL (z, rk )  T (z, rk )/z denotes the marginal tax with respect to labor income and TK (z, rk )  T (z, rk )/ (rk )
denotes the marginal tax with respect to capital income.
     Because utility is linear in consumption, (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)) jumps immediately to its steady-state value
(ci , ki , zi ) characterized by hi (zi ) = 1 - TL , ai (ki ) = i - r(1 - TK ), ci = rki + zi - T (zi , rki ). Lifetime utility
can be rewritten as:

                                                                                                           init
                Vi ({ci (t), ki (t), zi (t)}t0 ) = Ui (ci , ki , zi ) = [ci + ai (ki ) - hi (zi )] + i · (ki    - ki )    (31)

                                                                      init
The last term represents the utility cost of going from wealth ki          to wealth ki at instant 0. The dynamic
model of equation (29) is thus mathematically equivalent to a static representation where the agent simply
chooses (ci , ki , zi ) to maximize the static utility equivalent in (31) subject to the static budget constraint
ci = rki + zi - T (zi , rki ). Anticipated and unanticipated reforms have the same effect.

                                                                    22
    Individuals in this model accumulate different levels of wealth based on their heterogeneous tastes for
wealth and impatience levels, as well as on the net-of-tax return r¯ = r(1 - TK (z, rk )). As a result, steady
state wealth levels are heterogeneous, even conditional on labor earnings. Because of this the zero tax result
of Atkinson and Stiglitz (1976) does not apply.
   The wealth-in-the-utility feature puts a limit on individuals' impatience to consume; there is value in
keeping some wealth. At the optimum, the value lost in delaying consumption i - r   ¯ is equal to the marginal
value of holding wealth ai (k ) and the optimum for capital holding is interior. Capital hence exhibits a
smooth behavior in the steady state, with a finite elasticity of capital supply with respect to the net-of-tax
return.
   Having wealth in the utility makes sense for conceptual and empirical reasons. Conceptually, wealth can
be held for reasons other than just smoothing consumption and can bring other benefits than just the future
consumption flows. Empirically, it is difficult to rationalize the very large wealth holdings purely based on
a consumption smoothing motive. In addition, wealth holdings are heterogeneous even conditional on labor
earnings and the wealth distribution is much more skewed than could be explained by a model in which
wealth is purely the result of different ability people saving their labor income. This shows that there is
additional heterogeneity in preferences related to wealth, over and beyond heterogeneous abilities to work.
More precisely, wealth in the utility can be micro-founded by a bequest motive, a utility cost or disutility
benefit from entrepreneurship, services provided by wealth (such as liquidity), or social status concerns.


5.2    Optimal Tax Formulas
The social objective is:

                                      SW F =        i · Ui (ci , ki , zi )di,                              (32)
                                                i

where i  0 is the Pareto weight on individual i. We denote by gi = i · Uic = i the social marginal
welfare weight on individual i and normalize i i di = 1. The government sets the time invariant tax T (z, rk ),
subject to budget-balance, to maximize this social welfare objective. We start with linear taxes and then
derive nonlinear taxes.

Optimal Linear Capital and Labor Taxation. With linear taxes, the government rebates tax revenue
lump-sum and the transfer to each individual is G = K · rk m (¯
                                                              r) + L · z m (1 - L ) where z m (1 - L ) = i zi di
is aggregate labor income that depends on 1 - L and k m (¯
                                                         r) = i ki di is aggregate capital which depends on
¯ = r(1 - K ). K and L are chosen to maximize social welfare SWF in (32), with ci = (1 - K ) · rki + (1 -
r
L ) · zi + K · rk m (¯
                     r) + L · z m (1 - L ).
   Let eK be the elasticity of aggregate capital k m with respect to r
                                                                     ¯; and eL be the elasticity of aggregate
               m
labor income z with respect to the net of tax rate 1 - L . There are no income effects with the utility
assumed. Hence, eL > 0 and eK > 0. Applying the individuals' envelope theorems for the choice ki , we can
obtain the optimal linear tax capital tax:

Proposition 7. Optimal linear capital tax. The optimal linear capital tax is given by:

                         1-g¯K                           g
                                                        i i
                                                            · ki                        ¯ dk m
                                                                                        r
                K =                   with   g
                                             ¯K =                   and         eK =      ·    > 0.        (33)
                       1-g¯K + eK                          k
                                                          i i
                                                                                       k m dr
                                                                                            ¯

                                                          23
   The optimal labor tax can be derived exactly symmetrically:

                       1-g ¯L                       g
                                                   i i
                                                       · zi                   1 - L     dz m
              L =                   with g
                                         ¯L =                   and eL =          m
                                                                                    ·           > 0.              (34)
                      1-g
                        ¯L + eL                       z
                                                     i i
                                                                                z     d(1 - L )

    We can now see that the optimal capital tax will be zero only if g    ¯K = 1 or eK = . The former
case occurs when there are no redistributive concerns regarding capital income (gi is uncorrelated with ki ).
However, as long as capital is concentrated among individuals with lower social marginal welfare weights
(i.e., gi is decreasing in ki ), we have g
                                         ¯K < 1 and the optimal capital tax is strictly positive. The revenue
maximizing tax rates are obtained by setting g  ¯K = 0 and g
                                                           ¯L = 0. If there is no wealth in the utility, capital
responses are no longer smooth; the elasticity eK is infinite, which drives the Chamley-Judd zero optimal
capital tax result.
    Table A-2 shows a summary of the empirical literature on the tax elasticities of capital and distinguishes
between capital gains, dividends, ordinary capital income, and bequests and inheritances. Although there is
substantial variation in the estimates based on the settings and tax considered, and although the elasticities
are typically larger than those known for labor income, they are not as large as the standard tax model of
Chamley-Judd would predict. This justifies the need for a theory that generates steady states with non-
degenerate wealth distributions that feature very large wealth holdings and finite smooth responses of capital
to taxation.

Optimal Nonlinear Separable Taxes. Consider now nonlinear, separable, and time-invariant tax sched-
                               ¯ K (rk ) (respectively, G
ules TL (z ) and TK (rk ). Let G                        ¯ L (z )) be the average relative welfare weight on individuals
with capital income higher than rk (respectively, labor income higher than z ), i.e.:

                                                    g di
                                          {i:rki rk} i
                                                                                          g di
                                                                                 {i:zi z } i
                            ¯ K (rk ) =
                            G                                     ¯ L (z ) =
                                                              and G                              .                (35)
                                          P (rki  rk )                           P (zi  z )

The cumulative distributions of capital and labor income are HK (rk ) and HL (z ) and hK (rk ) and hL (z )
are the corresponding densities when the tax system is linearized at points rk and z . The local Pareto
parameters of the capital and labor income distributions (which depend on the tax system) are:

                                           rk · hK (rk )                        z · hZ (z )
                               K (rk )                        and L (z )                    .
                                           1 - HK (rk )                        1 - HZ (z )

The local elasticity of k with respect to the net of tax return r(1 - TK (rk )) at income level rk is denoted by
eK (rk ); that of z with respect to 1 - TL (z ) is denoted by eL (z ).

Proposition 8. Optimal nonlinear capital and labor income taxes.
   The optimal nonlinear capital and labor income taxes are:

                              1-G  ¯ K (rk )                                         1-G  ¯ L (z )
         TK (rk ) =     ¯ K (rk ) + K (rk ) · eK (rk )     and    TL (z ) =     ¯ L (z ) + L (z ) · eL (z ) .     (36)
                      1-G                                                     1-G

   Most "ordinary" capital income in many countries is taxed jointly with labor income by the individual
income tax (e.g.: interest earned from a standard savings account). Within this framework, the optimal
nonlinear tax on comprehensive income y  rk + z , of the form TY (y ) takes the same form as in Mirrlees
(1971) and Saez (2001).

                                                           24
    Let G ¯ Y (y ) = {i:yi y} gi di be the average welfare weight on individuals with total income higher than y ,
                      P (yi y )
HY (y ) be the cumulative distribution of the total income distribution, and hY (y ) the corresponding density,
assuming again a linearized tax system at point y . The local Pareto parameter for the distribution of total
income y is Y (y )  1yh      Y (y )
                           -HY (y ) and the elasticity of total income to the net of tax rate 1 - TY (y ) at point y
is eY (y ).

Proposition 9. Optimal tax on comprehensive income.
   (i) The optimal nonlinear tax on comprehensive income y = rk + z is given by:

                                                                1-G  ¯ Y (y )
                                            TY (y ) =       ¯                          .
                                                        1 - GY (y ) + Y (y ) · eY (y )

   (ii) The optimal linear tax on comprehensive income is:

                                                            1-g ¯Y
                                                    Y =              .                                                         (37)
                                                           1-g
                                                             ¯Y + eY


                           gy
                         i i i       zmg
                                       ¯L + rk m g
                                                 ¯K                        dy m (1 - Y )   z m eL + rk m eK
       with    ¯Y 
               g                 =                        and    eY                      =                  .                  (38)
                          ym           z m + rk m                       d(1 - Y ) y m         z m + rk m

   A tax system based on comprehensive income may be optimal for equity reasons if society considers it
unfair to discriminate income based on its source, or for efficiency reasons, if there are stark income shifting
responses between the capital and labor income bases.


Extensions. In this framework, it is easy to incorporate, among others, the following extensions: i) Jointness
in preferences between work and wealth, which introduces an additional cross-elasticity term in the formula
                                      zm
for capital: K = (1 - g     ¯K - L rk   m eL,(1-K ) )/(1 - g ¯K + eK ) (and symmetrically for the labor tax); ii)
                                                                                                           g ·ri ki
Heterogenous returns to capital can be captured by just plugging into the tax formula g          ¯rK = i iri k  i
                                                                                                                    and
                                                                                                           i
erK = d log(ri ki )/d log(1 - K ); iii) Different capital assets, such as financial assets or real estate, which have
different returns, and for which agents have different tastes. If there are no cross-elasticities, then for asset
                               j        1-g  j
                                            ¯K             j     g ·kj
                                                                i i i     j     ¯j
                                                                                r     dkm,j
j the tax formula is simply K     = 1-g   j    j , where g
                                                         ¯K  =       j ; eK = k m,j ·   ¯j > 0 are the average social
                                                                                       dr
                                         ¯K +eK                  i
                                                                   ki
welfare weight and the tax elasticity of that particular asset's income. The formula can be extended easily
to the case with non-separabilities in preferences for different assets (see Saez and Stantcheva (2018)).


5.3    Generalization and a New Steady State Approach
In the generalized model with concave utility for consumption and wealth in the utility, individual i chooses
(ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))t0 to maximize
                   
                                                                 dki (t)
        Vi =            ui (ci (t), ki (t), zi (t))e-t dt s.t.           = rki (t) + zi (t) - Tt (zi (t), rki (t)) - ci (t).
                  t=0                                              dt

The steady state (ci , ki , zi ) is characterized by:

              uik /uic =  - r(1 - TK ),            uic · (1 - TL ) = -uiz ,     and ci = rki + zi - T (zi , rki ),             (39)

                                                                 25
where uic , uik , uiz denote the partial derivatives of ui (c, k, z ) and TK , TL the marginal tax rates on capital
income and labor income all evaluated at the steady state (ci , ki , zi ).
    First, assume that the government always chooses a period by period neutral budget constraint so that
for all t:
                                          Tt (zi (t), rki (t))di = 0.
                                               i

    Second, assume time invariant tax rates K andL with a budget balancing lump-sum rebate G(t). Hence,
Tt (z, rk ) = L z + K rk - G(t). From the per period budget balancing assumption, we have that G(t) =
L z m (t) + K rk m (t) where k m (t) and z m (t) are average wealth and earnings at time t.
   Third, assume that at time 0, the economy is already in steady state with its initial tax system, which
means that G, ci (t), zi (t), ki (t), k m (t), z m (t) are all equal to their (time-invariant) steady state values. In
the steady state, average capital k m = i ki and average earnings z m = i zi will be functions of 1 - K
and 1 - L (since the lump-sum rebate G is also a function of K , L through budget balance). Steady state
capital k m has a finite elasticity with respect to the net-of-tax return r      ¯ = r(1 - K ), denoted by eK .

                                                                         ¯ dk m
                                                                         r
                                    Steady state elasticity :    eK =                                            (40)
                                                                        k m dr
                                                                             ¯
Note that eK mixes substitution and income effects and changes in G. The presence of utility for wealth
remains crucial for having a finite elasticity eK . The cross-elasticity of k m with respect to 1 - L denoted
by eK,1-L = ((1 - L )/k m ) · dk m /d(1 - L ) is also finite, as are the elasticities of aggregate labor earnings
z m with respect to both 1 - L and r  ¯. The cross-elasticity eL,1-K = (zm /r   ¯)(dz m /dr¯) measures how labor
earnings respond to changes in r¯. Note that such cross-elasticities arise not only if there is jointness of (k, z )
in utility, but also through income effects as the marginal utility of consumption uic affects labor supply
decisions.
    There are typically two approaches that can be taken to determine the optimal tax rate: the first considers
unanticipated reforms, the second anticipated reforms. Both have issues. The unanticipated reform makes
it very tempting to exploit sluggish responses and aggressively tax the existing capital stock, thus creating
commitment issues. The anticipated approach puts very low social welfare weight on impatient agents (which
get discounted heavily in the social objective), assumes infinite foresight and anticipation of policy by agents,
and generates extremely large (in the limit, infinite) responses of capital.
    Saez and Stantcheva (2018) propose an alternative, new, and non-standard solution to the optimal
capital tax problem: the "utility based steady state approach." Their goal is to neutralize the ability of
the government to exploit sluggish responses. However, this is not done by using the anticipated reform
approach, which has undesirable features. Instead, it is achieved by i) letting the government explicitly
recognize the long-run steady state behavioral responses as the normatively relevant ones and ii) imposing
that the government also respects individual savings choices. The solution arising based on this approach is
to use the standard optimal tax formulas with the steady-state elasticities.
    Consider a small reform dK at time 0. The actual response to this tax change is sluggish so that the
real change in taxes collected at time t is dG(t) = rk m dK + K rdk m (t) + L dz m (t). But to formalize that
the government does not want to exploit sluggish responses, assume that the government in fact considers
that the budgetary effect at time t is dG = rk m dK + K rdk m + L dz m and absorbs the difference between
dG(t) and dG. For instance, for a tax increase dK > 0, responses are smaller at first so that dG(t) > dG,
but the government dissipates this surplus. From a normative perspective then, the government ignores the

                                                         26
gains it can make by exploiting slow responses. Formally the goal is to find the tax system (K , L ) that
maximizes SW F but assuming that the lump-sum grant G(t) is equal to the steady-state lump-sum grant:
G = rK k m + L z m instead of the actual lump-sum grant rK k m (t) + L z m (t).

Proposition 10. Optimal linear capital tax in the utility based steady state approach
                                            m
                                       z
                             1-g
                               ¯K - L rk m eL,1-K
                       K   =                                with   g
                                                                   ¯K =       gi · ki /k m .                (41)
                                 1-g¯K + eK                               i

    A symmetric equation holds for the optimal labor income tax rate L . Hence, the same tax formulas
hold by simply using the steady state elasticities. One advantage of this approach is its robustness to
introducing heterogeneity in discount rates across individuals as heterogeneity in discount rates is normatively
irrelevant in the steady state. Importantly, all of the applications from the linear utility model as derived
by Saez and Stantcheva (2018) carry over to capital taxation with small modifications related to the fact
that a concave utility introduces cross-elasticities between capital and labor (but there are no transitional
dynamics). Another advantage of the utility-based steady state approach is that all the work done in the
literature to incorporate more realistic features of labor taxation in static settings can carry over here to the
taxation of capital in a dynamic, general setting.
    Note that this approach is related to, but not identical to choosing the budget-balanced tax system
that maximizes steady state welfare SW F = i i · ui (ci , ki , zi )di because the steady-state maximization
objective is paternalistic. Intuitively, increasing wealth looks good in the steady state because it "forgets"
that accumulating wealth required to sacrifice consumption in the past, which artificially creates a positive
welfare effect of wealth accumulation that will tend to lower the optimal capital income tax. The simplest
way to resolve this issue of paternalism is to intentionally ignore the effect of dki on individual welfare
by stating that any behavioral response triggered by a tax reform should have zero first order effect on
individual welfare through the envelope theorem. This amounts to saying that the government respects
individual savings' decisions. With this "forced" envelope theorem assumption, the optimal tax can be
derived entirely in the steady-state without dynamic considerations. The optimal steady-state tax formula
is given exactly as in Proposition 10. This is thus an alternative way to obtain the same results.


6    Conclusion
I conclude here with what appear to be productive avenues for future research. In the dynamic Mirrlees
approach, a general theory of approximation of the optimal, often complicated policies would represent a
big advance. It is, for instance, not known how well the linear age-dependent approximations do outside of
the parameterizations currently used in the literature. In addition, more realistic features of the economy ­
such as general equilibrium effects ­ should be added, which will require more quantitative analysis. This
will go hand in hand with more full estimations of the underlying parameters that go beyond calibrations.
The parametric Ramsey approach on the other hand would gain from the exploration of less-standard and
more complex tax instruments. In that sense, a middle-ground combination of the strengths of the dynamic
Mirrlees approach (i.e., less restricted instruments) and the Ramsey approach (i.e., more realistic quantitative
features) would probably be very fruitful.
    In the sufficient statistics approach, the key challenge is to obtain credible empirical estimates of the
relevant longer-run elasticities. As better individual-level tax data has become available over time, credible

                                                       27
estimates of the short or medium-run responses based on policy variation can be obtained. The best way
to go may then be to embed these reduced-form estimates into a structural model to estimate the long-run
responses.


References
Abraham, A., S. Koehne, and N. Pavoni (2011). On the first-order approach in principal­agent models with
 hidden borrowing and lending. Journal of Economic Theory 146 (4), 1331 ­ 1361.

Abraham, A., S. Koehne, and N. Pavoni (2016). Optimal income taxation when asset taxation is limited.
 Journal of Public Economics 136 (C), 14­29.

Abraham, A. and N. Pavoni (2008). Efficient Allocations with Moral Hazard and Hidden Borrowing and
 Lending. Review of Economic Dynamics 11 (4), 781­803.

Akcigit, U., D. Hanley, and S. Stantcheva (2016). Optimal taxation and r&d policies. NBER Working Paper
  22908 [Revise and Resubmit at Econometrica] .

Albanesi, S. and C. Sleet (2006). Dynamic Optimal Taxation with Private Information. The Review of
  Economic Studies 73 (1), 1­30.

Anderberg, D. (2009). Optimal Policy and the Risk Properties of Human Capital Reconsidered. Journal of
 Public Economics 93 (9-10), 1017­1026.

Arrow, K. J. (1962). The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing. The Review of Economic Stud-
  ies 29 (3), 155­173.

Atkinson, A. B. and J. E. Stiglitz (1976). The design of tax structure: Direct versus indirect taxation.
  Journal of Public Economics 6 (1), 55­75.

Ben-Porath, Y. (1967). The production of human capital and the life cycle of earnings. Journal of Political
  Economy 75 (4), 352­365.

Benabou, R. (2002). Tax and education policy in a heterogeneous-agent economy: What levels of redistri-
  bution maximize growth and efficiency? Econometrica 70 (2), 481­517.

Best, M. and H. J. Kleven (2016). Optimal income taxation with career effects of work effort. Working
  Paper .

Bohacek, R. and M. Kapicka (2008). Optimal human capital policies. Journal of Monetary Economics 55 (1),
  1­16.

Chang, Y. and Y. Park (2018). Optimal taxation with private insurance. Working Paper .

Conesa, J. C., S. Kitao, and D. Krueger (2009). Taxing capital? not a bad idea after all! American Economic
  Review 99 (1), 25­48.

Conesa, J. C. and D. Krueger (2006). On the Optimal Progressivity of the Income Tax Code. Journal of
  Monetary Economics 53 (7), 1425­1450.

                                                    28
da Costa, C. and I. Werning (2002). Commodity taxation and social insurance. MIT Working Paper .

da Costa, C. E. (2009). Yet another reason to tax goods. Review of Economic Dynamics 12 (2), 363 ­ 376.

Diamond, P. and J. Mirrlees (1978). A model of social insurance with variable retirement. Journal of Public
  Economics 10 (3), 295 ­ 336.

Erosa, A. and M. Gervais (2002). Optimal taxation in life-cycle economies. Journal of Economic The-
  ory 105 (2), 338 ­ 369.

Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2010). Progressive estate taxation. Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (2),
  635­673.

Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2013). Insurance and taxation over the life cycle. The Review of Economic
  Studies 80 (2), 596­635.

Findeisen, S. and D. Sachs (2016). Education and optimal dynamic taxation: The role of income-contingent
  student loans. Journal of Public Economics 138, 1 ­ 21.

Findeisen, S. and D. Sachs (2017). Redistribution and insurance with simple tax instruments. Journal of
  Public Economics 146, 58 ­ 78.

Golosov, M., N. Kocherlakota, and A. Tsyvinski (2003). Optimal indirect and capital taxation. The Review
 of Economic Studies 70 (3), 569­587.

Golosov, M., M. Troshkin, and A. Tsyvinski (2016). Redistribution and social insurance. American Economic
 Review 106 (2), 359­86.

Golosov, M. and A. Tsyvinski (2007). Optimal Taxation with Endogenous Insurance Markets. The Quarterly
 Journal of Economics 122 (2), 487­534.

Golosov, M., A. Tsyvinski, and N. Werquin (2014). A variational approach to the analysis of tax systems.
 Working Paper 20780, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grochulski, B. and T. Piskorski (2010). Risky human capital and deferred capital income taxation. Journal
  of Economic Theory 145 (3), 908­943.

Guvenen, F., G. Kambourov, B. Kuruscu, S. Ocampo-Diaz, and D. Chen (2019). Use it or lose it: Efficiency
 gains from wealth taxation. Working Paper 26284, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2017). Optimal Tax Progressivity: An Analytical Frame-
  work. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 132 (4), 1693­1754.

Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante (2019). Optimal progressivity with age-dependent taxation.
  Working Paper 25617, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hicks, J. (1970). Elasticity of substitution again: Substitutes and complements. Oxford Economic Papers 25,
  289­296.

Kapicka, M. (2013). Efficient Allocations in Dynamic Private Information Economies with Persistent Shocks:
 A First-Order Approach. The Review of Economic Studies 80 (3), 1027­1054.

                                                     29
Kapicka, M. (2015). Optimal mirrleesean taxation in a ben-porath economy. American Economic Journal:
 Macroeconomics 7 (2), 219­48.

Kapicka, M. and J. Neira (2014). Optimal taxation in a life-cycle economy with endogenous human capital
 formation. Technical report, Working paper, UC Santa Barbara.

Karabarbounis, M. (2016). A road map for efficiently taxing heterogeneous agents. American Economic
 Journal: Macroeconomics 8 (2), 182­214.

Kocherlakota, N. R. (2005). Zero expected wealth taxes: A mirrlees approach to dynamic optimal taxation.
 Econometrica 73 (5), 1587­1621.

Koeniger, W. and J. Prat (2018). Human capital and optimal redistribution. Review of Economic Dynam-
 ics 27, 1 ­ 26.

Krueger, D. and A. Ludwig (2013). Optimal progressive labor income taxation and education subsidies when
  education decisions and intergenerational transfers are endogenous. American Economic Review 103 (3),
  496­501.

Makris, M. and A. Pavan (2019). Taxation under learning-by-doing. Working Paper .

Milgrom, P. and I. Segal (2002). Envelope theorems for arbitrary choice sets. Econometrica 70 (2), 583­601.

Mirrlees, J. (1971). An exploration in the theory of optimum income taxation. The Review of Economic
 Studies 38, 175­208.

Ndiaye, A. (2017). Flexible Retirement and Optimal Taxation. Working Paper Series WP-2018-18, Federal
 Reserve Bank of Chicago.

Pavan, A., I. Segal, and J. Toikka (2014). Dynamic mechanism design: A myersonian approach. Economet-
  rica 82 (2), 601­653.

Perrault, L. (2015). Optimal income taxation with unemployment induced loss of human capital. Georgia
  State Working Paper .

Rogerson, W. P. (1985). The first-order approach to principal-agent problems. Econometrica 53 (6), 1357­
  1367.

Saez, E. (2001). Using elasticities to derive optimal income tax rates. The Review of Economic Studies 68 (1),
  205­229.

Saez, E. and S. Stantcheva (2016). Generalized social marginal welfare weights for optimal tax theory.
  American Economic Review 106 (1), 24­45.

Saez, E. and S. Stantcheva (2018). A simpler theory of optimal capital taxation. Journal of Public Eco-
  nomics 162, 120 ­ 142. In Honor of Sir Tony Atkinson (1944-2017).

Samuelson, P. A. (1974). Complementarity: An essay on the 40th anniversary of the hicks-allen revolution
  in demand theory. Journal of Economic Literature 12 (4), 1255­1289.

                                                     30
Stantcheva, S. (2014). Optimal taxation and human capital policies over the life cycle, job market paper
  version. Harvard University Working Paper .

Stantcheva, S. (2015a). Learning and (or) doing: Human capital investments and optimal taxation. Working
  Paper 21381, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Stantcheva, S. (2015b). Optimal income, education and bequest taxes in an intergenerational model. Working
  Paper 21177, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Stantcheva, S. (2017). Optimal taxation and human capital policies over the life cycle. [Lead article] Journal
  of Political Economy 125 (6).

Weinzierl, M. (2011). The Surprising Power of Age-Dependent Taxes. The Review of Economic Studies 78 (4),
 1490­1518.

Werning, I. (2002). Optimal unemployment insurance with unobservable savings. University of Chicago and
 UTDT .




                                                     31
              Online Appendix to "Dynamic Taxation"

                                        Stefanie Stantcheva

                                             January 14, 2020




   Stantcheva: Harvard, CEPR, and NBER (e-mail: sstantcheva@fas.harvard.edu); I thank Cl´
                                                                                        ement Herman, Julia Paul-
Venturine, and Yannic Rehm for outstanding research assistance.


                                                       1
                           Table A-1: Age-dependent features of the tax system in selected countries
                                                 Life-cycle related                                                              Explicitly age-dependent
      Income               Family             Consumption      Capital                   Social security        Pension age        Tax-favored          Other age-related
                                                                                                                                   pension plans        features

      Germany
      Income tax: on       Child tax          VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax:        Contributions:         Statutory age:     Pension              Long-term care
      annual taxable       deductions;        rate, standard   (includes interest and    employer 20.7%,        65 (increases      contribution tax     surcharge: 0.25%
      income,              Child benefit;     rate 19%,        dividends) flat tax of    employee 19.4-20.9%,   to 67 until        deduction: 86% of    of income (above
      progressive,         Joint tax filing   reduced rate     25% on income above       total 40.1%-41.6%      2031)              pension              23 years if
      marginal tax rates   for married        7%               threshold; Real estate                                              contribution up to   taxpayers has no
      from 0% to 45%       couples                             purchase tax:                                                       threshold            children)
                                                               3.5 - 6.5% of property
                                                               value; Property tax:
                                                               0.26 - 0.35% on
                                                               estimated property
                                                               value
      Austria
      Income tax: on       Family             VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax: flat   Contributions:         Statutory age:     Employer pension
A-1




      annual taxable       benefits; Child    rate, standard   tax rate of 25% (on       employer 21.38%,       65 for men, 60     fund: no income
      income,              tax credit         rate 20%,        deposits) or 27.5%        employee 18.12%,       for women          tax on
      progressive,                            medium rate      (other capital            total 39.50 %          (increase for      contributions
      marginal tax rates                      13%, reduced     incomes); Real estate                            women to 65        made by employer
      from 0% to 55%                          rate 10%         purchase tax: 0.5-3.5%                           until 2033)        and tax-favored
                                                               of property value;                                                  contributions by
                                                               Property tax (levied                                                employee;
                                                               locally on estimated                                                Deduction of
                                                               property value)                                                     taxable income:
                                                                                                                                   only 25% of
                                                                                                                                   pension benefit
                                                                                                                                   resulting from
                                                                                                                                   higher voluntary
                                                                                                                                   insurance are
                                                                                                                                   liable to income
                                                                                                                                   tax
      Switzerland (decentralized)
      Income tax:           Child              VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax: 35%    Contributions:         Statutory age:   Reduced
      Federal tax,          allowance;         rate, standard   withholding tax on        employer 8%;           65 for men, 64   withholding tax on
      progressive,          Education          rate 7.7%,       interest and dividend     employee 8%; total     for women        pensions: 15%
      marginal rates        allowance;         medium rate      income (sometimes         16%; Sizeable
      from 0% to 11.5%;     Joint tax filing   3.7%, reduced    deductible from           employer-specific
      Cantonal tax,         for married        rate 2.5%        income tax or             pension schemes and
      mostly progressive,   couples                             refunded); Property       private health
      marginal rates                                            rates vary between        insurance
      mostly below 13%;                                         cantons; property tax
      Municipal tax, as                                         on estimated value;
      a share of cantonal                                       Wealth tax (cantonal
      tax, up to 51%                                            and local); Imputed
                                                                rent tax
      Denmark
      State tax:            Child benefit;     VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax:        Contributions:         Statutory age:   Tax deduction for
      progressive,          Joint tax          rate, standard   progressive on shares     independent of         65 (increases    contributions to
      marginal rate from    return for         rate 25%         and dividends,            income, per year,      to 67 over the   private plans;
      12.16 % to 15%;       married                             marginal rates of         employer DKK           next years)      Reduced income
      Local tax: rates      couples                             27%-42%, property         2,271.60, employee                      tax rates and
A-2




      vary, average rate                                        gains exempt if           DKK 1,135.80, total                     pension income
      of 24.9%; Labour                                          principal dwelling;       DKK 3,407.40;                           below threshold
      market tax: flat at                                       Property tax: on          Voluntary                               tax exempt
      8%                                                        estimated property        unemployment
                                                                value, marginal rate of   insurance
                                                                1%-3%                     (tax-deductible
                                                                                          contributions);
                                                                                          Old-age pension
                                                                                          contribution (fixed
                                                                                          monthly amount of
                                                                                          DKK 284; employer
                                                                                          two thirds, employee
                                                                                          one third)
      Sweden
      Income tax: on       Child benefit     VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax: flat   Contributions:            Statutory age:                         Reduced social
      annual taxable                         rate, standard   rate of 30%; Property     employer 31.42%,          flexible, from                         security
      income,                                rate 25%,        tax: on estimated         24.26% for pensions,      61 (increases                          contribution:
      progressive,                           medium rate      property value (SEK       employees 7% (capped      to 64 over the                         under 26 years of
      marginal tax rates                     12%, reduced     8.049 or 0.75%, for       and fully refundable),    next years)                            age (rate of
      (national and                          rate 6%          single family homes)      total up to 62.68%                                               15.49%) and for
      municipal) up to                                                                                                                                   employees over 68
      57%. Municipal
      tax rates vary
      France
      Income tax: on       Child benefit;    VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax: flat   Contributions:            Statutory age:     Tax deductions on   Minimum income:
      annual taxable       Parental          rate, standard   tax rate of 19%, plus     employer 45%,             62 (full           payments to         only over 25 years,
      income,              benefits;         rate 20%,        17.2% social              employee around 22%       pension after      pension schemes     unless 2 years of
      progressive,         Family            medium rate      contributions;            (15% for public,          43 years of                            work experience;
      marginal tax rates   quotient          10%, reduced     Property tax: rates set   various regimes), total   contribution or                        Tax deductions for
      from 0% to 45%.      (reduction of     rate 5.5%        by local authorities;     between 60 and 67%,       above 67)                              dependents if over
                           tax base                           Wealth tax: replaced      plus special deductions                                          60.
                           depending on                       by tax on real estate     for low-income
                           the family                         (since 2018), rates       employees.
A-3




                           composition)                       0.7% - 1.5% above
                                                              threshold
      Belgium
      Income tax: on       Child benefits;   VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax: flat   Contributions:            Statutory age:     Tax deduction on
      annual taxable       Tax reimburse-    rate, standard   rate of 15% (can be       employer 33-40.73%,       65 (will           payments towards
      income after         ments for         rate 21%,        declared in income        employee: 13.07% in       increase to 67);   pension schemes:
      deductions,          dependent         medium rate      tax); Property tax: on    private sector and        Anticipated        taxed at the
      progressive,         children          12%, reduced     value, regional rate      11.05% in public,         pension plans      moment of
      marginal tax rates   (conditioned      rate 6%          1.25%-2.5%                total: 44.05%-53.8%       and part-time      withdraw or at 60
      up to 50%            on income, no                                                                          early
                           age limit);                                                                            retirement: at
                           Marital                                                                                least 55
                           quotient (only
                           for
                           single-earner
                           families)
      Italy
      Income tax: on           Child benefits;   VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax: 26%    Contributions:          Statutory age:    Tax deductions on     Reduction of tax
      annual taxable           Parental          rate, standard   (12.50% for               employer around 30%,    66 (to be         payments to           base for retired
      income,                  benefits;         rate 22%,        government bonds);        employee around 10%,    increased),       pension schemes       (up to threshold)
      progressive,             Dependent tax     medium rate      Wealth tax: 0.76% on      total around 40%        with              (up to threshold)
      marginal tax rates       deductions;       10%, reduced     real assets abroad,       (depends on number of   exceptions (62
      from 23% to 43%          Child tax         rate 4%          0.15% on all assets       employees of the        for female in
                               deductions                         abroad; Property          company and             private sector,
                                                                  taxes: municipal          employee's position)    63 and 6
                                                                  (0.2%-0.76% of                                    months for
                                                                  taxable base value);                              self-employed
                                                                  Housing tax: subject                              female and
                                                                  to maximum when                                   temporary
                                                                  combined with                                     workers); Early
                                                                  municipal property                                pension: 64
                                                                  taxes                                             years after 20
                                                                                                                    years of
                                                                                                                    contribution
      Spain (decentralized )
      Income tax: on           Child benefits;   VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax: part   Contributions:          Statutory age:    Tax deductions on     Unemployment
A-4




      annual taxable           Dependent         rate, standard   of taxable income;        employer 29.9%,         65 (to be         payments to           assistance benefits:
      income,                  child tax         rate 21%,        Property tax: based       employee 6.35%, total   increased         pension schemes:      older than 45 or
      progressive,             reductions        medium rate      on cadastral value,       36.25%                  incrementally     up to threshold or    dependents or at
      marginal tax rates       (until 26 years   10%,reduced      0.3- 0.4%; Wealth tax:                            to 67)            30% of income         least 6 months of
      from 19% to 43%          with max.         rate 4%          depends on region,                                                                        contribution
                               resource                           0.2-3.75% of net assets
                               condition);                        above the threshold
                               Education                          (includes primary
                               allowances                         residence allowance)
      Portugal
      Income tax: on           Parental          VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax:        Contributions:          Statutory age:    Tax deductions on
      annual taxable           allowances;       rate, standard   16.5%-35%; Property       employers 11%,          66 years and 4    payments to
      income,                  Child Benefits;   rate 23%,        tax: 0.3-0.8%             employees 23.75%,       months            pension schemes
      progressive,             Education         medium rate                                total 34.75%                              (up to 20% of
      marginal tax rates       allowances        13%, reduced                                                                         earnings, decreases
      from 14.5% to 48%                          rate 6%                                                                              with age)
      United States (decentralized )
      Federal income       Child tax         Sales tax:        Capital gains tax:        Contributions:          Statutory age:   Tax deductions on   Medicare: citizens
      tax: on annual       credit;           Levied at the     federal level,            employer 6.2%, plus     67 (early        payments to         above 65, covers
      taxable income,      Dependent tax     state/local       short-term gains          1.45% for Medicare,     retirement       pension schemes:    medical
      progressive,         deductions        level, sizeable   treated as ordinary       plus 0.6% for           with lower       phased out as       expenditure;
      marginal rates                         differences       income, long-term         unemployment,           pension from     income increases    Children health
      from 10% to 37%.                       between states    gains taxed at lower      employee 6.2%, plus     62)                                  insurance program,
      State income tax,                                        (progressive) rates       1.45% for Medicare,                                          in low-income,
      varying rates and                                        (0-20%); Property tax:    total 15.9%                                                  uninsured families
      degree of                                                levied at local level,                                                                 below the age of
      progressivity,                                           sizeable differences                                                                   19; Income tax
      marginal rates                                                                                                                                  credit for elderly
      from 0% to 12.3%.                                                                                                                               (up to threshold)
      Various deductions                                                                                                                              under some
                                                                                                                                                      conditions.
      Norway
      Income tax: on       Child benefit;    VAT: Flat tax     Capital gains tax: flat   Contributions:          Statutory age:   Tax deductions on
      annual taxable       Parental          rate, standard    rate of 22%; Property     employer 14.1%,         67 (early        payments to
      income,              benefits;         rate 25%,         tax: on the assessed      employee 8.2%, total    retirement       pension schemes;
      progressive, top     Childcare         medium rate       value of the property     22.3%                   from 62,         Reduced social
A-5




      marginal tax rate    income tax        15%;, reduced     (equal to 20-50% of                               decreases the    security
      ~
      46% (varies          deduction;        rate 12%          market value), ranges                             pension,         contributions on
      slightly depending   Unemployment                        from 0.2 to 0.7%                                  minimum          pensions (5.1%
      on source of         depending on                        depending on the                                  guaranteed)      instead of 8.2%)
      income)              number of                           municipality; Wealth
                           children                            tax: 0.85% on net
                                                               assets above threshold
      Canada (decentralized )
      Income tax:          Child benefit     GST and           Capital gains tax: 50%    Pension plan            Statutory age:   Pension plan        Reduction of
      Federal income       (phased out       Provincial        of gains are taxable      contributions:          65 (Early        contribution        taxable base for
      tax, on annual       with increasing   Sales Tax: Flat   under income tax;         employer 5.2%,          retirement       deducted from       pensioners over 65
      taxable income,      income)           tax rate,         Property tax: varies      employee 5.2%, total    from 60, with    gross income        (if low-income)
      progressive,                           standard rate     depending on the          10.4%; Unemployment     reduction in
      marginal rates                         13% (slight       region                    insurance               pension)
      from 0% to 33%.                        variations                                  contributions:
      Provincial income                      between                                     Employer 2.268%,
      tax, varying rates                     provinces)                                  employee 1.62%, total
      and degree of                                                                      3.888%.
      progressivity,
      marginal rates
      from 4% to 25.75%
      Ireland
      Income tax: on       Child benefit;    VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax: 33%    Universal                Statutory         Pension plan         Means-tested
      annual taxable       Parental          rate, standard   (flat rate); Dividend     contributions: payed     retirement age:   contributions        non-contributory
      income,              benefits          rate 23%,        withholding tax: 20%      on all income above      66                deductible from      benefit: lower
      progressive,                           medium rates     (flat rate); Property     threshold, progressive                     taxable gross        amount for 18-24.
      standard rate at                       9% and 13.5%,    tax: marginal rate        rates from 0.5% to 8%.                     income               Job seeker's
      20%, higher                            reduced rate     0.18%-0.25% of            Reduced rates                                                   allowance lower for
      marginal rate at                       4.8%             market value of the       (0.5-2%) for people                                             people under 26;
      40%, various                                            house, local variations   above 70; Social                                                Annual exemption
      deductions                                                                        insurance                                                       limit on income
                                                                                        contributions:                                                  tax for people aged
                                                                                        standard rates                                                  65 and above
                                                                                        employer 10,95%,                                                (increased for
                                                                                        employee 4%                                                     couples); Age tax
                                                                                                                                                        credit: in addition
                                                                                                                                                        to personal tax
                                                                                                                                                        credit (EUR245 if
                                                                                                                                                        single above 65,
                                                                                                                                                        EUR490 if married
                                                                                                                                                        and both over 65)
      United Kingdom
A-6




      Income tax: on       Child benefit,    VAT: Flat tax    Capital gains tax: 28%    Contributions:           Statutory         Reduction of         Exemption for
      annual taxable       Child tax         rate, standard   for residential           Employers 13.8%,         retirement age:   pension tax base:    social security
      income,              credit (part of   rate 20%,        property, 20% for         employees 12% (2%        between 65        25% reduction if     contributions for
      progressive, up to   universal         medium rate      other assets,             for income above GBP     and 66 (to be     pension is taken a   employees above
      45% with various     credit)           5%, reduced      deductions for            4,167/month), total      increased to 66   lump-sum; Tax        retirement age
      deductions.                            rate either 5%   low-income                around 25.8%,            until 2020)       deductions on        (66); Bereavement
                                             or 0%            households; Dividend      exemptions for                             private pension      payment and
                                                              tax: flat rate between    low-income and over                        contributions:       allowance: if
                                                              7.5% and 38.1%            66                                         capped, depends      spouse dies before
                                                              (depending on                                                        on total income      pension age,
                                                              income); Real estate                                                 tax                  tax-free lump-sum
                                                              purchase tax: based                                                                       GBP2,000, plus
                                                              on property value,                                                                        allowance of up to
                                                              between 0% and 12%                                                                        GBP350/week for
                                                              (15% for second                                                                           a year
                                                              property)
                                      Table A-2: Empirical literature on capital taxation

         Citation         Countries   Time period         Tax variation                  Main result                   Size

      Capital gains tax
      Feldstein et al.      USA          1973           Variation across          Reduction in capital gains           -3.8
          (1980)                                          individuals                    realization
      Minarik (1981)        USA          1973           Variation across          Reduction in capital gains           -0.4
                                                          individuals                    realization
        Auten and           USA        1967-1973     Variation across/within        Reduction in long-run        Transitory: -1.1
        Clotfelter                                    invididuals over time.       capital gains realization     Permanent : -0.4
         (1982)                                            1969 reform
      Lindsey (1987)        USA        1965-1982         Variation across        Increase in tax decreases the   Transitory: -2.1
                                                    invididuals and over time.    fraction of realized capital   Permanent: -1.4
                                                                                 gains reported in tax returns
      Poterba (1987)        USA        1965-1982      Variation over time.       Increase in tax decreases the          -1
A-7




                                                       Multiple reforms           fraction of realized capital
                                                                                 gains reported in tax returns
      Auerbach and          USA        1954-1986      Variation across time       Non-significant decrease in           0
      Poterba (1988)                                                               capital gains realization
       Auten et al.         USA        1979-1983     Variation across/within      Reduction in capital gains      Transitory: -3
         (1989)                                            individuals.                  realization             Permanent: -1.6
                                                           1981 reform
       Slemrod and          USA        1979-1984     Variation across/within       Non-robust reduction in              0
       Shobe (1990)                                        individuals.            capital gains realization
                                                           1981 reform
      Gillingham and        USA        1954-1989      Variation over time.        Non-significant but large             0
         Greenlees                                     Multiple reforms           reduction in capital gains
           (1992)                                                                        realization
       Burman and           USA        1980-1983    Variations across/within     Transitory shock in tax rate    Transitory: -6.4
        Randolph                                          individuals.              decreases capital gains       Permanent: 0
         (1994)                                           1981 reform            realization, permanent shock
                                                                                      effect not significant
      Auerbach and    USA   1986-1993   Variations across/within   Reduction in capital gains   Transitory: -4.4
      Siegel (2000)                           individuals.                realization           Permanent: -1.7
                                         Multiple tax reforms
       Dowd et al.    USA   1999-2008   Variation across/within    Reduction in capital gains   Transitory: -1.2
         (2012)                               individuals.                realization           Permanent: -0.8
                                        2001 and 2003 reforms
A-8
      Dividend tax
        Chetty and         USA        1980-2004     Variation across firms     Tax cut increases dividend         Short-run: -0.5
        Saez (2005)                                over time. 2003 reform              payments
      Wealth tax
      Br¨
        ulhart et al.   Switzerland   2001-2012   Variation across/within        Increase in wealth tax           Net-of-tax: 1.2
          (2016)                                  individuals and across       decreases reported wealth
                                                    cantons over time
       Seim (2017)        Sweden      2000-2006    Variation across/within    Increase in wealth tax has a     Net-of-tax: 0.1 to 0.3
                                                  individuals and bunching    negative impact on reported
                                                  at the zero-tax threshold        taxable net wealth
      Jakobsen et al.    Denmark      1980-1996    Variation across/within    Decrease in wealth tax leads     Long-run net-of-tax
          (2018)                                  individuals, at exemption      to increase in wealth        Moderately wealthy: 0.5
                                                  threshold, and over time.       accumulation, effect           Very wealthy: 2
                                                         1989 reform              increases with time
      Capital income tax
       Pirttil¨
              a and      Finland      1992-1995   Variation across/within      Decrease in tax on capital            Net-of-tax
A-9




       Selin (2011)                                individuals over time.       income leads to income                 All: 0
                                                  Dual tax reform of 1993      shifting for self-employed     Self-employed: 0.5 to 59
       Kleven and        Denmark      1980-2005   Variation across/within       Capital income elasticities    Net-of-tax: 0.1 to 0.3
      Schultz (2014)                               individuals over time.      2-3 times larger in absolute
                                                     1980s tax reforms        value than labor income ones
      Estate and inheritance taxes
       Slemrod and         USA        1916-1996     Age variation across      Negative impact of taxes on         Net-of-tax: 0.2
      Kopczuk (2000)                               individuals over time.        reported estate value
                                                     Multiple reforms
       Holtz-Eakin         USA          1992          Variation across        Negative impact of taxes on         Net-of-tax: 0.1
       and Marples                                 individuals and states        reported estate value
         (2001)
       Kopczuk and         USA        1916-1984       Variation across        Increase in potential savings    Death elasticity: 0.6
      Slemrod (2003)                               individuals and states     leads to later time of death.
                                                         over time.             Possibly due to reporting
                                                    Multiple tax reforms                 timing.
         Bakija and       USA   1965-1998      Variation across          Increase in estate and          Returns elasticity: -0.1
       Slemrod (2004)                       individuals and states     inheritance taxes leads to
                                                  over time           decrease in number of estate
                                                                               tax returns
       Joulfaian (2005)   USA     1989         Variation across       Increase in relative gift price   Gift elasticity: -2.3 to -2.9
                                            individuals and states     with respect to estate leads
                                                                           to decrease in gifts.
       Joulfaian (2006)   USA   1951-2001   Variation across states    Increase in estate tax leads           Net-of-tax: 0.1
                                                   over time          to decrease in taxable estate.
A-10
References
Auerbach, A. J. and J. Poterba (1988). Capital gains taxation in the united states: Realizations, revenue,
 and rhetoric. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 595­631.

Auerbach, A. J. and J. M. Siegel (2000). Capital-gains realizations of the rich and sophisticated. American
 Economic Review 90 (2), 276­282.

Auten, G. E., L. E. Burman, and W. C. Randolph (1989). Estimation and interpretation of capital gains
 realization behavior: Evidence from panel data. National Tax Journal 42 (3), 353­374.

Auten, G. E. and C. T. Clotfelter (1982). Permanent versus transitory tax effects and the realization of
 capital gains. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 97 (4), 613­632.

Bakija, J. and J. Slemrod (2004). Do the rich flee from high state taxes? evidence from federal estate tax
  returns. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Br¨
  ulhart, M., J. Gruber, M. Krapf, and K. Schmidheiny (2016). Taxing wealth: Evidence from switzerland.
  Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Burman, L. E. and W. C. Randolph (1994). Measuring permanent responses to capital-gains tax changes in
  panel data. The American Economic Review , 794­809.

Chetty, R. and E. Saez (2005). Dividend taxes and corporate behavior: Evidence from the 2003 dividend
  tax cut. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120 (3), 791­833.

Dowd, T., R. McClelland, A. Muthitacharoen, et al. (2012). New evidence on the tax elasticity of capital
  gains. Unpublished Paper. June .

Feldstein, M., J. Slemrod, and S. Yitzhaki (1980). The effects of taxation on the selling of corporate stock
  and the realization of capital gains. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (4), 777­791.

Gillingham, R. and J. S. Greenlees (1992). The effect of marginal tax rates on capital gains revenue: Another
  look at the evidence. National Tax Journal , 167­177.

Holtz-Eakin, D. and D. Marples (2001). Distortion costs of taxing wealth accumulation: Income versus
  estate taxes. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Jakobsen, K., K. Jakobsen, H. Kleven, and G. Zucman (2018). Wealth taxation and wealth accumulation:
  Theory and evidence from denmark. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Joulfaian, D. (2005). Choosing between gifts and bequests: How taxes affect the timing of wealth transfers.
  Journal of Public Economics 89 (11-12), 2069­2091.

Joulfaian, D. (2006). The behavioral response of wealth accumulation to estate taxation: Time series
  evidence. National Tax Journal , 253­268.

Kleven, H. J. and E. A. Schultz (2014). Estimating taxable income responses using danish tax reforms.
  American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6 (4), 271­301.

Kopczuk, W. and J. Slemrod (2003). Dying to save taxes: Evidence from estate-tax returns on the death
 elasticity. Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2), 256­265.

Lindsey, L. B. (1987). Capital gains rates, realizations, and revenues. In The effects of taxation on capital
  accumulation, pp. 69­100. University of Chicago Press.

                                                    A-11
Minarik, J. J. (1981). Capital gains. How taxes affect economic behavior , 255­65.

Pirttil¨
       a, J. and H. Selin (2011). Income shifting within a dual income tax system: Evidence from the finnish
  tax reform of 1993. Scandinavian Journal of Economics 113 (1), 120­144.

Poterba, J. M. (1987). Tax evasion and capital gains taxation.

Seim, D. (2017). Behavioral responses to wealth taxes: Evidence from sweden. American Economic Journal:
  Economic Policy 9 (4), 395­421.

Slemrod, J. and W. Kopczuk (2000). The impact of the estate tax on the wealth accumulation and avoidance
  behavior of donors. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Slemrod, J. and W. Shobe (1990). The tax elasticity of capital gains realizations: Evidence from a panel of
  taxpayers. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                                   A-12
