                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      THE WAGE PENALTY OF REGIONAL ACCENTS

                                        Jeffrey Grogger
                                       Andreas Steinmayr
                                        Joachim Winter

                                       Working Paper 26719
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26719


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank Astrid Adler, Francesco Cinnirella, Helmut Farbmacher, Bernd Fitzenberger, Chris
Hansen, Alfred Lameli, Giovanni Mellace, Alexandra Spitz-Oener, Steven Stillman, Frank
Windmeijer, Nikolaus Wolf, and participants at various seminars and workshops for invaluable
discussions and Markus Nagler for comments on the draft. Terence Chau and Kevin Kloiber
provided outstanding research assistance. Financial support by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
through CRC TRR 190 (project number 280092119) is gratefully acknowledged. The usual
disclaimer applies The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26719.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

 2020 by Jeffrey Grogger, Andreas Steinmayr, and Joachim Winter. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including  notice, is given to the source.
The Wage Penalty of Regional Accents
Jeffrey Grogger, Andreas Steinmayr, and Joachim Winter
NBER Working Paper No. 26719
January 2020
JEL No. J24,J71

                                          ABSTRACT

Previous work has documented that speaking one's native language with an accent distinct from
the mainstream is associated with lower wages. In this study, we seek to estimate the causal effect
of speaking with a distinctive regional accent, disentangling the effect of the accent from that of
omitted variables. We collected data on workers' speech in Germany, a country with wide
variation in regional dialects. We use a variety of strategies in estimation, including an
instrumental variables strategy in which the instruments are based on research findings from the
linguistics of accent acquisition. All of our estimators show that speaking with a distinctive
regional accent reduces wages by an amount that is comparable to the gender wage gap. We also
find that workers with distinctive regional accents tend to sort away from occupations that
demand high levels of face-to-face contact, consistent with various occupational sorting models.


Jeffrey Grogger                                  Joachim Winter
Irving B. Harris Professor of Urban Policy       Department of Economics
Harris School of Public Policy                   LMU Munich
University of Chicago                            Ludwigstr. 33
1155 E. 60th Street                              D-80539 Munich
Chicago, IL 60637                                Germany
and NBER                                         joachim.winter@lrz.uni-muenchen.de
jgrogger@uchicago.edu

Andreas Steinmayr
Department of Economics
University of Munich (LMU)
Ludwigstr. 33
D-80539 Munich
Germany
andreas.steinmayr@econ.lmu.de
1       Introduction
Does speaking with a regional accent reduce a worker's wage? Millions of workers worldwide speak a

dialect, a variety of a language that may depart from the standard variety in a number of ways.1 Results

from cognitive neuroscience and sociolinguistics show that one's native accent, a central component

of dialect, is largely acquired during childhood and is difficult to change thereafter. At the same time,

studies from social psychology show that listeners draw strong conclusions from others' speech. The

combination of strong preferences regarding others' accents, plus the high cost of changing them, could

result in a wage penalty for speakers with a non-standard accent.

    Indeed, several studies have found a negative link between dialect and wages. Rickford et al.

(2015) reported a negative correlation between earnings and the use of African American Vernacular

English (AAVE), a dialect spoken by many blacks in the United States. Grogger (2011, 2019) has

shown that African American workers with racially distinctive accents have lower wages than similarly

skilled whites. Yao and van Ours (2018) report a negative relationship between dialect and wages in

the Netherlands, where dialects vary by region rather than race.

    Our goal in this paper is to better understand this relationship. Our specific aim is to estimate the

causal effect of a regionally distinctive accent on workers' wages. The thought experiment we have in

mind is to estimate how a worker's wage would change if she had acquired an accent during childhood

that was considered standard rather than regionally distinctive. We then offer some evidence on the

mechanism by which the regional accent effect arises.

    We study workers in Germany, whose varied regional accents provide an ideal setting for our work.

To estimate the accent-related wage penalty, we collected survey data about the strength of workers'

accents. We also collected measures of skills that capture typically unobserved aspects of worker

productivity, as well as measures of the worker's childhood environment that may have shaped her

speech patterns. We employ these measures in different ways in order to deal with omitted variable

bias.

    We are concerned with two types of potential omitted variable bias. Considering the regional
    1 We   come back to the distinction between dialects and accents in Section 2.2.



                                                          1
nature of German dialects, one type of omitted variable bias may arise if regional accents are correlated

with characteristics of the regional economy that influence worker productivity. Another may arise if

idiosyncratic worker characteristics that influence wages are related to the worker's speech. Either type

of selection on unobservables may lead to bias in the estimated effect of regional accents on wages.

    Selection on unobservables has posed a challenge for prior work. Rickford et al. (2015) and Grog-

ger (2011) pursued a control strategy, including rather small sets of controls. Grogger (2019) expanded

the list, showing that the dialect wage penalty was robust to the inclusion of cognitive test scores. Yao

and van Ours (2018) similarly pursued a control strategy.2 Controlling for typically unmeasured skills

is just one step of our multipart strategy to deal with unobserved heterogeneity.

    Our second step focuses on unobservables that vary regionally. Since accents vary by region, it

is informative to compare different estimators that make different uses of the within vs. total regional

variation in the data. Region controls turn out to have little effect on the estimated regional-accent

penalty, regardless of the size of the regions.

    Finally, we take an instrumental variables approach to deal with worker-specific unobservables.

As we discuss in more detail below, research from linguistics shows that children acquire their native

accents from their childhood peers. This means that, in the absence of correlation between regional ac-

cents and regional labor market productivity, the share of one's schoolmates who speak with a regional

accent provides an instrument for one's own accent. We asked respondents about the accents of their

schoolmates; we construct leave-out means from the responses of respondents within the same vicinity

to construct such an instrument.

    All of our estimators yield similar estimates, showing that the regional-accent penalty is about 20

percent of the worker's wage. This magnitude is comparable to the gender wage gap. A natural question

is, what explains this effect? We provide evidence that largely rules out employer discrimination, but

is consistent with the type of occupational sorting that could arise either from consumer/coworker

discrimination or from a model of task-trading along the lines of Deming (2017).

    Our work is most closely linked to the earlier studies on dialect and wages cited above, but it is
   2 Van Ours and Yao (2016) instrumented dialect with the distance between the worker's residence and Haar-
lem, whose dialect is effectively the Dutch national standard. However, one might be concerned that residential
location could influence wages for reasons other than the dialect the worker speaks.


                                                      2
related to other literatures as well. Several studies have established that dialect and speech features

more generally affect a variety of economic outcomes. Two studies have shown that dialect influences

the housing market by affecting renters' attempts to rent apartments (Purnell et al., 1999; Massey and

Lundy, 2001), and Falck et al. (2012) show that migration is higher between areas with more similar

dialects, holding distance constant.

    Our work also relates to two broader literatures. One is the burgeoning literature relating non-

cognitive skills to the labor market (Borghans et al., 2008). The other is the literature on what one

might call unconventional dimensions of discrimination. This includes studies showing that traits such

as beauty, height, and body weight influence wages (Hamermesh and Biddle, 1994; Biddle and Hamer-

mesh, 1998; Persico et al., 2004; Cawley, 2004).

    In the next section, we discuss some key findings from sociolinguistics, cognitive neuroscience,

and social psychology that are relevant to our work. Following that, we discuss our data. In Section 4

we present our main results. Section 5 discusses different models that could generate regional-accent

penalties. Section 6 concludes.



2     Background
Findings from sociolinguistics, cognitive neuroscience, and social psychology help motivate both our

question and the approach we take.



2.1    Preferences toward others' speech

The social psychology literature provides abundant evidence that listeners draw strong conclusions

about speakers based on their speech. In the US, both black and white listeners routinely rate AAVE

speakers lower than Standard American English (SAE) speakers in terms of socioeconomic status, in-

telligence, and even personal attractiveness (Bleile et al., 1997; Doss and Gross, 1992, 1994; Koch

et al., 2001; Rodriguez et al., 2004). Research similarly has shown that, both inside and outside the

South, listeners rate Southern American English speakers lower than SAE speakers on certain subjec-

tive scales, including correctness and the degree to which the speaker sounds intelligent (Preston, 1996,

                                                   3
1999; Hartley, 1999; Kinzler and DeJesus, 2013; Tucker and Lambert, 1969; Bailey and Tillery, 1996;

Fridland and Bartlett, 2006).

    In the German setting, G
                            artig et al. (2010) show that speakers of some dialects are viewed as both

livelier and less educated than speakers of standard German. Heblich et al. (2015) report lab experi-

ments in which participants are more likely to cooperate with speakers of their own dialect than with

speakers of other dialects. All this evidence is consistent with the notion that people have preferences

over the speech of others, which is a necessary condition for either employer or consumer/coworker

discrimination on the basis of speech.



2.2    What is a dialect? What is an accent?

A dialect is a variety of a language that is related to and mutually intelligible with some standard variety

of that language, usually a national standard. Like the standard to which they are related, dialects follow

rules implicitly known by all speakers of the dialect. What distinguishes dialects from the standard (and

each other) is that some of the rules are different.

    Many different types of rules distinguish different dialects. Some involve vocabulary, others involve

grammatical features. Yet others concern pronunciation. Differences in pronunciation distinguish ac-

cents. Although we have so far used the term accent and dialect somewhat interchangeably, accents

are our focus. Indeed many speakers are able to use the grammar and vocabulary of both their native

dialect and their national standard. However, even when they employ the national standard, they still

speak with the accent of their regional dialect.3



2.3    Accent acquisition

Key to our instrumental variables strategy are findings from both sociolinguistics and cognitive neuro-

science that show evidence of a "sensitive period" for native dialect acquisition. Before the sensitive

period ends, children are capable of acquiring native-sounding accents in whatever language they are

exposed to. Once the sensitive period ends, it is much more difficult to acquire a native-sounding accent
   3 Franz   Josef Strauss, the former premier of Bavaria, provides an example.



                                                         4
in a second language. Second dialect acquisition is similar to second language acquisition, in that it is

difficult to acquire a native-sounding accent in a second dialect after the sensitive period ends (Siegel,

2010). The literature also indicates that one tends to acquire one's native accent from one's linguistic

peers during the sensitive period, rather than from one's parents or other sources such as broadcast

media (Labov, 1972).

    Although there is some debate as to when the sensitive period ends, there is a fair amount of agree-

ment that it is over before puberty concludes (Johnson and Newport, 1989; Hyltenstam and Abrahams-

son, 2008; Granena and Long, 2013). Different aspects of language acquisition may have different

sensitive periods. For example, the sensitive period for the acquisition of a native-sounding accent

may end as early as age six or seven (Siegel, 2010; Granena and Long, 2013). These various research

findings motivate the instrumental variables that we construct below.



2.4    German dialects

Sensitive-period theory predicts that one will tend to acquire the accent of the region in which one grows

up. German dialects exhibit widespread geographic variation, similarly to languages such as Italian,

Arabic, and Chinese (Lameli, 2008). Figure 1 provides a map showing the main dialect regions of

the country. One observation that stems from this figure is that regional dialects are widely distributed

across the country. Put differently, it is not as if one part of the country speaks standard German while

another part speaks with a regional dialect. Thus speaking with a regional accent is not equivalent

to coming from a particular region. In addition to differing by the nature of their regional dialects,

speakers differ in the strength of their accent. That is, variation in strength of accent exists both within

and between regional dialects. The measures of accent in our data, to which we turn, were designed to

capture differences in strength of accent.




                                                     5
3     Data

3.1    The German Socioeconomic Panel

Our data on workers' speech and wages come from the German Socio-Economic Panel Innovation

Sample, an offshoot of the long-running Socio-Economic Panel (SOEP, Wagner et al., 2007). The

SOEP began in 1983 with a representative sample of German households. Like the American Panel

Study of Income Dynamics after which it is modeled, it has followed those families on an annual

basis, as well as families that split off from the original sample households. The base sample has been

refreshed several times.

    Like the SOEP, the SOEP Innovation Sample (SOEP-IS) was designed to be representative of

the German population aged 17 years and older. Our SOEP-IS respondents were interviewed for the

first time in 2016 as part of a special data collection effort for the Collaborative Research Center 190

(CRC-190) that was funded by the German Science Foundation. The overall sample includes 1,556

individuals residing in 1,057 households.

    Of the original 1,556 respondents, 1,298 had no missing data on the covariates in our model (among

those with missing data, the most frequently missing variable was place of residence at age 10). Of

these, 634 were employed and provided valid wage data. We further excluded 52 workers who were

self-employed. Of the 1,298 with valid covariate data, 890 were reinterviewed in 2017, yielding an

additional 368 valid wage observations among non-self-employed workers. Thus our wage regressions

include a total of 950 person-year observations. Below we show that the presence of wage data is not

related to having a regional accent.

    Interviews were carried out in person. The questionnaires included the standard SOEP questions

on employment, earnings, wages, and schooling. In addition to the standard questions, the 2016 SOEP-

IS included several modules designed by the research teams collaborating in the CRC. One module

included a set of cognitive tests, which one might expect to be correlated with wages. Another asked

respondents whether they spoke English. Another module collected information about the respondent's

regional accent, while a final module asked about the accents of the respondent's grade school class-

mates. We now discuss these data in more detail.

                                                   6
3.2      Measuring respondents' regional accents

Early in the 2016 interview, we elicited the interviewer's assessment of the respondent's accent on a

five-point scale. The specific question and response options were:

    How would you assess the respondent's speech during the interview?

       No regional accent (like a news anchor in the Tagesschau)4
       Weak regional accent
       Medium regional accent
       Rather strong regional accent
       Very strong regional accent

    Interviewers were instructed to not confuse regional accents with foreign accents of migrants.

    One might be concerned that interviewers would use different standards in assessing the strength

of respondents' accents. In Section 4.3, we present results from a specification that allows for this pos-

sibility. Furthermore, Purschke (2008) has shown that listeners with no special training in linguistics,

like our field interviewers, assess strength of accent in a manner that correlates highly with objective

measures of accent strength.

    Table 1 shows the distribution of accents among those respondents with valid wages. Forty-two

percent were reported to have no regional accent, whereas 45 percent had a weak regional accent. Thir-

teen percent were reported to have a medium or stronger regional accent. The table also shows that

wages differ sharply between those with a weak accent or less and those with a medium or stronger ac-

cent. For this reason, we dichotomize this measure for the rest of our analysis. We refer to respondents

with medium or stronger accents as having a regionally distinctive accent, or simply a regional accent.

We refer to other respondents as mainstream speakers.

    Figure 2 shows the geographic distribution of regionally distinctive speakers by Regierungsbezirk,

an administrative unit that is larger than a county (Landkreis) but generally smaller than a state (Bundesland ).

A disproportionate number reside in the south, an area known for its distinctive dialects. At the same

time, a sizeable number of such speakers comes from the center and to some extent from the north of

the country. They are also divided between east and west. This illustrates an important point, which
   4A   widely viewed national news program.


                                                     7
we alluded to above: workers from many regions can speak with regional accents. Having a regional

accent does not mean that the speaker comes from any particular region. This fact should limit any

correlation between regional unobservables and regional differences in wages, since regions with many

distinctive speakers include both high-income areas (such as Bavaria, in the south) and low-income

areas (such as Saxony, in the east).

      An interesting question is whether workers with regionally distinctive accents speak in the manner

typical of the region in which they reside, or whether they are singled out as regionally distinctive

because they speak in a manner typical of a different region, from which they have moved to their

current residence. Our data show that roughly 20 percent of the sample moved between states between

the age of 10 and the time of our survey. However, moving is not correlated with having a distinctive

regional accent, suggesting that most of our speakers with distinctive accents speak with the accent of

their home region. We exclude movers from some of the regressions below.

      Table 2 tabulates wages and various worker characteristics by accent. Speakers with distinctive

accents have lower wages, are less likely to speak any English, have lower levels of schooling, are

disproportionately male, and have more labor market experience. Their mothers generally have lower

levels of education and they lived in somewhat smaller and less densely populated communities at age

10.

      The final rows tabulate the skill measures that were collected specifically as part of the 2016 SOEP-

IS. One measure comes from a math test; the other comes from a test of basic financial knowledge. Per-

formance on the math test is largely independent of accent, although speakers with distinctive accents

fare worse on the test of financial knowledge.

      With so many differences in observable characteristics, one might be concerned that unobservable

characteristics differ by accent as well. If those differences also influence wages, OLS estimates of

the effect of distinctive accents on wages will be biased. To deal with this problem, we construct

instruments based on speech patterns of elementary schoolmates as reported by respondents in the

vicinity.




                                                     8
3.3    Measuring respondents' childhood dialect environment

As discussed above, the linguistics literature has found that native accent acquisition occurs during

childhood and that children generally acquire their accents from their linguistic peers. Our instrument

is motivated by this finding. Reckoning that respondents' schoolmates made up an important share of

their linguistic peers during childhood, we asked them the following question:

    Think back to when you were in elementary school. How would you rate the speech of the majority

of your classmates?

   1. No regional accent (like a news anchor in the Tagesschau)
   2. Weak regional accent
   3. Medium regional accent
   4. Rather strong regional accent
   5. Very strong regional accent

    As with the variable capturing the respondent's own accent, we first dichotomize the responses

to this question, coding medium and stronger accents as strong and the others as mainstream. We

then form a spatial leave-out average over all respondents whose municipality of residence at age 10

was in the vicinity of the municipality in which the target respondent lived at age 10. We exclude

the target respondent and any of her household members in the construction of this mean. We vary

the definition of vicinity to variously include municipalities within a 30- to 60-kilometer radius of

the target respondent's municipality. We also experiment with weighting, using various kernels (e.g.,

triangular, Epanechnikov) that put greater weight on nearer neighbors. Finally, we require at least two

other respondents within each vicinity.

    Table 3 reports a correlation matrix for the respondent's own regional accent; that of her school-

mates, based on her own report; and that of her schoolmates, based on the spatial leave-out mean over

other respondents in her vicinity. Here we define vicinity as being within a 40-kilometer radius and

show results for both triangular and Epanechnikov kernels.

    The table makes several points. The first column shows that all of the schoolmates' accent measures

are similarly correlated with the respondent's own accent. The second column shows that the spatial

average measures of schoolmates' accents are highly correlated with the respondent's own report of

                                                  9
her schoolmates' accents. Finally, the third column shows that the spatial average measures are highly

correlated with each other. Below we show that they also yield similar estimates of the effect of a

regional accent on wages.

    To compute the instrumental variables estimates reported below, we make use of the spatial aver-

ages, rather than the respondent's own report of her classmates' regional accent. We do this for two

reasons, one that involves the potential for sorting into schools and one that involves the potential for

recall bias. By choosing a particular school, parents might be able to influence the composition of their

children's peer-group. Thus, at the very local level, one might be concerned that parental choices could

affect the composition of classmates and thus the classmates' accents. Such sorting into schools would

potentially lead to a violation of the exogeneity assumption. Using the spatial average over a larger

geographic area largely eliminates this concern, since sending a child to a school more than 30 to 60

km away would involve almost prohibitively large costs and is very uncommon in Germany.

    Recall bias could distort repondents' retrospective assessment of the accents of their classmates.

Consider two identical respondents who went to the same school. After graduating, suppose that the

first experiences a positive career shock. As a result, she earns more and enters jobs and social envi-

ronments where people speak with less of an accent. A negative career shock hits the other one, she

earns less, and people in her job and social environment speak with a stronger accent. At the time of

our interview, both respondents might benchmark the accent of their elementary school peers against

their current peers' accents. The first respondent might then assess the accent of her classmates as

stronger than the second respondent. Such recall bias would induce a positive correlation between the

respondent's own report of her classmates' accent and the outcome variable. This would violate the

exclusion restriction and lead to an IV estimate that is biased toward zero (since we expect a distinct

accent to reduce wages). The spatial average measure does not suffer from this problem, since it aver-

ages over the shocks of other individuals. Indeed, exploratory work showed that IV estimates based on

the respondent's own report of her classmates' accents were smaller in absolute value than those based

on our preferred spatial averages.




                                                   10
4     Estimation and Results

4.1       OLS regressions

The first step of our analysis is to estimate the regional accent penalty using regression models that

include varying sets of covariates, including some typically unobserved measures of skill. We report

ordinary least squares estimates of a wage regression that takes the form



                               wi =  Di + Xi  + i                  i = 1, ..., N .                    (1)


    where wi is the worker's log hourly wage; Di is the regional accent indicator, which equals one if

worker i speaks with a distinctive regional accent and equals 0 otherwise; Xi includes a vector of control

variables; and i is a disturbance term. The parameter 1 gives the effect of a regionally distinctive

accent on wages and the vector  contains the coefficients for the control variables. We proceed by

including different sets of controls in different specifications of Xi .

    The first column of Table 4 reports the estimate of  that results from a regression with no controls

at all. It gives the mean difference in log wages between workers with and without a distinctive regional

accent. The estimate (standard error) is -0.238 (0.061), a sizeable gap.

    The key question is, how much of that gap is due to the distinctive accent, and how much is due

to other traits that are correlated with the distinctive accent? One such set of traits might be language

skills generally. To capture language skills, we add to the regression a dummy variable equal to one

if the worker reports that she can speak English. The coefficient on the English dummy is sizeable

and significant. Adding it to the regression causes the distinct accent coefficient to fall from -0.238 to

-0.200.

    The next column adds a fairly standard set of regressors to the model, including educational attain-

ment dummies, a gender dummy, and experience and its square. The coefficients of these variables all

behave as one might expect. Adding them to the model raises the R-square from 0.04 to 0.24. It also

causes the distinct-accent coefficient to fall to -0.176. The next column adds maternal education dum-

mies to the model. Maternal education is jointly significant, although much of that is due to workers


                                                     11
who report not knowing their mother's education level.

    In column (5) we add scores from the math and financial knowledge tests that were administered in

the 2016 SOEP-IS. These variables clearly capture important dimensions of labor market productivity,

since their coefficients are both positive and significant and the R-square increases from 0.28 to 0.32.

Yet adding them to the model has little effect on the distinct-accent coefficient, if anything raising it

slightly (in absolute value).

    The last column of Table 4 adds geographic controls to the model. These include the population

size and density of the municipality in which the respondent lived at age 10, on the grounds that regional

accents may be more prevalent in rural areas. They also include a dummy for whether the respondent

lived in the former East Germany at age 10, as a rough control for differences in economic and political

systems. The East Germany coefficient is negative and significant, but adding these regressors has little

effect on the regional-accent coefficient. At the same time, the English coefficient has fallen from 0.267

(0.081) in column (2) to 0.077 (0.078) in column (6), which includes the broadest set of controls.

    In Table 5 we present estimates that provide controls for regional variation in unobservables. We

present three within-region estimates of  from equation (1), defining regions variously in terms of

states, Regierungsbezirke, and counties of residence at age 10.5 We estimate these models by adding

the relevant set of region dummies to the model reported in column (6) of Table 4. The region dummies

should largely eliminate variation in the nature of regional dialects, so that the resulting estimates are

identified only from within-region variation in the intensity of workers' accents.

    All three estimates are quite similar, whether we control at the level of the state or at the much finer

level of the county. Moreover, these estimates are similar to those reported in Table 4. This suggests

that there is little correlation between regional accents and unobserved regional characteristics that

influence worker productivity. This is consistent with the observation above that regional accents are

widely distributed across different regions of the country.

    Before proceeding, one important point from Tables 4 and 5 merits highlighting. Namely, the

coefficients on the distinct-accent dummy are quite stable across different sets of controls, including
   5 Our  data also include current state of residence, but not current Regierungsbezirk or county. When we
substitute state of current residence for state of residence at age 10, we obtain similar estimates.



                                                    12
those which have considerable explanatory power for wages. Excepting the raw mean difference in the

log wage, reported in column (1), the estimates range from -0.176 to -0.228.

    With some additional assumptions, we can use the estimates in Tables 4 and 5 to gauge not only

the importance of the observables, but also of the unobservables, as potential sources of bias to our

estimated regional accent coefficient. Altonji et al. (2005) and Oster (2019) provide conditions under

which one can bound the omitted variable bias stemming from unobservables on the basis of how much

the coefficient of interest changes when one adds additional observable regressors to the model. Oster

(2019) provides a bias adjustment that yields a consistent estimator under three conditions. These are:

(i) the ratios of the coefficients on the variables in Xi in equation (1) are equal to the ratios of the

coeffcients on the variables in Xi in a regression of Di on Xi ; (ii) selection on observables is equal to

selection on observables; and (iii) the maximum R-squared, denoted R2                          2
                                                                    max , is known, where the Rmax is

the R-squared that would result if one could control for all observables and unobservables.

    Of course, a limitation of this approach is that the first two assumptions are untestable and the third

is unlikely to hold. Nonetheless, under certain conditions, the bias adjustment below may provide a

useful, if rough, gauge of the extent to which the estimates in Tables 4 and 5 may be biased due to

omitted variables. Although Oster (2019) notes that condition (i) is guaranteed only in the case of

a single unobserved regressor, she argues that limited departures from this condition may leave her

bias adjustment procedure approximately valid. Altonji et al. (2005) argue that assumption (ii) may

be justified if researchers seek to measure and control for the most important variables, that is, the

variables that could cause the greatest bias. If so, then selection on observables may actually be more

important than selection on unobservables. Finally, replacing the unknown R2
                                                                           max with its upper bound

over-adjusts for bias.

    A consistent, bias-adjusted estimate of  in equation (1), under the assumptions above, is given by


                                                         R2
                                                          max - R
                                                                  2
                                      = ^ - [^c -^ ][               ]                                  (2)
                                                          R2 - R2
                                                                c

    where ^ is the estimate from a regression that includes all observable regressors; ^ c is the estimate

from a constrained regression that includes only a subset of the observables; and R2 and R2
                                                                                          c are the




                                                   13
R-squared statistics from the corresponding regressions.

    We first limit attention to Table 4, taking ^ c from column (1) and ^ from column (6). Since R2
                                                                                                  max

is unknown, we set it equal to one. Assuming that there is measurement error in log wages, so that

R2                                                                                             2
 max < 1 results in an estimate that is closer to zero than the estimate based on the unknown Rmax . The

resulting bias-adjusted estimate is   = -0.108. If instead we take ^ from column (3) of Table 5, which

includes county-level region controls, we get   = -0.173. Either way, if the underlying assumptions

were valid, these estimates would indicate that the true regional accent penalty was negative and sizable.

    For sake of comparison, we perform a similar calculation using the English coefficient, which

changes a great deal as additional regressors are added to the model. We compare the estimates in

columns (2) and (6) of Table 4. This yields a bias-adjusted estimate of the effect of speaking English

of -0.365. In contrast to the effect of a regional accent, the apparent effect of speaking English is so

affected by the observable regressors that OLS may actually get its sign wrong.



4.2    IV estimates

The above calculations suggest that unobservable characteristics of workers may not bias the estimated

regional-accent coefficient by a great deal. At the same time, those calculations are based on a set

of largely untestable and somewhat unfamiliar assumptions. In this section, we present instrumental

variables estimates, which are based on different and more familiar assumptions.

    As discussed above, our instrument is a weighted spatial average, taken over all other respondents

within the target respondent's vicinity, of the share of elementary school classmates who spoke with

a distinctive regional accent. Here we present results based on a vicinity defined in terms of a 40-

kilometer radius around the target respondent. We show results from two weighting schemes, one

that employs a triangular and one that employs an Epanechnikov kernel. These yielded the highest

first-stage F statistics among all the models we evaluated, as we discuss further below.

    Table 6 presents the results of first stage regressions that take the form


                             Di = 1 Zi + Xi 2 + vi               i = 1, ..., N .                      (3)



                                                     14
where Zi is one of the instruments and Xi now includes all the variables included in column (6) of

Table 4. Results in column (1) are based on the triangular kernel and those in column (2) are based on

the Epanechnikov kernel.6 The coefficients on the instruments are similar in the two regressions, and

besides the instruments, the most significant predictors of a regional accent are education and the math

score.

    Table 7 presents 2SLS estimates of the effect of a regional accent on log wages. Results in col-

umn (2) are based on the instrument constructed using the triangular kernel and those in column (3)

are based on the instrument that uses the the Epanechnikov kernel. Column (1) presents OLS results

based on the same sample for purposes of comparison. At the bottom of the Table we report effective

F statistics, which provide a measure of the strength of the first stage in the presence of dependent

observations (Montiel Olea and Pflueger, 2013). Both statistics exceed their 10 percent critical values

by a considerable magnitude.

    The IV estimates are both sizable and negative. They are also similar to each other and to the OLS

estimate. At the same time, they are about the same magnitude as their standard errors.

    In an attempt to increase precision, we also computed 2SLS estimates based on a logit first stage.

In this approach, we estimate equation (3) via a logit model, then use the predicted values from that

logit regression as the instrument for Di in equation (1). Wooldridge (2002, ch. 16) suggests that this

estimator should be more efficient than the 2SLS estimator based on the linear first stage, since the logit

model provides a better approximation to E (Di = 1|Zi , Xi ) than its linear counterpart.7 The coefficients

from the logit first stage appear in columns (3) and (4) of Table 6.

    Second-stage estimates based on the logit first stage are presented in columns (4) and (5) of Table 7.

Again, the regional accent coefficients are similar to the OLS coefficient. However, their standard errors

are much smaller. The t-statistic for the estimate based on the triangular kernel is -1.74; for the estimate

based on the Epanechnikov kernel, it is -1.62.
   6 The sample sizes here are a bit smaller than those above due to the restriction that there be at least two other

respondents in the target respondent's vicinity in order to compute the instrument.
   7 A probit first stage yielded similar estimates.




                                                        15
4.3     Robustness checks

Since our instruments are spatial leave-out means, they should be uncorrelated with worker-specific

unobservables by construction. One might nevertheless be concerned that they fail the exclusion re-

striction. We have shown that the worker's neighbors' accents predict the worker's accent, and that the

worker's accent predicts low wages. It stands to reason that the worker's neighbors have also have low

wages, and thus that their accents reflect other characteristics that could explain the worker's low wage.

    Fortunately, this hypothesis is testable. We include in the second-stage regression the mean of the

neighbors' log hourly wage, weighted with by the same kernel as we used to construct the instrumental

variable. If this variable were significant, that would constitute evidence that our instrument failed the

exclusion restriction. Columns (1) and (3) of Table 8 present results for both the linear and the logit

first-stages. The neighbors' mean wage is insignificant in both cases. The regional accent coefficient

remains almost unchanged compared to the baseline based on the linear first-stage. The coefficient

based on the logit first-stage becomes somewhat smaller in magnitude and identical to the OLS results.

    Columns (2) and (4) repeat the exercise, substituting for the neighbors' mean wage the log of

GDP/capita in the county in which the worker lived at age 10. This is a different measure of income

than wages, but may involve less measurement error. Results from these regressions are very similar

to those based on the neighbors' wage. None of these regressions yields evidence that the exclusion

restriction is violated.

    Above we noted that we experimented with a number of different definitions of vicinities and dif-

ferent kernels in computing our instrumental variables estimates. We also experimented with different

sets of regressors. Figure 3 provides a scatterplot of the first-stage effective F from each model against

the resulting estimated regional-accent penalty. The figure plots results from 96 different models. These

vary according to the radius used to define the vicinity over which the leave-out mean was calculated

(30, 40, 50, or 60 kilometers), the kernel used for weighting (triangular, Epanechnikov, or isentropic),

the functional form of the first stage (linear v. logistic), and the regressor sets corresponding to those

that appear in columns (3)-(6) of Table 4. The scatters for the linear (in red) and logit (in blue) first

stages are somewhat different, but both exhibit an inverted U-shape. Nearly all the estimates are nega-



                                                   16
tive. The estimates presented in Table 7, marked with X's, are those that yielded the highest effective F

statistics within the linear and logit classes.

    Table 9 presents some additional regressions to further check for sources of omitted variable bias.

Since the OLS and IV estimates are so similar, and the OLS estimates are much more precise, we

estimate these additional regressions by OLS using our baseline specification, the model in column (6)

of Table 4.

    In the first column, we add a variable that captures the worker's overconfidence with respect to

mathematical abilities and another that measures attitudes toward risk. These were collected in one

of the other experimental modules that were fielded by the SOEP-IS. In the second column, we add

the first principal component from a set of experimental variables designed to measure the importance

of factors such as personal relationships and professional as well as personal accomplishment in the

worker's life. Neither of these sets of variables has much effect on the distinct-accent coefficient.

    In the third column, we add to our baseline specification a set of field-interviewer dummies. The

distinct-accent coefficient rises slightly, suggesting that, if anything, variation in interviewer assess-

ments of accents causes the regional-accent penalty to be slightly understated. Column (4) reports

results from a regression that contains all three sets of variables. The distinct-accent coefficient re-

mains essentially the same.

    In the fifth column we drop workers whose current state of residence is different from their state of

residence at age 10. This raises the coefficient somewhat. At the same time, it shows that movers are

not driving the estimated wage penalty.

    In the sixth column, we add to our baseline specification interactions between the distinct-accent

and age-group dummies. This regression is designed to shed light on a reverse-causation hypothesis.

Although the sociolinguistic and neuroscientific evidence suggests that it is difficult to change one's

accent after childhood, some individuals may nevertheless be able to do so, particularly in response to

labor market incentives. If so, and if the cost of losing one's accent were positively correlated with the

gain from doing so, then we would expect the distinct-accent penalty to be larger among older workers

than among younger workers. The reason is that older workers would have faced incentives to change

their accent for a longer time and have had a longer time to do so. The interaction terms in column (5)


                                                   17
are not significant, but if anything, they suggest that older workers face a lower penalty rather than a

higher one. Of course, this could reflect negative correlation between the costs and benefits of losing

one's accent, but positive correlation seems more natural if we think of the costs and gains as being

greater for those with the stronger accents.

    In the seventh column, we add to our baseline specification an interaction between the distinct-

accent dummy and a dummy for having lived in one of the Southern states at the age of 10. The

Southern states have the highest share of speakers with distinct accent. The interaction term is positive,

hinting at a lower penalty for Southern dialects. However, the interaction is far from statistical signif-

icance and the implied penalty for Southern dialects is sizable as well. This suggests that the effect is

not driven by the accent of Southern speakers.

    In the eighth column, we add an interaction between the distinct-accent dummy and the level of

education to our baseline specification. These results suggest that the penalty is smallest for individuals

with low education and larger for groups with higher levels of education. Since the number of speakers

with distinct-accents within each group is rather small, standard errors are large. Overall, these results

show a penalty for all education groups but indicate that the penalty may be higher for more-educated

workers.

    Finally, Table 10 presents results from regressions that address the question of whether the presence

of valid wage data, or employment status more generally, is related to the worker's accent. If so, then

the wage regressions above could be subject to the usual sort of sample selection bias stemming from

the unobservability of wages among non-workers. In column (1), the dependent variable equals one if

the worker met our sample inclusion criteria and equals zero otherwise. In column (2), the dependent

variable equals one if the wage data is observed and equals zero otherwise. Both coefficients are small

and insignificant.



5     Can we explain the distinct-accent penalty?
Above we noted several models that could potentially explain a distinct-accent penalty. They included

employer discrimination; occupational sorting, stemming either from consumer/coworker discrimina-


                                                    18
tion or task-trading; or omitted variable bias more generally. Here we attempt to distinguish between

these alternative explanations.

    Most of the evidence points against omitted variable bias. The OLS estimates are quite robust

to the inclusion of a number of factors that are significant predictors of wages, including both worker-

specific productivity measures and and various levels of regional controls. The bias-adjustment exercise

proposed by Oster (2019) suggests that the remaining selection on unobservables may not be too great.

Our IV estimates are similar to the OLS estimates, further suggesting that our estimates reflect the

effect of a regional dialect, rather than some omitted variable.

    The two different models of discrimination predict different patterns of worker sorting and differen-

tial wage penalties across occupations (Hamermesh and Biddle, 1994). Models of consumer/co-worker

discrimination generate occupational sorting. In these models, the employer has to charge consumers

a lower price, or pay coworkers a higher wage, to induce them to interact with an employee against

whom they are prejudiced. The result is a lower wage for workers with a stigmatized trait, such as a re-

gional accent. To minimize their wage penalty, workers with the stigmatized trait sort into occupations

involving little contact with consumers or coworkers. Deming's (2017) task-trading model also leads

to occupational sorting: a worker with a trait that makes her less effective at trading tasks with others

should seek occupations that do not require intensive interpersonal interactions, since she would pre-

sumably suffer a wage penalty in occupations that do. Of course, these models may not be so distinct

in this setting, since consumer or coworker prejudice could be the reason why workers with regional

accents are less effective in interpersonal settings.

    In contrast, in Becker's (1971 [1957]) model of employer discrimination, the wage penalty is set by

the marginally prejudiced employer, that is, the employer who is indifferent about hiring a distinctively

accented worker. This provides an incentive for distinctively accented workers to sort away from more

prejudiced employers, but none to sort into particular occupations. Likewise, there is no reason to

expect that the distinct-accent penalty should vary across occupations.

    To distinguish between these models, we test for sorting and differential wage penalties across

occupations involving different levels of interpersonal interaction. We measure occupational interaction

intensity using the index of face-to-face contact from Firpo et al. (2011), which is constructed from


                                                        19
information on the task-intensity of occupations in the O*NET database. Grogger (2019) provides

details as to how it was constructed.8

    We assign occupations to one of three categories, depending on the tercile of the interaction-

intensity index into which they fall. We use multinomial logit models to measure worker sorting across

the terciles. In these logit models, the dependent variable indicates the tercile of the face-to-face contact

index into which the worker's occupation falls. The variables on the right side of the model include

all the regressors that appear in column (6) of Table 4. In the first column of Table 11, we report the

marginal effect of a regional accent on the probability that a worker's occupation lies in each of the

three terciles. These marginal effects sum to zero by construction.

    To test for occupational differences in the distinct-accent penalty, we estimate wage equations that

include all the variables in column (6) of Table 4 plus interactions between the distinct-accent dummy

and the middle- and low-tercile dummies. In these models, the main effect gives the regional-accent

penalty in occupations within the top tercile of interaction intensity as measured by the face-to-face

contact index. We report that main effect in the first row of column (2) in Table 11, labeled "high-

intensity." The rows labeled medium- and low-intensity report coefficients on the interactions between

the regional-accent dummy and the corresponding tercile dummies. We estimate the wage equations

by OLS, since the OLS estimates above were similar to the IV estimates but more precise.

    The sorting coefficients in column (1) show that workers with a regional accent sort away from

occupations in the top third of the interaction-intensity distribution and towards occupations in the bot-

tom third. These coefficients are both substantial and statistically significant. The joint test, labeled

"Sorting (p-value)," is significant as well. The second column shows that the regional accent penalty is

sizable and negative for workers in the most interaction-intensive occupations. It is smaller for workers

in less interaction-intensive occupations, since the corresponding coefficients are positive. The wage

penalty in the most interaction-intensive occupations is significantly negative, although the differences

between the wage penalties in that and the other occupations are neither individually nor jointly sig-

nificant. This pattern is a least partially consistent with the predictions from the consumer/co-worker

discrimination model and task-trading model discussed above. It does not tell us which of those models
   8 We   also considered Deming's (2017) social interactions measure, which yielded similar but weaker results.


                                                       20
generated the data, but the pattern is clearly inconsistent with the model of employer discrimination.

    The remaining columns of Table 11 show results from several placebo regressions. There we

estimate sorting logits and sector-specific wage penalties, but we define occupational sectors in terms

of tasks that are unrelated to interaction intensity. For example, we would not expect a regional accent

to be particularly penalized in occupations that involve a high degree of non-routine analytical tasks.

Likewise, we would not expect for workers with a regional accent to sort either into or away from such

occupations. If the estimates showed otherwise, that would call our results in columns (1) and (2) into

question.9

    The remaining odd-numbered columns of the table show no evidence of sorting by distinctively

accented workers into occupations based on the intensity of those occupations in non-routine analytical,

non-routine manual, or routine manual tasks. Likewise, in the even-numbered columns, there are no

significant interactions between distinctive speech and indicators of such task-intensity. Workers with

regional accents sort away from occupations involving high-intensity interpersonal interactions, but

neither toward nor away from occupations involving high-intensity tasks of other types.



6     Conclusions
Distinctive accents are common in many countries around the world. At the same time, people make

sharp judgements about the accents of others, which could result in discrimination. Yet distinguishing

the labor market effect of a distinctive accent from unobserved heterogeneity has been a challenge for

previous work.

    We employed several strategies to estimate the wage penalty of regional accents. First, we con-

trolled for a set of typically unobserved skill measures which are highly predictive of wages. Next, we

included detailed geographic controls. Finally, we utilized an instrumental variable that was motivated

by linguistic research on accent acquisition. All of these approaches yielded similar estimates. They

suggest that workers with distinctive regional accents experience a wage penalty of about 20 percent,
    9 Non-routineanalytical tasks and the other tasks analyzed here are defined in Autor and Handel (2013) and
constructed from the O*NET data.



                                                     21
all else equal.

    A lingering question one might have is, if the wage penalty for a regionally distinctive accent is

so large, then why don't people acquire a standard accent? One could similarly ask why people don't

complete a university education, considering the sizable wage premium earned by those who do? We

suspect that there are similarities in the answers to these two questions.

    Both answers involve costs. In the case of education, some of these costs are financial, in the

form of out-of-pocket expenses and foregone earnings while in college. There are also the costs of

effort involved in studying, which probably interacts with the student's underlying academic skill. The

earnings-maximizing student completes college if the benefits exceed the costs, leaving many without

degrees.

    In the case of accent, the costs are somewhat different. The costs of acquiring an accent is lowest

during childhood and rises thereafter. This means that parents make the key decisions that influence

their children's accents. Considering that children acquire their native accents from their peers, this

means that one's peers at school play a key role in influencing children's accents. If the use of dialect is

prevalent in one's region of residence, that will be reflected in the schools. This observation motivates

our instrument, but it also helps explain why parents don't just provide different environments, since

the cost providing a child with a different environment could entail changing schools or even moving

to a different region. It's easy to see how parents could forego such a costly choice.

    Workers with regional accents sort away from occupations that involve extensive interpersonal

interactions. By doing so, they avoid the large negative wage penalties that are associated with those

occupations, suffering the smaller wage penalties that arise in less interactive lines of work. We cannot

say whether this sorting arises from consumer/coworker discrimination or from a model of task-trading

in which regional speech reduces productivity for reasons other than consumer or coworker prejudice.

    We can say that the occupational sorting we see in Germany is similar to what we observe in the

United States among African American workers with distinctive speech (Grogger, 2019). An abundant

literature in both countries shows that people have strong views about the speech of others. Our results

show that the wage penalty that may stem from these views is quite sizable.




                                                    22
References
A LTONJI , J. G., T. E. E LDER , AND C. R. TABER (2005): "Selection on Observed and Unobserved
   Variables: Assessing the Effectiveness of Catholic Schools," Journal of Political Economy, 113,
   151184.

AUTOR , D. H. AND M. J. H ANDEL (2013): "Putting Tasks to the Test: Human Capital, Job Tasks,
  and Wages," Journal of Labor Economics, 31, S59쵹96.

BAILEY, G. AND J. T ILLERY (1996): "The Persistence of Southern American English," Journal of
  English Linguistics, 24, 308321.

B ECKER , G. S. (1971 [1957]): The Economics of Discrimination, University of Chicago Press.

B IDDLE , J. E. AND D. S. H AMERMESH (1998): "Beauty, Productivity, and Discrimination: Lawyers'
   Looks and Lucre," Journal of Labor Economics, 16, 172201.

B LEILE , K. M., J. S. M CGOWAN , AND J. E. B ERNTHAL (1997): "Professional Judgments about
   the Relationship between Speech and Intelligence in African American Preschoolers," Journal of
   Communication Disorders, 30, 367383.

B ORGHANS , L., A. L. D UCKWORTH , J. J. H ECKMAN , AND B. T ER W EEL (2008): "The Economics
   and Psychology of Personality Traits," Journal of Human Resources, 43, 451474.

C AWLEY, J. (2004): "The Impact of Obesity on Wages," Journal of Human Resources, 39, 9721059.

D EMING , D. J. (2017): "The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market," The Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 132, 15931640.

D OSS , R. C. AND A. M. G ROSS (1992): "The Effects of Black English on Stereotyping in Intraracial
  Perceptions," Journal of Black Psychology, 18, 4758.

------ (1994): "The Effects of Black English and Code-switching on Intraracial Perceptions," Journal
  of Black Psychology, 20, 282293.

                                                
FALCK , O., S. H EBLICH , A. L AMELI , AND J. S UDEKUM (2012): "Dialects, Cultural Identity, and
  Economic Exchange," Journal of Urban Economics, 72, 225239.

F IRPO , S., N. F ORTIN , AND T. L EMIEUX (2011): "Occupational Tasks and Changes in the Wage
   Structure," Discussion Paper 5542, IZA.

F RIDLAND , V. AND K. BARTLETT (2006): "Correctness, Pleasantness, and Degree of Difference
   Ratings across Regions," American Speech, 81, 358386.

  
G ARTIG , A.-K., A. P LEWNIA , AND A. ROTHE (2010): Wie Menschen in Deutschland u    ber Sprache
  denken. Ergebnisse einer bundesweiten Repr asentativerhebung zu aktuellen Spracheinstellungen,
  Mannheim: amades- Institut f쮞r Deutsche Sprache.

G RANENA , G. AND M. L ONG (2013): Sensitive Periods, Language Aptitude, and Iltimate L2 Attain-
  ment, John Benjamins Publishing.


                                                23
G ROGGER , J. (2011): "Speech Patterns and Racial Wage Inequality," Journal of Human Resources,
   46, 125.

------ (2019): "Speech and Wages," Journal of Human Resources, 54, 926952.

H AMERMESH , D. S. AND J. E. B IDDLE (1994): "Beauty and the Labor Market," American Economic
  Review, 84, 11741194.

H ARTLEY, L. C. (1999): "A View from the West: Perceptions of US Dialects by Oregon Residents,"
  Handbook of Perceptual Dialectology, 1, 315332.

H EBLICH , S., A. L AMELI , AND G. R IENER (2015): "The Effect of Perceived Regional Accents on
   Individual Economic Behavior: A Lab Experiment on Linguistic Performance, Cognitive Ratings
   and Economic Decisions," PloS one, 10, e0113475.

H YLTENSTAM , K. AND N. A BRAHAMSSON (2008): "Maturational Constraints in SLA," in The Hand-
  book of Second Language Acquisition, Wiley-Blackwell, 538588.

J OHNSON , J. S. AND E. L. N EWPORT (1989): "Critical Period Effects in Second Language Learning:
   The Influence of Maturational State on the Acquisition of English as a Second Language," Cognitive
   Psychology, 21, 6099.

K INZLER , K. D. AND J. M. D E J ESUS (2013): "Northern = smart and Southern = nice: The Develop-
   ment of Accent Attitudes in the United States," The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology,
   66, 11461158.

KOCH , L. M., A. M. G ROSS , AND R. KOLTS (2001): "Attitudes toward Black English and Code
 Switching," Journal of Black Psychology, 27, 2942.

L ABOV, W. (1972): Language in the Inner City: Studies in the Black English Vernacular, University
   of Pennsylvania Press.

L AMELI , A. (2008): "Deutsche Sprachlandschaften," Nationalatlas aktuell, 9.

M ASSEY, D. S. AND G. L UNDY (2001): "Use of Black English and Racial Discrimination in Urban
  Housing Markets: New Methods and Findings," Urban Affairs Review, 36, 452469.

M ONTIEL O LEA , J. AND C. P FLUEGER (2013): "A Robust Test for Weak Instruments," Journal of
  Business and Economic Statistics, 31, 358369.

O STER , E. (2019): "Unobservable selection and Coefficient Stability: Theory and Evidence," Journal
   of Business and Economic Statistics, 37, 187204.

P ERSICO , N., A. P OSTLEWAITE , AND D. S ILVERMAN (2004): "The Effect of Adolescent Experience
   on Labor Market Outcomes: The Case of Height," Journal of Political Economy, 112, 10191053.

P RESTON , D. R. (1996): "Where the Worst English is Spoken," in Focus on the USA, ed. by E. Schnei-
   der, Amsterdam: Benjamins, 297360.

------ (1999): "A Language Attitude Analysis of Regional US Speech: Is Northern US English Not
  Friendly Enough?" Cuadernos de Filologia Inglesa, 8, 129146.

                                                 24
P URNELL , T., W. I DSARDI , AND J. BAUGH (1999): "Perceptual and Phonetic Experiments on Amer-
   ican English Dialect Identification," Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 18, 1030.

P URSCHKE , C. (2008): "Regionalsprachlichkeit im Hoererurteil," in Sprechen, Schreiben, Hoeren 
   Zur Produktion und Perzeption von Dialekt und Standardsprache zu Beginn des 21. Jahrhunderts,
   ed. by H. Christen and E. Ziegler, Vienna: Edition Praesens, 183202.

R ICKFORD , J. R., G. J. D UNCAN , L. A. G ENNETIAN , R. Y. G OU , R. G REENE , L. F. K ATZ , R. C.
   K ESSLER , J. R. K LING , L. S ANBONMATSU , A. E. S ANCHEZ -O RDONEZ , ET AL . (2015): "Neigh-
   borhood Effects on Use of African-American Vernacular English," Proceedings of the National
   Academy of Sciences, 112, 1181711822.

RODRIGUEZ , J., A. C ARGILE , AND M. R ICH (2004): "Reactions to African-American Vernacular
  English: Do More Phonological Features Matter?" The Western Journal of Black Studies, 28, 407
  414.

     S , J. AND N. W OLF (2018): "Regional Economic Development in Europe, 1900-2010: A De-
ROS E
  scription of the Patterns," Tech. Rep. 12749, CEPR Discussion Papers.

S IEGEL , J. (2010): Second Dialect Acquisition, Cambridge University Press.

T UCKER , G. R. AND W. E. L AMBERT (1969): "White and Negro Listeners' Reactions to Various
   American-English Dialects," Social Forces, 47, 463468.

VAN O URS , J. C. AND Y. YAO (2016): "The Wage Penalty of Dialect-Speaking," Tinbergen Institute
  Discussion Paper Series, 16-091/V.

WAGNER , G. G., J. R. F RICK , AND J. S CHUPP (2007): "The German Socio-Economic Panel Study
 (SOEP)  Scope, Evolution and Enhancements," Schmollers Jahrbuch, 127, 161191.

YAO , Y. AND J. C. VAN O URS (2018): "Daily Dialect-speaking and Wages among Native Dutch
  Speakers," Empirica, In press.




                                                 25
Tables and figures

                     Figure 1: Dialect areas in Germany




                            Source: Lameli (2008)




                                     26
Figure 2: Geographic distribution of speakers with distinctive regional accents
              Share with regional accent
              (0.49,0.56]
              (0.42,0.49]
              (0.35,0.42]
              (0.28,0.35]
              (0.21,0.28]
              (0.14,0.21]
              (0.07,0.14]
              [0.00,0.07]




      Notes: The figure depicts the share of workers with distinctive regional accents.




                                            27
                              Figure 3: IV estimates with different specifications
                   60




                                                                                           Linear FS
                                                                                           Logit FS
                                                                                           Main estimates
                   50
         Effective F
                   40
                   30




                        -.4         -.3            -.2               -.1               0                    .1
                                                 Effect of regional accent


Notes: The figure depicts second stage coefficients (x-axis) and effective F-statistics (y-axis) from various speci-
fictions. Each dot is the result of one specification. Specifications vary by covariates chosen (covariates from
column 3, 4, 5, 6 of Table 4; by radius that defines the vicinity (30, 40, 50, 60 km); by kernel for the weighting
function (triangular, Epanechnikov, uniform); and linear or logit first stage. Total number of specifications is 96.
The ones marked with X are the main specifications presented in Table 7.




                                                        28
Table 1: Distribution of interviewer assessment of regional accent and mean
hourly wage

                                  Observations       Share (%)      Hourly wage (Euro)
 No regional accent                   402              42.3                17.8
 Low regional accent                  424              44.6                17.4
 Medium regional accent               114               12                 13.8
 Strong regional accent                10              1.05                15.5
 Total                                950              100                 17.1
Notes: The table shows the distribution of interviewer assessments and mean hourly wage. One
individual with very strong regional accent has been added to the fourth category. In subsequent
tables, no and low regional accent as well as medium and strong regional accent are grouped
together into binary categories.



Table 2: Means and standard deviations of respondent characteristics, by dis-
tinct regional accent

                                             No regional accent        Regional accent
                                             mean           sd         mean           sd
  Hourly wage (Euro)               17.62                   8.85        13.94    8.56
  Speaks English at all             0.95                  0.22           0.81  0.40
  Lower Secondary Ed.               0.17                  0.37           0.41  0.49
  Secondary Ed.                     0.34                  0.47           0.45  0.50
  Higher Ed.                        0.37                  0.48           0.10  0.30
  University                        0.12                  0.33           0.04  0.20
  Male                              0.50                  0.50           0.53  0.50
  Experience (years)               23.89                  13.00         32.39  11.11
  Mother Lower Sec. Ed.             0.52                   0.50          0.71  0.46
  Mother Sec. Ed.                   0.22                   0.41          0.16  0.37
  Mother post-sec., university      0.14                  0.35           0.02  0.15
  Mother's Ed. Unknown              0.12                   0.33          0.10   0.31
  Mun. pop. at age 10 (in 1000s)  296.54                 738.16        280.82 784.95
  Mun. pop. density at age 10     927.72                 1049.61       884.68 1076.89
  Lived in East Germany at age 10   0.21                  0.41           0.24   0.43
  Math score                       -0.01                   1.02          0.06   0.88
  Financial knowledge               0.03                   0.97         -0.23   1.14
  Math score missing                0.02                   0.15          0.04   0.20
  Observations                                826                       124
Notes: No regional accent refers to workers with no or weak regional accent. Regional accent
refers to workers with medium or stronger regional accent.




                                              29
   Table 3: Correlation between respondent's and childhood schoolmates' regional accents

                                                                                 Spatial leave-out mean
                                              Regional     Schoolmates       Schoolmates        Schoolmates
                                               accent      with distinct      w/ accent           w/ accent
                                                              accent       (r=40km, k=tri)    (r=40km, k=epa)
 Regional accent                                  1
 Schoolmates with distinct accent               0.323           1
 Schoolmates w/ accent (r=40km, k=tri)          0.323         0.411               1
 Schoolmates w/ accent (r=40km, k=epa)          0.324         0.409             0.996                 1
Notes: First two columns are based on target respondent's report; second two are based on reports of other
respondents within her vicinity. Vicinity is defined as the area within 40km of the target respondent's residence at
age 10. The target respondent and other respondents from the same household are excluded from the calculation.
r=radius, km=kilometers, k=kernel, tri=triangular kernel, epa=Epanechnikov kernel.




                                                         30
                                    Table 4: OLS wage regressions

                                           (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)
  Regional accent                        -0.238     -0.200     -0.176     -0.177     -0.190      -0.194
                                         (0.061)    (0.062)    (0.057)    (0.057)    (0.057)    (0.057)
  Speaks English at all                              0.267      0.236      0.198      0.129      0.077
                                                    (0.081)    (0.081)    (0.078)    (0.074)    (0.078)
  Secondary                                                     0.082      0.072      0.028      0.051
                                                               (0.047)    (0.047)    (0.047)    (0.047)
  Post-secondary                                                0.297      0.263      0.184      0.192
                                                               (0.057)    (0.059)    (0.060)    (0.060)
  University                                                    0.437      0.406      0.294      0.304
                                                               (0.071)    (0.069)    (0.071)    (0.072)
  Male                                                          0.208      0.222      0.157      0.152
                                                               (0.040)    (0.039)    (0.041)    (0.041)
  Experience (years)                                            0.051      0.043      0.044      0.045
                                                               (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.007)    (0.007)
  Exp. squared                                                 -0.001      -0.001     -0.001     -0.001
                                                               (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
  Mother secondary                                                         0.120      0.132      0.154
                                                                          (0.047)    (0.046)    (0.046)
  Mother post-sec., university                                             0.011      0.035      0.073
                                                                          (0.064)    (0.064)    (0.065)
  Mother's ed. unknown                                                     -0.294     -0.263     -0.247
                                                                          (0.080)    (0.077)    (0.077)
  Math score                                                                          0.062      0.064
                                                                                     (0.020)    (0.020)
  Financial knowledge                                                                 0.085      0.083
                                                                                     (0.022)    (0.022)
  Math score missing                                                                  -0.012     -0.003
                                                                                     (0.072)    (0.070)
  Mun. pop. at age 10 (in 1000s)                                                                 0.000
                                                                                                (0.000)
  Mun. pop. density at age 10                                                                    -0.000
                                                                                                (0.000)
  Lived in East Germany at age 10                                                                -0.122
                                                                                                (0.048)
  Observations                             950        950        950        950        950        950
  R-squared                                0.02       0.04       0.24       0.28       0.32       0.33
Notes: Sample restricted to employed workers with valid wage data. Figures in parentheses are standard errors,
clustered by worker.




                                                     31
                 Table 5: Within-region estimates

                           (1)             (2)                  (3)
                         State      Regierungsbezirk         County
  Regional accent       -0.214           -0.228               -0.205
                        (0.059)         (0.064)              (0.081)
  Observations            950             950                  950
  R-squared               0.35            0.37                 0.56
Notes: Figures in parentheses are standard errors, clustered by worker. In
addition to the variables shown, all regressions include all variables from
column (6) of Table 4.




                                   32
                                    Table 6: First-stage estimates

                                                     Linear                            Logit
                                             (1)           (2)                (3)            (4)
                                         Triangular    Epanechnikov       Triangular     Epanechnikov
  Schoolmates w/ accent                     0.363           0.368            3.924              3.939
                                           (0.052)         (0.053)          (0.571)            (0.567)
  Secondary                                -0.073          -0.074           -0.467             -0.495
                                           (0.048)         (0.048)          (0.366)            (0.366)
  Post-secondary                           -0.118          -0.119           -1.214             -1.228
                                           (0.045)         (0.045)          (0.487)            (0.486)
  University                               -0.164          -0.166           -1.533             -1.526
                                           (0.053)         (0.053)          (0.693)            (0.692)
  Male                                      0.005           0.006            0.200              0.200
                                           (0.029)         (0.029)          (0.325)            (0.325)
  Experience (years)                        0.003           0.003            0.096              0.096
                                           (0.004)         (0.004)          (0.050)            (0.050)
  Exp. squared                              0.000           0.000           -0.001             -0.001
                                           (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.001)            (0.001)
  Mother secondary                          0.006           0.007            0.077              0.092
                                           (0.037)         (0.037)          (0.468)            (0.469)
  Mother post-sec., university             -0.076          -0.076           -2.417             -2.406
                                           (0.031)         (0.031)          (1.120)            (1.117)
  Mother's ed. unknown                      0.020           0.021            0.265              0.277
                                           (0.047)         (0.047)          (0.548)            (0.549)
  Math score                                0.031           0.030            0.291              0.278
                                           (0.013)         (0.013)          (0.149)            (0.149)
  Financial knowledge                      -0.022          -0.022           -0.282             -0.278
                                           (0.015)         (0.015)          (0.148)            (0.148)
  Math score missing                       -0.057          -0.058           -0.787             -0.809
                                           (0.085)         (0.085)          (0.675)            (0.671)
  Speaks English at all                    -0.111          -0.110           -0.329             -0.319
                                           (0.077)         (0.077)          (0.480)            (0.481)
  Mun. pop. at age 10 (in 1000s)            0.000           0.000            0.000              0.000
                                           (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)
  Mun. pop. density at age 10               0.000           0.000            0.000              0.000
                                           (0.000)         (0.000)          (0.000)            (0.000)
  Lived in East Germany at age 10          -0.035          -0.036           -0.282             -0.279
                                           (0.039)         (0.039)          (0.422)            (0.422)
  Observations                              915               915             915               915
Notes: Figures in parentheses are standard errors, clustered by worker. The regressions include all variables
from column (6) of Table 4. Instruments are constructed using a radius of 40 km.




                                                      33
                       Table 7: Second-stage estimates

                            OLS           Linear FS              Logit FS
                             (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
                                        Tri        Epa         Tri        Epa
  Regional accent         -0.181      -0.192     -0.178     -0.224       -0.212
                          (0.058)     (0.179)    (0.179)    (0.129)      (0.131)
  Effective F                          47.95      48.06      58.60       57.25
  10% critical value                   23.11      23.11      23.11       23.11
  Observations              915         915        915        915         915
 Notes: Figures in parentheses are standard errors, clustered by worker. The
 regressions include all variables from column (6) of Table 4. Tri=triangular,
 Epa=Epanechnikov. Instruments are constructed using a radius of 40 km.




    Table 8: Second-stage estimates with additional regional controls

                                           Linear FS                 Logit FS
                                          (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)
 Regional accent                       -0.174     -0.178      -0.181      -0.183
                                       (0.183)    (0.179)     (0.126)     (0.129)
 Neighbors' wage                       -0.043                 -0.042
                                       (0.070)                (0.068)
 GDP/capita at age 10 (county)                     0.050                   0.050
                                                  (0.084)                 (0.084)
 Effective F                            48.32      47.94       66.06      58.52
 10% critical value                     23.11      23.11       23.11      23.11
 Observations                            915        914         915        914
Notes: Figures in parentheses are standard errors, clustered by worker. "Neighbors'
wage" is the mean of log hourly wages of other respondents within the radius weighted
with an Epanechnikov kernel. "Real GDP per capita" is the historical log real GDP per
capita of the NUTS-2 region where the respondend lived at the age of 10 years. Data
from Ros es and Wolf (2018). In addition, the regressions include all variables from
column (6) of Table 4. Instruments are constructed using a radius of 40 km and an
Epanechnikov kernel.




                                         34
                                                  Table 9: OLS regressions with additional regressors

                                                 (1)                (2)            (3)       (4)               (5)     (6)     (7)     (8)
                                          Overconfidence,                     Interviewer                   Without
                                                risk            Attitudes         FE's    All three         movers
       Regional accent                        -0.194              -0.188         -0.236    -0.243           -0.308 -0.289 -0.296 -0.115
                                              (0.057)            (0.056)        (0.062)   (0.062)           (0.070) (0.134) (0.078) (0.066)
       Yes  Age 35-50                                                                                               -0.013
                                                                                                                    (0.151)
       Yes  Age>50                                                                                                   0.198
                                                                                                                    (0.159)
       Yes  Southern F.S. age 10                                                                                            0.135
                                                                                                                            (0.106)
       Yes  Secondary                                                                                                               -0.152
                                                                                                                                    (0.109)
       Yes  Post-sec., university                                                                                                   -0.032
35




                                                                                                                                    (0.179)
       Observations                              950               950            950            950          716      950    950     950
       R-squared                                 0.34              0.33           0.54           0.55         0.53    0.32    0.33    0.32
     Notes: Figures in parentheses are standard errors, clustered by worker. All regressions include all variables from column (6) of Table 4. In addition,
     column (1) includes measures for overconfidence and risk preferences, column (2) includes a measure for attitudes, column (3) includes interviewer FE's,
     and column (4) includes all of these.
                      Table 10: Effect of regional accent on being employment

                                                 (1)                      (2)
                                           Employed (0/1)         Wage observed (0/1)
                     Regional accent           0.011                    0.020
                                              (0.031)                  (0.031)
                     Observations              2188                     2188
                     R-squared                  0.30                     0.32
                   Notes: Coefficients from OLS regressions of indicators for observed wage
                   data (column 1) and salaried employement (column 2) on the regional ac-
                   cent dummy and all variables from column (6) of Table 4. The sample is
                   restricted to individuals aged 17 and older with no missings in the covari-
                   ates. Figures in parentheses are standard errors, clustered by worker.



                    Table 11: Sorting and wage penalties by occupational characteristics

                          Face-to-face contact    Non-routine analytical    Non-routine manual       Routine manual
                             (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)
                          Sorting      Wage       Sorting       Wage        Sorting      Wage       Sorting     Wage
  High intensity           -0.147      -0.243      -0.071       -0.147       -0.055      -0.180      -0.011     -0.165
                          (0.067)     (0.066)     (0.056)      (0.120)      (0.046)     (0.085)     (0.046)    (0.079)
  Medium intensity         0.034       0.100       -0.018       -0.093       0.027       -0.090      -0.023      0.030
                          (0.058)     (0.109)     (0.058)      (0.151)      (0.060)     (0.108)     (0.058)    (0.115)
  Low intensity            0.113       0.074       0.089        0.019        0.028       0.081       0.034      -0.150
                          (0.051)     (0.102)     (0.051)      (0.130)      (0.057)     (0.137)     (0.058)    (0.134)
  Observations              923         923         923          923          923         923         923         923
  R-squared                             0.34                     0.37                     0.34                   0.34
  Sorting (p-value)         0.05                    0.19                      0.50                    0.85
  Interaction (p-value)                 0.61                     0.58                     0.40                  0.41
Notes: Coefficients in columns titled "Sorting" are marginal effects of regional accent from a multinomial logit model
that predicts taskt-intensity tercile of a worker's occupation. Coefficients in the first row in columns titled "Wage" is
coefficient of regional accent dummy in a log wage regression. Coefficients in the second and third row are coefficients
on an interaction term between the regional accent dummy and the corresponding occupational task tercile dummies.
Figures in parentheses are standard errors, clustered by worker. In addition to the variables shown, all regressions include
all variables from column (6) of Table 4. "Sorting (p-value)" stems from a joint test of the regional accent dummy in the
multinomial logit model. "Interaction (p-value)" stems from a joint test of the interaction terms in the wage regression.




                                                       36
