                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DO CASH WINDFALLS AFFECT WAGES? EVIDENCE FROM R&D GRANTS
                           TO SMALL FIRMS

                                      Sabrina T. Howell
                                       J. David Brown

                                      Working Paper 26717
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26717


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




We are grateful to seminar participants at UCLA, USC, OSU, Chicago Booth Conference on
Finance and Labor, NYU Stern, Temple, and WFA ECWF. We also thank Tania Babina,
Jonathan Berk, Nick Bloom, Will Gornall, Luigi Guiso, Alex He, David R. Howell, Simon
Jaeger, Xavier Jaravel, Patrick Kline, Ye Li, Adrien Matray, Claudio Michelacci, Holger Mueller,
Paige Ouimet, John Van Reenen, Dimitris Papanikolaou, Thomas Philippon, Fabiano Schivardi,
Rene Stulz, Chad Syverson, and Eric Zwick for helpful comments, and Alix Byrd and Jun Wong
for research assistance. Howell's research on this project was funded by the Kauffman
Foundation. This paper uses data from the U.S. Census Bureau. Any opinions and conclusions
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S.
Census Bureau. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential information is
disclosed. The Disclosure Review Board release numbers are DRB-B0086-CDAR-20180607,
CMS request 7276, CBDRB- FY19-369, CBDRB-FY19-452, and CBDRB-FY2020-CES005-010
for DMS project P-7083300. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sabrina T. Howell and J. David Brown. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Do Cash Windfalls Affect Wages? Evidence from R&D Grants to Small Firms
Sabrina T. Howell and J. David Brown
NBER Working Paper No. 26717
January 2020
JEL No. G32,G35,J31,J41

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper examines how employee earnings at small firms respond to a cash flow shock in the
form of a government R&D grant. We use ranking data on applicant firms, which we link to IRS
W2 earnings and other U.S. Census Bureau datasets. In a regression discontinuity design, we find
that the grant increases average earnings with a rent-sharing elasticity of 0.07 (0.21) at the
employee (firm) level. The beneficiaries are incumbent employees who were present at the firm
before the award. Among incumbent employees, the effect increases with worker tenure. The
grant also leads to higher employment and revenue, but productivity growth cannot fully explain
the immediate effect on earnings. Instead, the data and a grantee survey are consistent with a
backloaded wage contract channel, in which employees of financially constrained firms initially
accept relatively low wages and are paid more when cash is available.


Sabrina T. Howell
NYU Stern School of Business
KMC 9-93
44 West 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
and NBER
showell@stern.nyu.edu

J. David Brown
U.S. Bureau of the Census
4600 Silver Hill Road
Washington, DC 20233
j.david.brown@census.gov
1         Introduction
To what extent do firms share rents with employees? Existing literature has focused on
whether productivity shocks affect wages using proxies for productivity-induced surplus,
such as value-added, profits, sales, and patent grants.1 Firms may also share with workers
rents that are unrelated to labor productivity. Thus far, it has been difficult to disentangle
the effects of productivity growth from pure rent-sharing, as even exogenous productivity
shifts are intertwined with changing marginal products of employment relationships (Card,
Cardoso, Heining & Kline 2018). To examine how firms share rents, the ideal experiment
would randomly assign cash to firms and observe wage effects.
        To approximate this experiment, we evaluate the effects of a government R&D grant
program on employee earnings using a regression discontinuity design that compares grant
awardees with unsuccessful applicants. The grant can be considered a cash flow shock because
there are no restrictions on how it is spent. In the short term, the effect of winning a grant
offers a clean experiment in which firm productivity and growth are fixed, yet there are new
rents to potentially be shared. We find that incumbent workers benefit immediately, but
there are no short- or long-term effects for workers hired after the grant award year.
        The firms in our data are small, private, and high-tech, a type of firm that is crucial to
economic growth.2 It is important to understand how these firms set wages. There is much
evidence that this type of firm faces financial constraints (Kerr & Nanda 2009, Howell 2017),
leading to potential benefit from delaying employee compensation until there is more ability
to pay. Indeed, a backloaded wage contract mechanism best explains the short-term effect
of the grant on wages. Here, the rent sharing represents implicit debt incurred by foregone
earnings that the firm owes the employee (Michelacci & Quadrini 2009, Guiso, Pistaferri &
Schivardi 2013).
        Our data consist of applications between 1995 and 2013 to U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) grants. Private ranking data permit a
regression discontinuity design, which follows Howell (2017). The grant amount is uniform
within a given year, at $150,000 in recent years, or about $22,000 per employee as of the
year before the award. Awardees are not required to use the money as outlined in their
    1
     The rich literature on this subject includes Abowd & Lemieux (1993), Blanchflower, Oswald & Sanfey
(1996), Abowd, Kramarz & Margolis (1999), Bell & Van Reenen (2011), Card, Devicienti & Maida (2014),
Card et al. (2016), Carlsson et al. (2016), Mogstad et al. (2017), Goldschmidt & Schmieder (2017), and
Helpman et al. (2017).
   2
     See Decker, Haltiwanger, Jarmin & Miranda (2014).


                                                  1
applications, nor are their expenditures monitored ex-post. We link applicants to U.S. Census
Bureau data on the firms and their employees, including employee-level IRS W-2 annual
earnings data. Note that the term "earnings" in this paper refers to worker, not firm, earnings.
As these firms appear to primarily employ full-time workers, we sometimes use the term
"wages" instead of "earnings," following convention in the literature.3 A benefit of these data
is that they provide a well-defined and fairly homogenous sample of small, high-tech U.S.
firms. Of course, the specific sample limits the extent to which we can extrapolate our results
to other types of firms. For example, as the application process is quite onerous, applicant
firms may be especially in need of funds.
      We first examine the effects on average earnings and calculate rent-sharing elasticities.
In firm-level regressions, we find that receiving a grant leads to a nine percent immediate
increase in employee earnings. The positive impact of the grant begins in the quarter
following the grant award and endures with statistical significance for at least five years.
At the employee level with employee fixed effects, we find effects of three to four percent.
The employee-level effect is smaller because larger firms naturally experience smaller
effects. The effect is similar using the award amount per employee as of the year before the
award, rather than an indicator for an award. This per-worker estimate is larger for smaller
firms but does not reject the hypothesis that rent sharing has constant elasticity across
firm sizes. The implied rent-sharing elasticity from the firm-level estimate is 0.21, which is
smaller than the seminal estimate in Van Reenen (1996).                    The elasticity from the
employee-level estimate is .07, which is similar to recent estimates with employee-level data,
such as Card, Devicienti & Maida (2014). For the average firm, increased wages account
for the entire grant amount about four (nine) years after the grant using the employee-level
(firm-level) estimate. These results indicate that in the short run, the firms share some of
the rent with workers. The effect does not appear to reflect more hours worked.
      We next examine which employees benefit.           Incumbent employees, hired before the
application year, receive a 16 percent increase, which is consistent across the wage
distribution. New hires, hired in or after the year of the award, do not benefit at all. The
difference between incumbent employees and new hires is statistically significant. Among
incumbent employees, by far the largest and most robust source of heterogeneity is tenure,
  3
    We do not observe equity compensation such as stock option grants, though exercised options and
bonuses are included. (However, the vast majority of private firms ­ even high-tech, young ones ­ do not
grant stock to non-owner employees.)



                                                   2
or the number of years an employee has been with the firm (see Figure 3). The relationship
between tenure and the grant effect is strong and linear; that is, longer-tenure workers
benefit more. This is not driven by owners. We find no effects of interactions between the
grant and relevant measures of labor market tightness. These results join Jäger et al.
(2018) in suggesting that outside options are not especially important sources of wage
variation.
   We consider eight channels that might explain why wages increase after a cash flow
shock. The evidence is most consistent with employment relationships compensating for
financial frictions. The starting point for this mechanism is that applicant firms appear
to be financially constrained. They are high-tech, involved in energy innovation, young,
private, and small, all characteristics likely associated with financial constraints. Consistent
with this, the grant has larger effects among firms that are younger and smaller, which we
expect to be more constrained. Similarly, Howell (2017) finds that the grants positively affect
subsequent innovation, with larger effects for smaller and younger firms. Existing literature
suggests that we would not observe pass-through to wages among large, unconstrained firms
that are relatively risk-neutral (Azariadis 1988, Dharmapala, Foley & Forbes 2011).
   If the firm is financially constrained but can commit to long term contracts, employees
can offer financing to the firm. In this case, the worker initially agrees to be underpaid
relative to some benchmark (such as his outside option) in exchange for a higher wage later
when the firm's situation improves. Michelacci & Quadrini (2009) and Guiso, Pistaferri &
Schivardi (2013) add financial constraints to the Harris & Holmstrom (1982) model to show
how workers may lend to financially constrained firms. Our findings that new hires are
unaffected and that the incumbent worker benefit increases with job tenure are consistent
with the firm paying back the worker after a windfall. Two further predictions of this model
are satisfied: The effect is larger among firms that initially paid below-market wages and
that grew faster before the grant application. Also, long-tenure incumbent workers appear
to pay a "constrained employer" penalty when they start at the firm, consistent with having
accepted a backloaded contract. Finally, the effect of the grant is decreasing in the percent
raise that the incumbents received when they joined.
   To assess whether this mechanism is used in practice among firms in the data, we
conducted a survey of DOE SBIR grantee principal investigators, who are almost always
company CEOs. The survey asked directly about use of backloaded wage contracts as a
result of the firm having been financially constrained.           We received 99 responses,

                                               3
representing a response rate of 20 percent. The results indicate that the mechanism is used
in practice, with 55.6 percent of respondents replying yes, 21.2 percent no, and 23.2 percent
not explicitly answering the question.
   If the effect for incumbent workers reflects backloaded wage contracts, two questions arise.
First, do incumbent workers receive a premium for having accepted the risky contract? A
back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests that they do. Second, do new workers receive flat
or backloaded contracts? We do not find that awards lead to flatter wage-tenure profiles.
This suggests that the firm may remain constrained and engage in similarly backloaded
contracts with new hires. In this case, the effect on incumbent workers reflects a need to use
an observable windfall to pay back employees with the most unvested human capital. This
gives the firm credibility to engage in new backloaded wage contracts.
   The evidence is much less consistent with seven other mechanisms: productivity growth
or expected productivity growth, bargaining power, incentive contracting, agency frictions,
dividends through wages, match quality models, and efficiency wages. The first four are the
most plausible. First, the grant increases firm employment and revenue, which may be linked
to productivity growth and could help explain the persistence of the effect on wages over
time (note there are no effects on firm death or employee departures). However, productivity
growth does not fully explain the immediate effects on incumbent earnings. For example,
the entire earnings effects are observable within two quarters, while only part of the long-
term revenue effect exists within the first two years. Productivity measured as revenue per
employee does not increase substantially in the two years immediately after the grant. A
revenue decomposition, in which we "instrument" for revenue growth with winning an award,
finds a much smaller and weaker effect on earnings than the main effect of the award; only
16.9 percent of the total effect on earnings can be explained though a revenue channel.
   The main argument against a bargaining model is that the cash windfall does not affect
the worker's productivity. The firm may have more ability to pay after the grant, but this
does not affect its cost of hiring a replacement worker, and thus does not change a worker's
bargaining power. Six specific findings are inconsistent with either bargaining or incentive
contracting: Immediate effects, persistent effects, no effects for new workers, no variation in
proxies for skill, and no variation with measures of labor market tightness.
   The third plausible alternative is that employees accrue agency power and become more
entrenched over time. Such agency rents should cease when the free cash flow is exhausted,
but instead the effect persists over time. More importantly, an agency story is observationally

                                              4
equivalent to the backloaded wage explanation. It requires us to ask why the employee's
agency power didn't allow him to previously receive a higher wage. The answer must be
that the firm faced financial constraints. Therefore, both models predict that after a cash
flow shock, constrained firms increase wages based on incumbent tenure. The difference
between the two models is the source for the wages implicitly owed to the employee; in the
agency interpretation, the source is perhaps "friendship" with the owner. This is irrelevant to
the key components of the backloaded wage mechanism, which are that (a) the constrained
firm owes wages to employees and (b) this unvested human capital is increasing in tenure,
leading a cash windfall to be shared proportionally with tenure.
   The results shed light on how wages are set across firm and worker lifecycles, helping
to explain why wages differ systematically across firms in ways that help shape inequality
(Card, Heining & Kline 2013, Barth et al. 2016, Song et al. 2018, Bonhomme, Lamadon &
Manresa 2019). We show that the cash windfall causes higher within-firm wage inequality.
This reflects the combination of lower average earnings among new hires across all firms, no
effect for new hires, and higher effects on levels of earnings among high-earning incumbents.
The inequality results are consistent with the hypothesis that the value of higher but not
lower skill labor increases with firm scale, helping to explain why larger firms have more
within-firm inequality (Mueller et al. 2017a, Mueller et al. 2017b, Song et al. 2018). The
results suggest that inequality within the firm can increase while all incumbent employees
arguably receive a "fair share" of rents, and new workers are treated equally as a group (see
Edmans 2019). There is evidence from the psychology and behavioral economics literature
that people dislike unfairness but not inequality (Starmans, Sheskin & Bloom 2017).
   This paper contributes to studies of rent sharing and pass-through, including Black &
Strahan (2001), Card, Devicienti & Maida (2014), Macis & Schivardi (2016), Bergman et al.
(2017), Fuest, Peichl & Siegloch (2018), Friedrich et al. (2019), Garin & Silvério (2019), and
Lamadon, Mogstad & Setzler (2019). These papers primarily study shocks that likely affect
the employer-employee surplus, such as demand shocks or geographic variation, or they take
a structural approach. In Sweden and Norway, respectively, Saez, Schoefer & Seim (2019)
and Ku, Schoenberg & Schreiner (2020) find evidence that permanent tax policy changes
affect firm rent sharing with workers.
   The literature on innovation and wages is also related to this paper. It has found that
inventor wages, average firm wages, and firm productivity increase after patent grants
(Van Reenen 1996, Balasubramanian & Sivadasan 2011, Toivanen & Väänänen 2012, Bell

                                              5
et al. 2017, Aghion et al. 2018, Kogan et al. 2019). Kline et al. (Forthcoming) find that
patent-instrumented surplus leads to higher wages among incumbent top earners but not
among new hires, similar to our results. Their approach differs in several ways from ours,
including the empirical design, source of variation, and mechanism (they argue that
patents increase wages because some workers' marginal productivity changes). Relative to
this literature, this paper has two innovations. One is the regression discontinuity design,
permitting clear causal effects. The other is the use of a one-time cash flow shock rather
than a patent, which represents a potential productivity increase and expectations of
future cash flows. The one-time cash flow shock also has the benefit of permitting a precise
calculation of rent sharing, as opposed to using an imputed patent value.
        We further contribute to the literature on how firms spend cash in the presence of
frictions (e.g. Hennessy & Whited 2007, Erel, Jang & Weisbach 2015). Starting with
Fazzari, Hubbard & Petersen (1988) and Hoshi, Kashyap & Scharfstein (1991), the
literature has focused on investment (see also Faulkender & Petersen 2012, Gilje & Taillard
2016, and Cespedes et al. 2019). This paper examines the labor side, joining recent work
such as Schoefer (2015). Finally, an additional contribution is to provide the first causal
evaluation of how R&D grants affect firm revenue, employment, and wages.                        Previous
literature including Einiö (2014), Bronzini & Iachini (2014), Jaffe & Le (2015), and Howell
(2017), focuses primarily on subsequent patenting and investment.4



2        Empirical setting
This section first describes the setting (Section 2.1), then explains the data sources (Section
2.2), and finally describes summary statistics (Section 2.3).


2.1        Institutional context
This paper uses data on applications and awards from the U.S. Department of Energy's
(DOE) SBIR grant program.            Congress first authorized the SBIR program in 1982 to
strengthen the U.S. high technology sector and support small firms.                    Today, the law
    4
    Using data on Finland and an IV strategy based on geographic variation, Einiö (2014) studies sales and
employment effects but not wages. There are also structural approaches, including Takalo, Tanayama &
Toivanen (2013). Also related is Lokshin & Mohnen (2013).



                                                    6
requires 11 federal agencies to allocate 3.2 percent of their extramural R&D budgets to the
SBIR program. The law also stipulates that the SBIR program has two phases. Phase 1
grants of $150,000 are supposed to fund nine months of proof-of-concept work (the amount
increased in two steps from $50,000 in 1983). Phase 2 grants of $1 million, awarded about
two years after Phase 1, aim to fund later stage demonstrations. For both phases, eligible
firms are for-profit, U.S.-based, and majority U.S.-owned. There is no required private cost
sharing, and the government takes no equity and demands no rights to IP. The application
process for both phases is onerous, taking a full-time employee one to two months.5 The
firm proposes to use the grant for R&D in its application, but there is no monitoring or
enforcement once the firm receives the lump sum. However, to apply for Phase 2 a firm
must (i) have spent the Phase 1 money as outlined in the application; (ii) demonstrate
progress on the Phase 1 project; and (iii) not be more than 50 percent owned by outside
private equity investors.       Howell (2017) finds that these requirements lead to adverse
selection in Phase 2 application, and 40 percent of winners do not apply to Phase 2.
Consistent with Howell (2017), we find no effects of the Phase 2 grant (results are available
upon request).
       Each year, DOE officials in technology-specific programs (e.g., Solar) announce
competitions in granular sub-sectors.            The officials then rank applicants within each
competition based on written expert reviews and their own discretion, according to three
criteria: (i) strength of the scientific/technical approach; (ii) ability to carry out the
project in a cost effective manner; and (iii) commercialization impact (Oliver 2012). The
program official does not know the award cutoff (the number of grants in a competition)
when she conducts the ranking. She submits ordered lists to a central DOE SBIR office,
which determines the cutoff.6
       By virtue of their status as applicants to DOE's SBIR program, at the time they apply
the firms in the sample are engaged in some sort of innovation activity related to energy,
   5
     Applicants must describe the project and firm in detail and provide an itemized budget for the proposed
work. There are over 100 pages of instructions on DOE's SBIR Phase 1 application website. Interviews with
grantees confirmed the 1­2 month time-frame.
   6
     The cutoff in a competition is based on budget constraints. Ranking occurs before the SBIR office
determines how many awards to allocate to each program and competition. Interviews with DOE officials
indicated that the cutoff decision is exogenous to the ranking process. Some ranking data provided in the
form of e-mails from program officials to the SBIR office also support exogeneity. Observable variables do
not predict competition cutoffs. Average award numbers do not vary systematically by office or competition
subsector. The budget for each contest is set at the beginning of the year based on the budget for the
program office (e.g., Solar), which overwhelmingly goes to other line items, like the national labs.



                                                     7
and they must be relatively small (less than 500 employees). They tend to be focused on
a specific technology, rather than being diversified. Many can be described as high-tech
startups. A drawback is that the sample is not representative of all U.S. firms. However,
there are two important benefits. First, these firms are of a type that is an important engine
of economic growth. Second, their common characteristics make them more comparable,
which is helpful for our identification strategy.


2.2    Data sources
We use complete data from the two main applied offices at the DOE: Fossil Energy (FE) and
Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE). Together, they awarded $884 million (in
2012 U.S. dollars) in SBIR grants between 1983 and 2013. In the data used in this paper,
there are about 270 competitions (all reported counts are rounded to comply with Census
disclosure requirements). Each competition has on average about 16 applicants and three
winners. We observe the applicant's company name, address, funded status, and award
notice date. While awards are public information, the ranks and losing applicant identities
are indefinitely secret. Ranking data exist from 1995, so analysis begins then. For additional
details and summary statistics about the application process and data, see Howell (2017).
   The application data are matched to the U.S. Census Bureau's Business Register, which
contains all business establishments in the U.S. private non-farm sector with at least one
employee, by EIN (when available) or probabilistic and then clerical matching on name,
address, and zip code. About 70 percent of firms are matched successfully. We err on the
side of including only matches that we were confident are correct, to avoid an excess of false
positives. Based on observable characteristics in the DOE data, there is no clear bias in
matching, and match rates are similar by rank around the cutoff.
   Once a link to a Business Register record is established, we are able to link the firms
to other Census Bureau datasets. One is IRS W-2 data, which contain annual earnings for
each employee. These data begin in 2005 and end in 2013. We observe only earnings, not
hourly wages. The earnings should be thought of as salary income, as most of the jobs in
this sample appear to be full-time jobs. While bonuses or stock exercises would appear in
W2 earnings, we do not observe equity compensation. However, the vast majority of private
firms ­ even high-tech, young ones ­ have no expectation of a liquidity event such as an



                                               8
acquisition or IPO and do not grant stock to non-owner employees.7
       We also link to the Longitudinal Business Database (LBD), which begins in 1976 and
ends in 2015. The LBD is the universe of non-farm, non-public administration business
establishments with paid employees. We use three outcome variables from the LBD. The
first is employment, which is observed quarterly after 2004 (before 2004, it is observed once
per year, in the pay period that includes March 12). The second is payroll, which is observed
quarterly throughout. The third is revenue, which is observed annually starting in 1996. We
also use information from the Individual Characteristics File about employees of all firms
in the Longitudinal Employee Household Dynamics dataset, which has similar coverage to
W-2s These data provide demographic information about the employees. The sample sizes
differ across outcomes, because data are not available for all firms for all outcomes. In
particular, variables based on W2 data have considerably smaller samples. A disadvantage
of our data is we lack information about occupation. Instead, we use proxies for skill that
include education and pre-existing wage.


2.3       Summary statistics
The main summary statistics are presented in Table 1. Among the 2,100 unique applicant
firms, the average number of employees across all firm-years is 35, and 6.8 in the year
before the award year. In comparison, for all firms in the U.S. in 2012, the average number
of employees is 20, and within establishments with 20-99 employees, the average is 39.8
Average revenue in the sample is $4.8 million; though the distribution is highly right-skewed.
This is reasonably aligned with U.S. averages, which are $779,000 for firms with less than
20 employees, and $7.9 million for firms with 20-99 employees. Average payroll in our data
is higher than the average for U.S. firms with 20-99 employees, at $2.5 million relative to
$1.6 million. Average earnings are also higher, at $64,150 relative to $40,417 across all U.S.
firms with 20-99 employees in 2012. The within-firm standard deviation is high, at about
60 percent of the mean. These differences indicate that the firms in the data have relatively
high-skill employees. Average firm age is 12 years, but in the year before the application, it
   7
     For example, Robb & Robinson (2014) show that just four percent of young firms receive outside equity
in a large, representative survey of U.S. firms started in 2004 that over-samples high-tech firms. Coleman &
Robb (2011) use the same survey to show that high tech firms have lower rates of outside equity than low
tech firms.
   8
     https://www.census.gov/data/tables/2012/econ/susb/2012-susb-annual.html



                                                     9
is 8.3 years.
      The primary measure of within-firm wage inequality is the 90/10 ratio, or the log wage
difference between the 90th percentile and the 10th percentile. This is standard in the
literature, including Goldin & Katz (2008), Van Reenen (2011), and Abowd et al. (2018).
We also use the 99/50 ratio as a proxy for upper-tail inequality, and the standard deviation.
The 90/10 ratio is preferred to the standard deviation in part because we expect the latter to
mechanically increase if all employees' wages increase by the same percentage. In unreported
results, we found generally similar effects using the interquartile range. Some of our analysis
uses logged growth measures, defined as the log difference of an outcome in a given year
                                                                         
                                                                   Yi,t
relative to the year before application (t = 1): Growthi,t = ln Yi,t = 1
                                                                          . Table 1 Panel
B shows that on average, these measures are small but negative, implying that they tend
to be larger in the year before application compared to other years. This is because firms
grow over time, with some attrition due to exits. Therefore, the outcome measures are on
average lower in the years before the application than in the pre-application year, and there
are more observations in this pre-application period. Note that the number of observations
reflect data availability. Some statistics require W2 data, which are only available after 2005.
Revenue is available in the LBD only for a subset of firms.
      Employee-level statistics are in Table 1 Panel C. The average earnings among all
employees at applicant firms is $63,500 (in 2010 dollars).              Tenure averages 3.85 years.
Consistent with existing work, tenure is correlated with wages; the correlation coefficient is
0.33. The subsequent rows in the table compare incumbent and new employees. The
average firm has almost seven incumbent and four new employees by the second year after
the award year (note the "award year" includes firms that did not win; it refers to the year
the award decision was announced). These statistics reflect a skewed distribution in which
some firms grow fast while others exit, which is typical of young, high-tech firms. Panel D
shows that incumbent workers are more educated, older, and have much higher earnings
than new employees. However, they receive a smaller average wage increase relative to
their previous jobs. The wage distribution among incumbent workers is more positively
skewed but is significantly higher than new workers throughout the distribution.
      Additional firm and worker characteristics are in Appendix Table A.1. As we might
expect for applicants to an R&D grant program, the most common NAICS 3-digit industry
is Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services, at 62 percent of firms.9 The next most
  9
      Industry is a firm-year variable because industry assignations may change over time within a firm.


                                                   10
common is Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing, at 7.9 percent. The table
shows an additional seven industries. The average worker is 43 years old. Just 22 percent of
employees are female. There are also disparities relative to the population in ethnic makeup
and country of origin; only 2.7 percent of employees are Black, for example, and just 71
percent are U.S.-born.



3     Estimation approaches
The ideal experiment would randomly allocate cash to a subset of firms, enabling us to
examine the effect of the exogenous cash flow shock on firm outcomes. Following Howell
(2017), we approximate this experiment using a regression discontinuity (RD) design, which
estimates a local average treatment effect around a cutoff in a running variable. A valid RD
design requires that treatment not cause rank, which is not a problem here, as the award
decision happens after ranking and previous winners are excluded. Ranks are ordinal, and
on average the differences in the true distance between ranks should be the same. That is,
errors in differences on either side of the cutoff in any given competition should average zero.
The primary concern is whether firm ranks are manipulated around the cutoff. The cutoff in
a valid RD design must be exogenous to rank (Lee & Lemieux 2010). Howell (2017) provides
five tests for manipulation, a discussion and test of the discreteness of the rating variable,
and extensive evidence of continuity of observable baseline covariates around the cutoff. In
our setting, we confirm that before applying, the awardees and non-awardees have similar
observable characteristics, such as moments of the wage distribution, wage, and employee
education.
    The primary specification for evaluating the effect of a grant award is shown in Equation
1.10 Here and below, i denotes a firm, k denotes an employee, j denotes a competition, and
Industry is based on six-digit NAICS codes. Where a firm has multiple units, and therefore potentially
multiple industries, we use the NAICS associated with the firm's largest employment share.
  10
     Our main analysis focuses on the Phase 1 grant. As in Howell (2017), we find no effects of Phase 2, and
the sample is much smaller.




                                                    11
t denotes a year.


                      Wi/k,t = P ostAwardi,j,t + Awardi,j + P osti,j,t                      (1)
                                                2
                            + 1 Ranki,j + 2 Ranki,j + 3 Agei + 4 Age2
                                                                    i

                            +   j/i/k   + t + "i,j,t


We have chosen to use a panel setting, where each observation is a firm-year. This offers
several advantages. First, while Howell (2017) provides extensive evidence of continuity
around the threshold for winning, the discreteness of the running variable (a firm's rank
in a competition) means that we cannot affirmatively establish local continuity. Frandsen
(2014) shows how a panel setting can add a differences-in-differences aspect to the RD design,
enabling the much weaker condition of local continuity in differences, and local continuity
conditional on characteristics. While the data in Howell (2017) did not permit a panel
approach, the richness of the U.S. Census data does. We can use fine controls and growth
specifications, lending additional validity to the empirical design. The panel setting also
follows related wage literature more closely (e.g. Guiso et al. 2005 and Cardoso & Portela
2009). Finally, the panel permits a larger sample and thus more subsamples to be disclosed
without reaching Census restrictions. We find similar results in a non-panel setting where
each observation is an application.
   A firm that ever wins a grant is assigned the non-time varying indicator Awardi,j = 1.
The variable P osti,j,t is an indicator for the year being after the year the firm applied, and
P ostAwardi,j,t is the interaction between P osti,j,t and Awardi,j . Some firms apply multiple
times, and some of these firms become multiple-time grant winners. Our primary approach
includes winning firms only once, for their first grant. The main model uses an indicator for
winning a grant, not the award amount per employee. This is because employment is also
an outcome variable, creating potential concerns about endogeneity. However, we use award
per employee in robustness tests at both the firm and employee level, and also use this to
explore whether the effect on a per-worker basis exhibits constant elasticity across firm sizes.
   The primary specification controls for rank within the competition quadratically, as
shown in Equation 1. We do not use higher order polynomials, following Gelman & Imbens
(2018).   We also show the results controlling for rank separately among winners and
non-winners. Since the number of applicants and awards varies across competitions, ranks
are centered around zero. The lowest-ranked winner i in competition j has centered rank

                                                  12
Ranki,j =1, and the highest-ranked loser has Ranki,j = -1. Howell (2017) shows that rank
is uninformative about outcomes, and this remains true in our setting.                          Therefore,
bandwidths of one firm or all firms around the threshold yield essentially the same point
estimates.     Due to disclosure limitations, we do not report specifications with narrow
bandwidths around the cutoff, but the results are all qualitatively robust to those
specifications.11
     The dependent variable in Equation 1 is either a levels measure, such as the average wage
                                                                                              
of firm i or employee k in year t (Wi,t or Wk,t ), or a growth measure, such as ln WW     i,t
                                                                                       i,t= 1
                                                                                               ,
where Wi,t=     1   is the firm's average wage in the year before the grant award year. The grant
award year for rejected applicants is the year they applied and failed to win a grant. The
growth specification ensures that unobserved time-invariant characteristics are controlled
for, which is a conservative approach since we do not report specifications with narrow
bandwidths. Levels outcomes are used to compare effects on new and incumbent employees,
as "change" is undefined within the firm for new employees. The primary model includes
competition fixed effects ( j ) and calendar year fixed effects (t ). Other controls include the
firm's age and age squared. In alternative approaches, we use firm-application fixed effects
( i ), which subsume rank, award, and competition controls; the goal is to control more
completely for pre-treatment differences, including all the characteristics of the application.
Analysis at the employee level includes employee fixed effects ( k ).
       We graphically present results from two additional specifications. First, we show the
effects by rank around the cutoff for the award using Equation 2.

                                       x=3
                                       X
                              Yi,t =          x   (P ostAwardi,j ) (Ranki,j = x)                         (2)
                                       x= 6

                                 + 1 Agei + 2 Age2
                                                 i + t +           j   + "i,j,t


Outcomes are in levels (e.g. log employment), though the effects are similar when growth
outcomes are used in Equation 2 instead. Second, we show the effects by quarter around the
award quarter using Equation 3, where q denotes the quarter.
  11
    In the remainder of this paper, there are numerous results discussed but not reported to limit disclosure
burdens. While the samples underlying some results are simply too small to ever disclose, future drafts can
report additional results as desired by readers.




                                                        13
                            x=13+
                             X
                   Yi,q =           [   x (Awardi,j   = 1) (q = x) +   x (q   = x)] + q +   i   + "i,j,q   (3)
                            x= 13

 The coefficients of interest,              x,   are on the quarter indicators interacted with the award
dummy, and these are shown in the graph. We include firm-application fixed effects. This
specification is most stringent, as it controls for all possible application and firm
characteristics. Again, outcomes are in levels. We find similar effects using competition
fixed effects or growth outcomes. In estimating Equations 1, 2 and 3, standard errors are
clustered by competition for firm-level analysis and employee for employee-level analysis,
though the main effects are robust to a variety of error assumptions.



4          Grant effect on earnings
This section presents the main results. First, Section 4.1 describes the effect of a grant
on earnings at the firm and employee levels. The result is decomposed across incumbent
employees and new hires in Section 4.2. Employee characteristics, especially tenure, are
considered in Section 4.3. Finally, Section 4.4 examines the effect of the grant on within-firm
wage inequality.


4.1         Average earnings
Table 2 shows the grant effect on levels and growth of earnings at the firm level, using
variations of Equation 1. The coefficient on P ostAwardi,j,t is the average effect of winning
in years after the application year, controlling for whether the firm is a winning firm and
whether the year is after the application year. The preferred main estimate in Column 1
finds an effect of nine percent, which translates to an increase of $5,773 at the mean wage.
Column 2 includes fixed effects for the firm's state and an indicator for whether the firm is
located in one of five top MSAs.12 Appendix Figure A.2 A shows the effect on levels of log
earnings by rank around the cutoff, using Equation 2.
         The effect on earnings growth, the ratio of earnings in the current year to the base year,
    12
    This is an indicator for being located in the MSAs of San Francisco, New York, Los Angeles, Texas
triangle (Dallas-Fortworth, Austin-San Marcos, San Antonio and Houston), Boston, and Washington, D.C.




                                                            14
which is the year before the award, is considered in columns 5-8.13 The main model in
column 5 finds an effect of about 13 percent. In columns 6 and 7, we present two robustness
tests. First, the effect is similar when rank is controlled for separately on either side of the
cutoff. Second, the effect is also robust to including firm-application fixed effects (column
7), which absorb controls for rank and competition. The effect occurs quickly, with almost
the entire effect observed within a two-year window of the application year (Table 2 column
8). Figure 1 demonstrates the effect on earnings by quarter around the award quarter, using
Equation 3. The figure shows that the effect is immediate but persists over time, consistent
with the long-term regression coefficients being very similar to the two-year coefficients. In
Section 5, we consider the implications of persistence and the possibility that firm growth
may fund wages in the longer term.
       We next turn to employee-level analysis, in which we use log earnings as the dependent
variable and include employee fixed effects. The results are in Table 3. For all specifications
except column 4, the employee fixed effects absorb firm fixed effects, as each individual is
observed only while employed at the applicant firm. The main estimates in columns 1-3 find
effects of three to four percent; an estimate of 0.032 translates to a $2,032 increase in the
mean wage. These are smaller than the firm-level estimates because larger firms are more
heavily weighted than smaller firms at the employee level, and as we will see below, the effects
are larger among smaller firms. The effect is somewhat larger within two years (column 3).
Column 4 uses switchers to identify the effect by including employee-years before and after
an employee worked at the SBIR applicant firm. This permits both firm and employee fixed
effects. The estimate is higher, at 7.6 percent. We find no effect of winning on employee
departures from the firm. The effect is also persistent over time at the employee level (not
reported). Using the employee(firm)-level estimate of three(nine) percent, the grant can be
"accounted for" entirely through wage increases after ten(four) years.
       To situate the findings so far within the rent-sharing literature, we can approximate a
firm rent-sharing elasticity. To motivate this measure, consider the relationship between
rents per worker and wages posited by Card et al. (2018). This is motivated by a standard
bargaining model, in which the wage reflects the reservation wage and a share of the joint
surplus from the worker's employment relationship with the firm (Stole & Zwiebel 1996).
  13                                                  Y
     The coefficient gives the percentage change in Yi,ti,t
                                                        = 1
                                                            associated with being an award recipient relative
to a non-winner. The exact effect is 100  (e    1). Note it is relative to the year before the application (that
is, the effect is not an absolute increase).



                                                      15
When the worker has more bargaining power, there is greater weight on the latter term,
which is tied to firm productivity. We denote by w the wage, o the worker's outside option,
  2 [0, 1] a rent-sharing parameter, G the rent (here, the grant), and N the number of
employees:
                                                               G
                                               w =o+             .                                         (4)
                                                               N
The elasticity of wages with respect to the rent-per-worker is:

                                                           G
                                                =          N
                                                               G
                                                                   .                                       (5)
                                                     o+        N


To arrive at an estimate of  , the literature typically relates a measure of quasi-rents, such
as value-added per worker, to wages on an annual basis (Card et al. 2018).14 The parallel
in our context is a calculation of the wage elasticity to the grant in the year following the
award. The effect of the grant on levels of earnings is about nine percent in the first year
(this can also be seen by quarter in Figure 1 Panel C). The average grant per employee,
using employment in the year before the award year, is $21,880, or 43 percent of the median
wage. This implies a rent sharing elasticity  of 0.21 (.09/.43). In turn, we can use Equation
5 to approximate a rent-sharing parameter             of 0.56.15 At the employee level, the coefficient
of 3.2 yields a rent-sharing elasticity of 0.07.
       These elasticities are in the same general range as previous findings. In a seminal study,
Van Reenen (1996) instruments for rents with innovation and finds a similar wage elasticity
of about 0.25. Kline et al. (Forthcoming) estimate the effect of patent-instrumented surplus
on the average wage, and find an an elasticity of 0.35. Kogan et al. (2019) find an elasticity
of 0.19 by taking the ratio of patent-wage and patent-profits relationships. Other existing
work at the firm level has employed measures of value added per worker, profit per worker,
or output/revenue per worker. Estimates based on value-added are roughly one fifth of our
estimate (Fakhfakh & FitzRoy 2004, Card et al. 2014, Card et al. 2016). Estimates using
individual data are smaller and closer to our employee-level estimate, including Margolis &
Salvanes 2001, Arai 2003, Martins 2009, Gürtzgen 2009, Carlsson et al. (2016), and Bagger
et al. (2014). The literature has found larger rent-sharing effects when firm value added or
  14
    The above equations assume that N  G
                                         is exogenous to the level of wages, which is true when bargaining
jointly determines capital and labor. The elasticity is arrived at by differentiating wages with respect to N
                                                                                                            G
                                                                                                              ,
                                     G
which yields , and multiplying by w N
                                      .
  15
     To proxy for the outside wage we use the median wage among firms that did not win an award in the
year before the award year, as these are arguably the most similar firms to the winning firms.


                                                      16
profits are instrumented with a variable correlated with systematic or permanent changes
in rents.16 Cardoso & Portela (2009) and Guiso, Pistaferri & Schivardi (2005) find zero
elasticities to transitory changes in value added or sales. The finding in this paper of a
positive elasticity for a one-time cash flow shock (i.e. the immediate effect within the first
few quarters) is, to our knowledge, new to the literature not only because previous work has
focused on shocks directly associated with productivity or permanent rent changes, but also
because it differs from previous studies of transitory shocks.
       We also estimate the effect of log award per employee in Appendix Table A2.17 The
effect is shown at both the employee (columns 1-3) and firm (columns 4-5) levels. The
coefficients imply roughly the magnitude of the employee-level result in Table 3, because
the average award amount per employee of $21,880 is about one-third of the average wage.
This approach permits us to ask whether it is appropriate to assume that firms of different
sizes share rents equally on a per-worker basis. In Figure 2, we show the effect of the award
per employee for each quintile of firm size, measured as the number of employees in the
year before the award.18 Each point is a coefficient showing the effect of award dollars
per employee conditional on being within a given quintile of firm size. The omitted group is
composed of rejected applicants in the bottom size quintile. The blue dashed line is the best-
fit across the coefficients. Finally, the red solid horizontal line shows the effect of grant per
worker estimated on full sample, which is the prediction from assuming constant elasticity
with respect to grant per worker. The effect is largest for the smallest quintile, but otherwise
is similar across the size distribution, and is not statistically significantly different from the
estimate in the whole population (the red line) for any quintile. In sum, it appears that the
effect to some degree decreases in firm size. However, the result is not inconsistent with rent
sharing having constant elasticity across firm sizes.
       The effects are robust to a number of unreported approaches. First, they are similar with
a bandwidth of one firm around the cutoff. Second, when we split the sample by time period,
for example around 2005 or 2008, we find similar effects on either side. The magnitude of the
effect is somewhat larger in the earlier periods, but not statistically significantly so. Fourth,
the effect is not driven by the first year after the award. When we omit the first year, the
  16
     In addition to works cited above, this includes Abowd & Lemieux (1993), Guiso et al. (2005), and Arai
& Heyman (2009).
  17
      Specifically, the independent variable of interest is post interacted with the log of the award amount
($150,000) divided by the number of employees at the firm in year t = 1.
  18
     The quintiles are less than 6, 6-11, 12-23, 24-69, and more than 69 employees.



                                                    17
coefficient is similar and of equal significance.19 Fifth, the effect is similar when multiple-
time grant winners are excluded from the sample; that is, the result does not reflect future
grants.
       We cannot rule out that the effect on earnings reflects more hours worked, as we do not
observe the hourly wage. However, this seems unlikely for two reasons. First, the effects
endure over time. If higher earnings reflected more hours worked, the effect should decline
over time as the firm hires new workers and reaches a new target size, as pointed out by
Kline et al. (Forthcoming). Second, more hours worked should affect both incumbent and
new employees; as we show below, there is no effect among new employees.


4.2       Incumbent vs. new employees
We next examine how the positive grant effect on earnings established in the previous section
is distributed across new and pre-existing (incumbent) employees.20 Table 2 columns 3 and
4 and Table 3 columns 5 and 6 restrict the sample to either incumbent or new employees.
Both tables strongly suggest that incumbent employees drive the average effect. Consistent
with this, Table 3 column 7, at the employee level and using firm fixed effects, shows that
an interaction between PostAwardi,j,t and being an incumbent employee is .096 and highly
significant. That is, an award increases the difference between incumbent and new hire
earnings by about 10 percent. When employee controls for tenure, age, education, and wage
in the year before the application year are added, the interaction coefficient increases to 0.15
(column 8). This does not reflect partial earnings in a new employee's first year. When
the first year of work is omitted, the coefficient for the new worker sample is larger, but
still significantly lower than the effect for incumbents and not significantly different from
zero. Appendix Table A2 Column 2 shows that the effect remains significantly larger for
incumbent employees using the award amount per employee as the independent variable.
       Table 1 Panel D compares new and incumbent workers. The first set of statistics shows
that incumbent workers are more educated, older, and have higher average earnings. The
second set shows that the large difference is roughly consistent across the wage
distribution.      Despite these differences, the specification with controls suggests the
incumbent-new differential is unlikely to be fully explained by skill. Also consistent with
  19
    This creates especially small implicit samples with other samples, and cannot be reported.
  20
    We exclusively use level outcomes because there are no new employees in year t = 1 with which to
construct growth measures.


                                                18
this, and perhaps counterintuitively, the large positive effect for incumbents persists at all
points in the wage distribution, which is shown in Table 4. Here, the dependent variables
are the within-firm 10th, 50th, 90th, or 99th percentile earnings. Chetverikov, Larsen &
Palmer (2016) explain how this type of quantile regression panel estimator is consistent
and asymptotically normal. The effect is the same, at about 15 percentage points, at the
10th and the 90th percentiles. This consistency across the wage distribution is not driven
by very small firms where all employees might plausibly be a narrow group of co-founders.
When we eliminate firms below the 25th percentile of employment from the sample, we
continue to find consistent effects across the wage distribution, though they are slightly
smaller at the higher end.
       The difference in the wage effect between new and incumbent workers could reflect a
compositional effect. That is, perhaps the selection of new hires is different at winning firms
than at non-winning firms. For example, it may be that winning firms hire lower skill workers
on average but pay them relatively more. However, new workers have similar education, age,
earnings in their previous job, and percent raise when they arrive at rejected and winning
firms, suggesting that different selection is not an especially important factor.


4.3       Tenure and other employee characteristics
To explore what may explain the large effect of the grant on incumbent earnings, we interact
winning an award with various employee characteristics within the sample of incumbent
employees.21 By far the largest and most robust source of heterogeneity is tenure, or the
number of years an incumbent employee has been with the firm. Table 5 column 1 shows
that an additional year of tenure increases the effect of winning on wage by 1.2 percent,
which is about 25 percent of the average employee-level effect (mean tenure is 3.8 years). To
assess whether this is an artifact of skill or employee age, we add controls for employee age,
education, and pre-existing wage percentile (column 2) or pre-existing linear wage (column
3). The effect persists with essentially the same magnitude as in column 1. Appendix Table
A2 Column 3 shows that the effect continues to increase in tenure with the award amount
per employee as the independent variable.
       The effect is markedly linear in tenure. Figure 3 shows coefficients from a regression with
  21
    For wage, inequality, and growth outcomes, we examined heterogeneity in a wide array of firm, employee,
and location characteristics. We found no significant and robust interactions besides those described here.
There is no effect of heterogeneity in the share of employees of a certain gender, age bin, or race/ethnicity.


                                                     19
separate dummies for years of tenure interacted with winning, among incumbent employees.
The effect increases linearly through ten years (subsequent years are similar but very noisy).
While the effects at two and three years are negative, they are not significantly different
from the effects at one year. A quadratic specification in Table 5 column 4 confirms the
relationship. The coefficient on PostAwardi,j,t · Tenure2 k,t is negative and significant, albeit
economically small, so the effect on earnings is somewhat concave in tenure. The tenure
effect does not appear to reflect firm owners. Column 5 restricts the sample to incumbent
employees hired at least three years after the first year the firm is observed, who are not
plausibly owners. The result is similar to Column 1. There is no measurable effect of the
award on the firm's wage-tenure profile. As has been shown in the overall universe of firms
(e.g. Brown 1989), there is a positive relationship for both awardees and non-awardees, and
the difference between them is not statistically different.
   Other characteristics, again among incumbent employees, are considered in Table 6. For
parsimony, we show only the main interaction of interest. Columns 1 and 2 show that
while there is a positive association between employee age and benefit from the award, this
disappears with other employee controls. We do find persistent positive effects in education
and wage (columns 3-7), but they are all small in magnitude. The effect of having at least
a BA is about three percent, relative to mean of 46 percent. Interacting with four parts
of the pre-existing wage percentiles, where earnings less than the 10th percentile are the
omitted group, we find that the effect is largest for the top 10 percentiles. The linear effect
of interacting winning with log pre-existing wage is three percent, significant only at the .1
level. Note that despite the firms being small with just seven employees on average in the
year before the award, there is substantial variation in pre-existing wages, with the standard
deviation being about 60 percent of the mean in the year before the award. In sum, while
the effect of the cash flow shock on earnings does increase with measures of employee skill,
and especially for top earners, the effect of tenure is by far the largest economically, even
after conditioning on the employee's wage.


4.4    Wage inequality
The heterogeneity established above suggests that the cash flow shock may affect within-
firm inequality. We find large and robust positive effects on the three inequality measures in
Table 7. Columns 1-4 use growth outcomes, and columns 5-10 use levels outcomes. A grant


                                               20
increases the growth of the 90/10 ratio by 24 percent (column 1), and the effect is in fact
slightly larger when only the first two years after the application are included (column 2).22
The effect on upper-tail inequality growth (the 99/50 ratio), shown in column 3, is smaller,
at about eight percentage points. Note that when there are fewer than 10 employees, the
algorithm assigns the 90th and 10th percentiles to the extreme observations. As mentioned
earlier, the within-firm standard deviation of wages is substantial, even when the firms have
few employees.
       The inequality effects contrast with the positive effect among incumbents at all points
in the wage distribution (Table 4), which is something of a puzzle. The answer is that the
difference between new hire and incumbent earnings drives the effect on inequality. Table
7 columns 6 and 7 show that there is no effect of winning on inequality within incumbents
or new hires, consistent with Table 4. New hires induced by the grant do not receive an
above-market wage and tend to be at the lower end of the firm's wage distribution. This
"weighs against" the bump that incumbent low earners receive, which is in percentage terms
about the same as for incumbent high earners. Since incumbent high-wage employees receive
a large bump and there are few new high-wage employees, the average effect on inequality
comes from the top of the distribution.
       Our results highlight how a windfall is different from making incentives more
high-powered.       Bandiera, Barankay & Rasul (2007) show that the introduction of
managerial incentives leads to higher within-firm wage inequality. They find that this is
driven by managers targeting their effort towards making the most productive workers even
more productive. In our case, the increase in wage dispersion comes in part from the
extensive margin, where new and relatively lower wage workers are hired. These results
shed light on both within- and across-firm wage inequality, helping to explain why workers
with similar skills are paid different amounts depending on where they work, and why it
may be profitable for firms to outsource low-skill services as they grow (Goldschmidt &
Schmieder 2017).       Within our sample of small, high-tech firms, within-firm inequality
appears to increase with growth as the firm "fleshes out", hiring more relatively lower
skilled workers.
  22
     Figure A.2 Panel B demonstrates the effect on the 90/10 ratio by rank around the cutoff. We only
report two positive ranks for inequality, because the smaller sample led to a very large confidence interval
for the firm three ranks away from the cutoff. We cannot create the quarterly figure as the W2 data used to
construct inequality measures are annual.




                                                    21
5         Effects on firm growth
An immediate effect of the grant on growth might explain the immediate effect on wages we
observe. We cannot observe profits or productivity, but we can observe revenue and total
employment. This section shows that there are positive effects of the grant on these growth
measures in the longer term, but they do not fully explain the immediate effect on wages.
         The effects of the grant award on these growth measures are presented in Table 8. The
effect of winning a grant on log employment relative to the base year is the coefficient on
P ostAwardi,j,t in columns 1-4. The coefficients on quadratic rank (column 1) and on either
side of the cutoff (column 2) are also shown. Firm-application fixed effects are included in
column 3, which soak up the controls besides age and year. The coefficient of 0.27 means that
a grant award increases employment growth (the ratio of employment in the current year to
the base year) by about 30 percent.23 Evaluated at the means, this indicates that winners
have about 19 percent more employees than losers, or on average 6.7 more employees, relative
to the year before application. Column 4 shows that about half the effect on employment
occurs within two years of the grant application. Appendix Figure A.2 Panel C demonstrates
the effect on levels of log employment by rank around the cutoff.
         A grant award increases revenue growth by about 20 percent, or 15 percent more revenue
than in the pre-application year (Table 8 columns 5-8). Again, just over half the effect on
revenue occurs within two years of the grant application.24 Appendix Figure A.2 Panel D
demonstrates the effect on levels of log revenue by rank around the cutoff. The effect on
employment within two years is statistically indistinguishable from the effect on revenue
within two years (columns 4 and 8). Indeed, productivity measured as revenue per employee
does not increase substantially in the period immediately after the grant. We also examined
firm exit in the forms of firm acquisition and death but found no measurable effects on these
outcomes.25
         To explore whether the effect on employee earnings shown above is primarily a function
of increased revenue or profitability, we conduct two tests. The first decomposes the effect
    23                                                  Y
      The coefficient gives the percentage change in Yi,ti,t
                                                          = 1
                                                               associated with being an award recipient relative
to a non-winner. The exact effect is 100  (e       1). Note it is relative to the year before the application (that
is, the effect is not an absolute increase).
   24
      There is no quarterly graph because Census does not have quarterly revenue data.
   25
      We define exit via acquisition as an instance in which the last establishment year is later than the last firm
year. This indicates that the establishment continues but the firm dies. We define failure as establishment
and firm exit from the panel.



                                                        22
into that which goes through revenue and that which goes straight to earnings. We do this
by instrumenting for revenue growth with the grant. The first stage regresses revenue growth
on the grant, and the second stage regresses wage growth on the revenue growth predicted
by the grant. We do not report the first stage to minimize disclosure requirements. The
Cragg-Donald F-statistic is 249. Table 9 column 1 reports the coefficient on the second stage,
which is 0.08, significant at the .1 level. Both revenue growth and wage growth are logged, so
the interpretation is an elasticity; a 100 percent increase in instrumented revenue increases
earnings by about 8 percent. Since the effect on revenue is about 20 percent, this implies
that revenue instrumented with the grant increases wages by about 1.6 percent, which is
16.9 percent of the main effect of the grant on wages (from Table 2 column 3). That is, while
some of the grant's effect on revenue is passed to earnings, a maximum of about 17 percent
of the total effect on earnings can be explained though a revenue channel.
    The second test shows that the immediate effect of winning is not higher among firms
with higher growth or innovation in the two years after the grant. First, we interact winning
with revenue growth, and find no statistically significantly effect (Table 9 column 2). The
same is true for employment growth (column 3). Third, we interact the number of cite-
weighted patents that the firm applies for and is ultimately granted during the two years
after the application year, a measure of innovation quality. The coefficient on the interaction
is negative and significant (column 4). Results are similar when longer time frames are
used. These results demonstrate that the effect on earnings is not larger among firms that
are able to grow more in the immediate years after the award. In sum, it is clear that the
pass-through to wages does not entirely reflect a productivity-related channel, and in the
short term is quite independent from growth.



6    Financial constraints as an explanatory mechanism
The results thus far have found that on average the grants immediately and persistently
affect wages for incumbent but not new hires. They also affect growth within a few years of
the grant, but a growth channel does not fully explain the immediate wage effects. These
results are somewhat puzzling; in particular, it is not intuitive that a one-time cash flow
shock would yield permanent effects on wages for a subset of employees.
    This section describes an economic mechanism that is particularly consistent with the


                                              23
data: Early employees implicitly finance the firm through backloaded wage contracts. We
first provide theoretical background in Section 6.1. Empirical support for the mechanism,
including additional analysis and a survey, is in Sections 6.2-6.4. Section 6.5 discusses how
the implicit contract may be enforced.
      Section 6.6 briefly discusses key points about other plausible mechanisms. In Appendix
B we examine these in greater detail, separately considering the evidence for and against
six alternative hypotheses: 1) A standard neoclassical model, or payment of the grant as
a dividend to owners via wages; 2) Match quality revealed over time (Jovanovic 1979);
3) Efficiency wages (Akerlof & Yellen 1988); 4) Incentive contracting (Lazear 1981); 5)
Benchmark employee bargaining power (Stole & Zwiebel 1996); 6) Agency frictions (i.e.,
entrenchment; Berk, Stanton & Zechner 2010). The evidence either contradicts or is not
fully consistent with the main predictions of these models.


6.1       Lending within the firm
The financial mechanism of within-firm lending begins with wage-tenure profiles. An initial
literature, including Azariadis (1975) and Bernhardt & Timmis (1990), argues that wage-
tenure dynamics are flatter than they would be in the absence of financial frictions because
relatively more risk-neutral firms insure relatively more risk-averse workers. Dating back to
Harris & Holmstrom (1982), the flat wage contract provides optimal risk sharing by enabling
workers to smooth consumption, which they cannot achieve by borrowing in outside financial
markets.
      Later work takes note of the stylized fact that wages tend to correlate strongly with
tenure, especially in small firms. Michelacci & Quadrini (2009) model how a financially
constrained firm may optimally pay workers lower wages initially, implicitly borrowing from
them. This enables the firm to grow faster than it would otherwise. Their theory reconciles
several stylized facts: larger (but not older) firms pay higher wages, firms growing faster pay
lower wages, and firms with more financial pressure pay lower wages. Guiso et al. (2013)
show that in Italian provinces with less developed credit markets at the time of hiring, wages
increase with tenure more than in provinces with more developed credit markets.26 A similar
prediction is in the model of Garmaise (2007), where workers agree to employment at risky,
financially constrained firms without compensation for the extra risk because they have the
 26
      A key assumption in their work is that better workers do not sort differently across provinces.


                                                      24
option to quit. In his model, financially constrained firms share a larger portion of future
profits with workers. Finally, a broader view on these relationships can be found in models
of insurance within the firm, including Guiso et al. (2005) and Cardoso & Portela (2009).
       Next we turn to testing predictions of models in which financially constrained firms
offer backloaded wage contracts, where the wage rises after a windfall. If the firm uses the
grant to repay implicit financing from employees, a number of predictions arise: The effect
should be larger among firms that are more constrained, and as a result initially paid below-
market wages. The effect should also be larger among firms that grew faster before the
grant application. Clearly, only incumbent employees should be affected, and importantly,
their "unvested human capital" should increase with job tenure. In the following sections,
we consider how the evidence supports these predictions, and then discuss enforcement.27
Importantly, we are agnostic about the source of foregone wages. The counterfactual higher
wage without constraints might reflect any number of wage-setting forces, such as the outside
option, bargaining power, or agency rents.


6.2       Financial constraints
In the absence of financial frictions, firms should make all positive NPV investments. In
contrast to a productivity or future cash flow shock, unconstrained firms should not respond
to a cash flow shock by growing. The fact that they do points to financial constraints. Note
that applicant firms have undergone an onerous application process that is not only time
intensive but requires substantial disclosure to the government and some public disclosure if
a grant is awarded. We should expect that managers believe their firm needs the grant else
they would not apply. A similar cash windfall at a random firm of the same size and industry
would likely have a smaller effect. For perspective, it is useful to consider publicly traded
firms. There is evidence that public firms spend tax holiday-induced cash windfalls from
repatriation primarily on dividends, not wages (Dharmapala, Foley & Forbes 2011).28 This
is more consistent with the flat wage-tenure profiles theorized in Azariadis (1988), where
risk-neutral firms insure risk-averse workers. Large publicly traded firms with significant
  27
     If the data do not support these predictions, it does not mean that the mechanism is not at play. Even if
the grant reduces financial constraints, the firm may remain constrained, and even if implicit lending within
the firm is occurring, the firm might spend the grant only on other things.
  28
     Relatedly, Blanchard, Lopez-de Silanes & Shleifer (1994) ask what public firms do with a cash windfall.
Using a sample of 11 firms that won lawsuits, they find that managerial cash compensation rises 84 percent
after an award, which they conclude best reflects severe agency problems between managers and shareholders.


                                                     25
overseas cash holdings likely have good access to capital markets, unlike the small, young,
private firms in our data. The differing responses to a cash windfall may reflect this disparity.
The Azariadis (1988) model can help explain the lack of pass through among large public
companies, while the Michelacci & Quadrini (2009) model can help explain the large pass-
through and steep wage-tenure profile observed here.
    With this background in mind, within our sample the backloaded wage contract predicts
larger effects among firms that we expect to be more constrained. We find at the employee
level in Table 10 that the grant is more useful for smaller and younger firms. Columns 1 and
2 show the effect of winning interacted with indicators for top quartile employment and age
in the year before the grant award year.29 In both cases, the coefficient is large and negative.
The result in Column 1 is to some degree mechanical, because the grant is the same size for
all firms. However, the results are supported by the finding in Howell (2017) that winning
has a larger effect on innovation and VC among smaller and younger firms, and imply that
the results are likely driven by more constrained firms.
    Four additional pieces of evidence are consistent with financially constrained firms offering
a backloaded wage contract. First, these contracts are most useful when the firm needs
to grow fast, so Michelacci & Quadrini (2009) predict that firms growing faster should
initially pay lower wages. Consistent with this, we find that firms growing faster before the
application year experience larger effects. Specifically, in Table 10 column 3, we interact
winning with revenue growth between three and one years before the grant application year.
The coefficient is strongly positive, consistent with the effect stemming from fast-growing
firms that substitute other investments for wage payments.
    Second, firms that tended to pay more before the grant are less likely to be using these
backloaded wages contracts. Indeed, firms that paid above-median wages in the year before
the application year tend to experience a smaller effect of the grant on wages, shown in Table
10 column 4. Third, the finding that there is, if anything, some substitution in the years
after the grant between wage increases and investment (Table 9 columns 2-4) is consistent
with those firms that remain constrained using less of the grant to repay existing backloaded
wage contracts. Finally, we expect that wages will increase as profits rise if they are initially
pushed down by firm financial constraints. Consistent with this hypothesis, we find that
on average as revenue increases, wages rise more for workers with high tenure (we do not
  29
     We use indicator variables here because at the employee level, these variables are quite skewed. These
relationships persist at the firm level.


                                                    26
observe profits).30


6.3       Incumbent status
If the grant is used to pay out existing backloaded wage contracts, only incumbent employees
should be affected. Indeed, this is what we find. We would also expect that the firm "owes"
the most to incumbent employees who have been at the firm the longest. Indeed, the effect
increases in worker tenure, which is not driven by firm owners and is similar across the wage
distribution, suggesting that backloaded wage contracts are used for all employees.
       If incumbent workers accept a backloaded contract, their initial wage should reflect a
"constrained employer" penalty, and their benefit should be increasing in this penalty. Table
10 shows evidence consistent with both of these predictions. First, column 6 shows that
the percent raise in the first year at the SBIR applicant firm relative to the previous job is
decreasing in the tenure of the worker as of the year before the application. Second, column
5 shows how the effect varies with the employee's percent raise when he was hired relative
to his previous job. The interaction term indicates that the effect on earnings decreases in
the percent raise. In other words, workers who accepted higher wage penalties when they
joined the firm receive a larger benefit because of the grant award.
       Several descriptive facts about the percent raise are worth reporting, as this is seldom
examined in the literature. The median worker at the firms in our sample accepts a lower
wage when he joins than he earned at his previous firm. This median pay penalty is about
6 percent (Table 1 Panel C). However, there is substantial skewness. Table 1 Panel D shows
that the average percent raise is positive and significantly larger for new employees.31 There
is no difference in the percent raise among new hires across award status, consistent with
the absence of an effect among awardees generally. Also, the percent raise is smaller among
firms we expect to be more constrained (Table 10 columns 7-8).32 The award does not affect
the percent raise for new hires, consistent with there being no different composition of new
hires across firm types.
  30
      We did not disclose this result as revenue is not observable for some observations and so a new sample
is created that led to excessively small implicit samples with the samples of other disclosed results.
   31
      Note the 24 percent average raise across the whole distribution is on the high side but not
dissimilar to data on pay raises in general for highly educated individuals. E.g., see for data scientists:
https://www.burtchworks.com/2019/05/13/2019-update-analytics-salary-increases-when-changing-jobs/
   32
      Note we do not conduct this exercise comparing across awardees and non-awardees because it is irrelevant,
as there is no effect for new hires, and incumbents' raise is a pre-application event.



                                                      27
       We do not find evidence that there is a significant change in the overall wage-tenure profile
after the grant, suggesting that the firm may remain constrained and engage in similarly
backloaded contracts with new hires.33 The grant does not leave the firm unconstrained ­ in
fact, to the degree the firm uses the grant to fund growth, it may engage in contracts that
are even more backloaded. The effect on incumbent workers could reflect a need to use part
of an observable windfall to "pay back" employees with the most unvested human capital.
This gives the firm credibility in engaging in new backloaded wage contracts.
       Do incumbent workers earn a risk premium for having accepted the backloaded contract?
Without observing the counterfactual unconstrained wage trajectory, we cannot fully answer
this question. However, if we put aside counterfactual wage growth, we can assess whether
the pay penalty at hiring is repaid after the grant, and if so with what premium or discount.
A simple calculation using the main results and descriptive statistics suggest a substantial
premium for workers with seven years of tenure at the time of the grant (seven years is
about one standard deviation above the mean). The annual increase is over twice the pay
penalty for joining early, allowing the worker to "make up" for foregone income within three
years. Within seven years, the additional income will further compensate for a reasonable
assumption about lower wage growth.34 While the exact number is of course sensitive to
assumptions, an incumbent worker with long tenure who is at a winning firm appears to be
well-compensated.


6.4       Survey evidence
Thus far, we have provided evidence for the mechanism that is cross-sectional and therefore
inherently more descriptive than the causal analysis that establishes the main effect of the
grant on wages. The ideal test would observe whether firms in the data are actually using
  33
      Using a within-firm annual measure of the correlation between tenure and wage, we found no difference
between winners and non-winners post-award decision. Among new employees, the tenure-wage profile is
also not statistically different across winners and non-winners.
   34
      The closest measure we have to the average unconstrained wage bump is the bump for new hires among
awardees, which is 24 percent. The percent increase is decreasing by .025 on average per year of tenure
(Table 10 column 7). A worker with seven years of tenure (about one standard deviation above the mean)
therefore "missed out" on about 4.2 percent of wage gain when hired. The average wage in the last year of
the previous job is $47,570, implying that he missed out on $1,997 per year. The increase in wages due to the
grant is about nine percent. Relative to the average incumbent wage of $63,500, this is $5,715. Thus, the pay
bump is more than twice the penalty at hiring, suggesting a substantial premium. Making the conservative
assumption that the employee would have invested this income at 5 percent, and reinvesting the income on
it, the foregone earnings total $17,776. It therefore takes between two and three years after the grant to
make up for this lost income.


                                                     28
backloaded wage contracts as a result of financial constraints.               To assess whether this
mechanism is used in practice, we conducted an email survey of DOE SBIR grantee
principal investigators, who are almost always company CEOs.35 The survey asked the
following question:

         "Have you ever paid employees less than you would optimally want to pay them
         because you were cash-constrained, and then been able to pay them more once
         you were doing well? That is, do employees sometimes accept lower pay initially
         so that the firm can grow faster, with the expectation that cash windfalls may
         be shared fairly with them in the future?
         You can simply reply "Yes" or "No" to this email, but if you have time it would
         be terrific if you can provide a bit of color or explanation as well."

       We sent the same email to 585 individuals for whom we were able to find email addresses.36
Among these, 88 addresses bounced. We received 99 responses, representing a response
rate of 19.9 percent. The full text of the email is shown in Appendix Figure A.3, which
also includes an actual response (with permission from the responder).37 Across the 99
respondents, 55.6 percent replied yes, 21.2 percent no, and 23.2 percent did not explicitly
answer the question. The sample response in Appendix Figure A.3 is representative of the
fact that most responders directly answered the question while also generously providing
qualitative color. Three additional examples are as follows (also with permission). First,
Susan MacKay, CEO of Cerahelix, wrote:

         "Yes I have done that often...several times with a promise of higher salaries in
         the future (have also delivered on that promise). It's not just a promise of
         higher salary in the future, I also told (and still do tell) my employees that the
         experience and level of responsibility, the learning curve and challenges that they
         will encounter, are more than they would ever experience at a larger, more mature
         company."

Second, Ron Sinton, Founder and President of Sinton Instruments, wrote:
  35
     Emails sent from Sabrina Howell. Note that the grantee firm and individual principal investigator
information used to develop the survey is public, available at www.sbir.gov, and makes no use of data from
the U.S. DOE or the U.S. Census. The survey targeted firms, so did not require IRB approval.
  36
     We started with the sample of all Phase 1 grantees. The emails were sent on October 31 and November
1 2019. All tabulated responses were collected by November 6.
  37
     The SBIR grant for this responder is publicly filed under the firm name "ProjectEconomics," available
at https://www.sbir.gov/sbirsearch/detail/880883.


                                                   29
      "I would say "yes".      I effectively do this by supplementing salaries with
      discretionary year-end bonuses,       proportionate to base salary for each
      employee....that a bonus depends on the vagaries of profits rather than effort
      does not always sit well with some employees...I try to emphasize that I hand
      out cash rather than stock because stock value is an optimistic scenario that
      may not materialize."

Third, Tom Heiser, President and CEO of Ridgetop Group, said that

      "...in the past this was a very good strategy as long as the candidate could
      understand the vision and was willing to sacrifice short term for the long term."

These quotes highlight the positive answers regarding the mechanism. They also join many
other responses in emphasizing the non-pecuniary amenities of working at a small, high-tech
firm. Motivating employees to feel that they are part of a larger, important mission seems
integral to the incentive compatibility of these implicit labor contracts and seems a fruitful
avenue for future research.
   It is important to caveat the results: There are no doubt biases in both the subset of
all grantees that we reached and in the decision to respond. Nonetheless, the results offer
strong support for the mechanism. The survey responses indicate that grantees have often
used backloaded wages contracts as a result of having been financially constrained and share
windfalls with workers as a way to repay these contracts.


6.5    Enforcement mechanism
Why doesn't the firm renege on backloaded wage contracts? The evidence suggests that
firms remain constrained after they receive the grant. Yet they increase wages permanently,
raising their expenses and thus potentially becoming more constrained. One explanation is
that higher pay was formerly positive net present value but the firm wasn't able to take on this
"project." The combination of the grant and subsequent growth allow it to pay the optimal
wage. Employees expected part of their compensation to be in the form of higher wages when
the firm succeeds, leading to an implicit financing contract. The question remains, however,
how the firm is able to commit to this ex-ante. In Michelacci & Quadrini (2009), the firm
can commit to increase wages in the future because it invests in worker-specific capital. The
loss of this capital should the worker quit operates as a form of implicit collateral for the

                                              30
employee. In this way, the enforcement mechanism in Michelacci & Quadrini (2009) is a
type of bargaining power. However, this holdup problem should be double-sided. If the
human capital of the employee is to some degree firm-specific, the firm should in theory be
able to hold up the employee just as well as the reverse. Also, new hires should have the
most bargaining power as they are actively choosing between firms and have no firm-specific
capital. Yet we find no effect among new hires.
   An alternative enforcement mechanism is concern for fairness or reputation. Sharing
rents in a manner deemed fair by employees could benefit the firm in the long run (Lazear
1989, Kahneman, Knetsch & Thaler 1986). In an implicit contract, worker loyalty yields more
productivity, and in exchange employees are guaranteed a share of firm rents (Howell & Wolff
1991). Indeed, establishing a good reputation and building trust with employees appear to
play a role in real world wage bargaining outcomes (Blanchard & Philippon 2006). There is
abundant evidence that fairness ­ especially relating to relative pay ­ shapes employee wage
perceptions. This literature includes Falk, Fehr & Zehnder (2006), Card, Mas, Moretti &
Saez (2012), Breza, Kaur & Shamdasani (2017), and Dube, Giuliano & Leonard (2019).
   The results suggest that inequality within the firm can increase while all incumbent
employees receive a "fair share" of rents.    There is evidence from the psychology and
behavioral economics literature that people dislike unfairness but not inequality (Starmans,
Sheskin & Bloom 2017).       Edmans (2019) suggests that penalties for high within-firm
inequality, exemplified by taxes or divestment campaigns targeting companies with high
pay ratios, may be misplaced if the pie grows for all employees even as inequality increases.


6.6    Other mechanisms
We have already shown in Section 5 that an increase in firm growth does not explain the
effect on earnings. Appendix B contains detailed consideration of alternative mechanisms.
Here we discuss a few key points relating to the three most plausible possibilities, which are
bargaining, incentive contracting, and agency models.
   First, in bargaining models the wage is based on employee productivity and the outside
option (Stole & Zwiebel 1996, Hall & Milgrom 2008). When a cash windfall occurs, the
worker's productivity has not changed, quite unlike the theoretical model in Kline et al.
(Forthcoming), where wage effects come from the changes to marginal productivity that
happen after a patent grant. Thus, bargaining models predict no immediate effect of the


                                             31
cash windfall on wages, because the firm's greater ability to pay does not affect its cost
of hiring a replacement worker, and thus does not change a worker's bargaining power. It
is therefore inconsistent with bargaining to observe the entire effect on wages within the
second quarter after the grant. If immediate gains reflected bargaining over expected future
productivity growth, these gains should be proportional to the benefit that the employee
will provide and should also accrue to new workers. Yet we find no variation with proxies
for skill, such as pre-existing wage or education, and no effects for new workers.
   Relatedly, in a bargaining model, we expect workers with less power to have wages that
move more closely with their outside option. To test for this, we interact the effect of the
award with measures of labor market tightness but find no interaction effects at any point
in the wage distribution. Finally, the larger effect among more financially constrained firms
would not be expected in a bargaining model unless the worker had foregone previous wages,
which is observationally equivalent to the backloaded wage contract mechanism.
   A second plausible mechanism is incentive contracting. This should yield a "bonus" type
payout that would be temporary. Instead, we observe permanent increases. Further, the
benefit should be proportional to the individual's effort to get the grant, which should move
more directly with proxies for skill than tenure. It seems unlikely that low wage workers, such
as administrative assistants, would have been pivotal to receiving an R&D grant. Finally,
there is no reason an incentive contracting mechanism would reflect measures of financial
constraints.
   A third alternative is that employees accrue agency power and become more entrenched
over time (Berk et al. 2010). One challenge to an agency frictions channel is that the effect
persists over time. We would normally expect agency rents to cease when the free cash flow is
exhausted. More importantly, an agency model is fundamentally observationally equivalent
to the backloaded wage explanation. To illustrate this, suppose an employee is not paid his
reservation wage, and there are two possible explanations: (1) He has implicitly agreed to
a backloaded wage and knows that when a cash windfall occurs he will be compensated for
foregone wages; (2) He knows that the employer will treat him "fairly" by sharing with him
in proportion to his tenure at the firm. The second model ­ the agency story ­ requires us to
ask why his agency power didn't allow him to previously receive a higher wage. The answer
must be that the firm faced financial constraints, which prevented him from extracting more
agency rents. Therefore, both models predict that after a cash flow shock, constrained firms
increase wages based on incumbent tenure. The difference between the two models is the

                                              32
source for the wages implicitly owed to the employee. In a more classical interpretation, they
stem from the employee's outside option or, in a bargaining model, his productivity. In the
agency interpretation, the source is perhaps the employee being "friends" with the owner.
The source is orthogonal to the key components of the backloaded wage mechanism, that
(a) the constrained firms owes wages to employees and (b) this unvested human capital is
increasing in tenure, leading a cash windfall to be shared proportionally with tenure.



7    Conclusion
A firm might spend a cash flow shock on dividends (i.e. transfer it to owners or shareholders),
wages, or investment in physical or human capital (i.e. new hires). This paper offers the
first evaluation of how a cash flow shock affects firm wages, employment, and revenue, using
government R&D grants to small, likely financially constrained firms. In addition to being
economically important, small firms are particularly interesting because their employment
and wage structures are especially dynamic. If such firms must make tradeoffs between
spending on optimal wages and other purposes, their wage-setting behavior may deviate
from modern models focused on the interplay between a worker's bargaining power, her
marginal product, and firm rents.
    We show that the cash flow shock significantly increases wages only among incumbent
employees who are present at the time of the grant application. The effect on incumbents
increases essentially linearly in worker tenure. The grant also increases within-firm wage
inequality, employment, and revenue. However, a growth channel does not fully explain the
effects on wages.    The results are most consistent with the firm sharing rents with
employees to pay out backloaded wage contracts, a form of implicit financing that the
employee provides to the firm. The firms in our data offer a good setting to test for
implicit contracts governing rent sharing because small firms have less hierarchical
structures, more employee autonomy, and more opportunity for monitoring and
coordination (Isaac, Walker & Williams 1994, Carpenter 2007, Elfenbein et al. 2010). It
seems likely that large, unconstrained firms would react quite differently to a cash windfall.
Assessing heterogeneity effects across a representative population of firms is a fruitful
avenue for future research.




                                              33
References
Abowd, J. A. & Lemieux, T. (1993), `The effects of product market competition on collective
 bargaining agreements: The case of foreign competition in canada', The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics 108(4), 983­1014.
Abowd, J. M., Kramarz, F. & Margolis, D. N. (1999), `High wage workers and high wage
 firms', Econometrica 67(2), 251­333.
Abowd, J. M., McKinney, K. L. & Zhao, N. L. (2018), `Earnings inequality and mobility
 trends in the united states: Nationally representative estimates from longitudinally linked
 employer-employee data', Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1), S183­S300.
Aghion, P., Akcigit, U., Hyytinen, A. & Toivanen, O. (2018), On the returns to invention
  within firms: Evidence from finland, in `AEA Papers and Proceedings', Vol. 108, pp. 208­
  12.
Akerlof, G. A. & Yellen, J. L. (1988), `Fairness and unemployment', The American Economic
  Review 78(2), 44­49.
Arai, M. (2003), `Wages, profits, and capital intensity: Evidence from matched worker-firm
  data', Journal of Labor Economics 21(3), 593­618.
Arai, M. & Heyman, F. (2009), `Microdata evidence on rent-sharing', Applied Economics
  41(23), 2965­2976.
Azariadis, C. (1975), `Implicit contracts and underemployment equilibria', Journal of political
  economy 83(6), 1183­1202.
Azariadis, C. (1988), `Human capital and self-enforcing contracts', The Scandinavian Journal
  of Economics pp. 507­528.
Bagger, J., Christensen, B. J. & Mortensen, D. T. (2014), Wage and labor productivity
  dispersion: The roles of total factor productivity, labor quality, capital intensity, and rent
  sharing.
Balasubramanian, N. & Sivadasan, J. (2011), `What happens when firms patent? new
  evidence from us economic census data', The Review of Economics and Statistics
  93(1), 126­146.
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I. & Rasul, I. (2007), `Incentives for managers and inequality among
  workers: Evidence from a firm-level experiment', The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  122(2), 729­773.
Barth, E., Bryson, A., Davis, J. C. & Freeman, R. (2016), `It's where you work: Increases
  in the dispersion of earnings across establishments and individuals in the united states',
  Journal of Labor Economics 34(S2), S67­S97.
Bell, A. M., Chetty, R., Jaravel, X., Petkova, N. & Van Reenen, J. (2017), Who becomes an
  inventor in america? the importance of exposure to innovation, Technical report, National
  Bureau of Economic Research.
Bell, B. & Van Reenen, J. (2011), `Firm performance and wages: evidence from across the
  corporate hierarchy', CEP Discussion paper 1088.
Bergman, N. K., Iyer, R. & Thakor, R. T. (2017), The effect of cash injections: Evidence
  from the 1980s farm debt crisis, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                              34
Berk, J. B., Stanton, R. & Zechner, J. (2010), `Human capital, bankruptcy, and capital
  structure', The Journal of Finance 65(3), 891­926.
Bernhardt, D. & Timmis, G. C. (1990), `Multiperiod wage contracts and productivity
  profiles', Journal of Labor Economics 8(4), 529­563.
Black, S. E. & Strahan, P. E. (2001), `The division of spoils: rent-sharing and discrimination
  in a regulated industry', American Economic Review 91(4), 814­831.
Blanchard, O. J., Lopez-de Silanes, F. & Shleifer, A. (1994), `What do firms do with cash
  windfalls?', Journal of financial economics 36(3), 337­360.
Blanchard, O. & Philippon, T. (2006), `The quality of labor relations and unemployment'.
Blanchflower, D. G., Oswald, A. J. & Sanfey, P. (1996), `Wages, profits, and rent-sharing',
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1), 227­251.
Bonhomme, S., Lamadon, T. & Manresa, E. (2019), `A distributional framework for matched
  employer employee data', Econometrica 87(3), 699­739.
Breza, E., Kaur, S. & Shamdasani, Y. (2017), `The morale effects of pay inequality', The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 133(2), 611­663.
Bronzini, R. & Iachini, E. (2014), `Are incentives for r&d effective? evidence from a regression
  discontinuity approach', American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 6(4), 100­134.
Brown, J. N. (1989), `Why do wages increase with tenure? on-the-job training and life-cycle
  wage growth observed within firms', The American Economic Review 79(5), 971­991.
Card, D., Cardoso, A. R., Heining, J. & Kline, P. (2018), `Firms and labor market inequality:
  Evidence and some theory', Journal of Labor Economics 36(S1), S13­S70.
Card, D., Cardoso, A. R. & Kline, P. (2016), `Bargaining, sorting, and the gender wage gap:
  Quantifying the impact of firms on the relative pay of women', The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 131(2), 633­686.
Card, D., Devicienti, F. & Maida, A. (2014), `Rent-sharing, holdup, and wages: Evidence
  from matched panel data', Review of Economic Studies 81(1), 84­111.
Card, D., Heining, J. & Kline, P. (2013), `Workplace heterogeneity and the rise of west
  german wage inequality', The Quarterly journal of economics 128(3), 967­1015.
Card, D., Mas, A., Moretti, E. & Saez, E. (2012), `Inequality at work: The effect of peer
  salaries on job satisfaction', American Economic Review 102(6), 2981­3003.
Cardoso, A. & Portela, M. (2009), `Micro foundations for wage flexibility: wage insurance
  at the firm level', Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111(1), 29­50.
Carlsson, M., Messina, J. & Skans, O. N. (2016), `Wage adjustment and productivity shocks',
  The Economic Journal 126(595), 1739­1773.
Carpenter, J. P. (2007), `Punishing free-riders: How group size affects mutual monitoring
  and the provision of public goods', Games and Economic Behavior 60(1), 31­51.
Cespedes, J., Huang, X. & Parra, C. (2019), `More cash flows, more options? the effect of
  cash windfalls on small firms'.


                                              35
Chetverikov, D., Larsen, B. & Palmer, C. (2016), `Iv quantile regression for group-level
  treatments, with an application to the distributional effects of trade', Econometrica
  84(2), 809­833.
Coleman, S. & Robb, A. (2011), Sources of financing for new technology firms: evidence from
  the kauffman firm survey, in `The economics of small businesses', Springer, pp. 173­194.
Decker, R., Haltiwanger, J., Jarmin, R. & Miranda, J. (2014), `The role of entrepreneurship in
  us job creation and economic dynamism', The Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(3), 3­
  24.
Dharmapala, D., Foley, C. F. & Forbes, K. J. (2011), `Watch what i do, not what i say:
 The unintended consequences of the homeland investment act', The Journal of Finance
 66(3), 753­787.
Dube, A., Giuliano, L. & Leonard, J. (2019), `Fairness and frictions: The impact of unequal
 raises on quit behavior', American Economic Review 109(2), 620­63.
Edmans, A. (2019), `Grow the pie: Creating profit for investors and value for society'.
Einiö, E. (2014), `R&d subsidies and company performance: Evidence from geographic
  variation in government funding based on the erdf population-density rule', Review of
  Economics and Statistics 96(4), 710­728.
Elfenbein, D. W., Hamilton, B. H. & Zenger, T. R. (2010), `The small firm effect and the
  entrepreneurial spawning of scientists and engineers', Management Science 56(4), 659­681.
Erel, I., Jang, Y. & Weisbach, M. S. (2015), `Do acquisitions relieve target firms' financial
  constraints?', The Journal of Finance 70(1), 289­328.
Fakhfakh, F. & FitzRoy, F. (2004), `Basic wages and firm characteristics: Rent sharing in
  french manufacturing', Labour 18(4), 615­631.
Falk, A., Fehr, E. & Zehnder, C. (2006), `Fairness perceptions and reservation wages
  the behavioral effects of minimum wage laws', The Quarterly Journal of Economics
  121(4), 1347­1381.
Faulkender, M. & Petersen, M. (2012), `Investment and capital constraints: repatriations
  under the american jobs creation act', The Review of Financial Studies 25(11), 3351­
  3388.
Fazzari, S., Hubbard, R. G. & Petersen, B. (1988), `Investment, financing decisions, and tax
  policy', The American Economic Review 78(2), 200­205.
Frandsen, B. R. (2014), `The surprising impacts of unionization: Evidence from matched
  employer-employee data', Economics Department, Brigham Young University, mimeo .
Friedrich, B., Laun, L., Meghir, C. & Pistaferri, L. (2019), Earnings dynamics and firm-level
  shocks, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fuest, C., Peichl, A. & Siegloch, S. (2018), `Do higher corporate taxes reduce wages? micro
  evidence from germany', American Economic Review 108(2), 393­418.
Garin, A. & Silvério, F. (2019), How responsive are wages to demand within the firm?
 evidence from idiosyncratic export demand shocks, Technical report.



                                             36
Garmaise, M. J. (2007), `Production in entrepreneurial firms: The effects of financial
 constraints on labor and capital', The Review of Financial Studies 21(2), 543­577.
Gelman, A. & Imbens, G. (2018), `Why high-order polynomials should not be used in
 regression discontinuity designs', Journal of Business & Economic Statistics pp. 1­10.
Gilje, E. P. & Taillard, J. P. (2016), `Do private firms invest differently than public firms?
  taking cues from the natural gas industry', The Journal of Finance 71(4), 1733­1778.
Goldin, C. & Katz, L. (2008), The Race Between Education and Technology., Belknap Press
 for Harvard University Press.
Goldschmidt, D. & Schmieder, J. F. (2017), `The rise of domestic outsourcing and
 the evolution of the german wage structure', The Quarterly Journal of Economics
 132(3), 1165­1217.
Guiso, L., Pistaferri, L. & Schivardi, F. (2005), `Insurance within the firm', Journal of
 Political Economy 113(5), 1054­1087.
Guiso, L., Pistaferri, L. & Schivardi, F. (2013), `Credit within the firm', Review of Economic
 Studies 80(1), 211­247.
Gürtzgen, N. (2009), `Rent-sharing and collective bargaining coverage: Evidence from linked
 employer­employee data', Scandinavian Journal of Economics 111(2), 323­349.
Hall, R. E. & Milgrom, P. R. (2008), `The limited influence of unemployment on the wage
  bargain', American economic review 98(4), 1653­74.
Harris, M. & Holmstrom, B. (1982), `A theory of wage dynamics', The Review of Economic
  Studies 49(3), 315­333.
Helpman, E., Itskhoki, O., Muendler, M.-A. & Redding, S. J. (2017), `Trade and inequality:
  From theory to estimation', The Review of Economic Studies 84(1), 357­405.
Hennessy, C. A. & Whited, T. M. (2007), `How costly is external financing? evidence from
  a structural estimation', The Journal of Finance 62(4), 1705­1745.
Hoshi, T., Kashyap, A. & Scharfstein, D. (1991), `Corporate structure, liquidity, and
  investment: Evidence from japanese industrial groups', The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 106(1), 33­60.
Howell, D. R. & Wolff, E. N. (1991), `Skills, bargaining power and rising interindustry wage
  inequality since 1970', Review of Radical Political Economics 23(1-2), 30­37.
Howell, S. T. (2017), `Financing innovation: evidence from r&d grants', American Economic
  Review 107(4), 1136­64.
Isaac, R. M., Walker, J. M. & Williams, A. W. (1994), `Group size and the voluntary
  provision of public goods: Experimental evidence utilizing large groups', Journal of Public
  Economics 54(1), 1­36.
Jaffe, A. B. & Le, T. (2015), The impact of r&d subsidy on innovation: a study of new
  zealand firms, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Jäger, S., Schoefer, B., Young, S. G. & Zweimüller, J. (2018), Wages and the value of
  nonemployment, Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.


                                             37
Jovanovic, B. (1979), `Job matching and the theory of turnover', Journal of political economy
  87(5, Part 1), 972­990.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L. & Thaler, R. (1986), `Fairness as a constraint on profit seeking:
 Entitlements in the market', The American economic review pp. 728­741.
Kerr, W. R. & Nanda, R. (2009), `Democratizing entry: Banking deregulations, financing
  constraints, and entrepreneurship', Journal of Financial Economics 94(1), 124­149.
Kline, P., Petkova, N., Williams, H. & Zidar, O. (Forthcoming), `Who profits from patents?
  Rent-sharing at innovative firms', The Quarterly Journal of Economics .
Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Schmidt, L. & Song, J. (2019), `Technological innovation and
 labor income risk', Working Paper .
Ku, H., Schoenberg, U. & Schreiner, R. (2020), `Do place-based tax incentives create jobs?',
 Journal of Public Economics .
Lamadon, T., Mogstad, M. & Setzler, B. (2019), Imperfect competition, compensating
  differentials and rent sharing in the us labor market, Technical report, National Bureau
  of Economic Research.
Lazear, E. P. (1981), `Agency, earnings profiles, productivity, and hours restrictions', The
  American Economic Review 71(4), 606­620.
Lazear, E. P. (1989), `Pay equality and industrial politics', Journal of political economy
  97(3), 561­580.
Lee, D. S. & Lemieux, T. (2010), `Regression discontinuity designs in economics', Journal of
  economic literature 48(2), 281­355.
Lokshin, B. & Mohnen, P. (2013), `Do r&d tax incentives lead to higher wages for r&d
  workers? evidence from the netherlands', Research Policy 42(3), 823­830.
Macis, M. & Schivardi, F. (2016), `Exports and wages: Rent sharing, workforce composition,
 or returns to skills?', Journal of Labor Economics 34(4), 945­978.
Margolis, D. & Salvanes, K. (2001), `Do firms really share rents with their workers?'.
Martins, P. S. (2009), `Rent sharing before and after the wage bill', Applied Economics
 41(17), 2133­2151.
Michelacci, C. & Quadrini, V. (2009), `Financial markets and wages', The Review of
 Economic Studies 76(2), 795­827.
Mogstad, M., Setzler, B., Lamadon, T. et al. (2017), Earnings dynamics, mobility costs, and
 transmission of market-level shocks, in `2017 Meeting Papers', number 1483, Society for
 Economic Dynamics.
Mueller, H. M., Ouimet, P. P. & Simintzi, E. (2017a), `Wage inequality and firm growth',
 American Economic Review 107(5), 379­83.
Mueller, H. M., Ouimet, P. P. & Simintzi, E. (2017b), `Within-firm pay inequality', The
 Review of Financial Studies 30(10), 3605­3635.
Oliver, M. (2012), `Overview of the doe's small business innovation research (sbir) and small
  business technology transfer (sttr) programs', DOE Webinar.

                                             38
Robb, A. M. & Robinson, D. T. (2014), `The capital structure decisions of new firms', The
  Review of Financial Studies 27(1), 153­179.
Saez, E., Schoefer, B. & Seim, D. (2019), `Payroll taxes, firm behavior, and rent
  sharing: Evidence from a young workers' tax cut in sweden', American Economic Review
  109(5), 1717­63.
Schoefer, B. (2015), The financial channel of wage rigidity, PhD thesis, Harvard University.
Song, J., Price, D. J., Guvenen, F., Bloom, N. & Von Wachter, T. (2018), `Firming up
  inequality', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 134(1), 1­50.
Starmans, C., Sheskin, M. & Bloom, P. (2017), `Why people prefer unequal societies', Nature
  Human Behaviour 1(4), 0082.
Stole, L. A. & Zwiebel, J. (1996), `Organizational design and technology choice under
  intrafirm bargaining', The American Economic Review pp. 195­222.
Takalo, T., Tanayama, T. & Toivanen, O. (2013), `Estimating the benefits of targeted r&d
  subsidies', Review of Economics and Statistics 95(1), 255­272.
Toivanen, O. & Väänänen, L. (2012), `Returns to inventors', Review of Economics and
  Statistics 94(4), 1173­1190.
Van Reenen, J. (1996), `The creation and capture of rents: wages and innovation in a panel
  of uk companies', The Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(1), 195­226.
Van Reenen, J. (2011), `Wage inequality, technology and trade: 21st century evidence',
  Labour Economics 18(6), 730­741.




                                            39
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics

                               A. SBIR Phase 1 competition data (counts)
                                                       N
        Unique applicant firms                       2100
        Applications                                 4300
        Grant award winners                           800
        Grant award non-winners                      3600
        Competitions                                  270


                            B. Firm-level outcome and control variables (firm-year)

        Levels statistics
                                                             N      Mean       Std Dev    Median
        Payroll ('000 2010 $)                              30500     2546        6141      689.5
        Employment                                         30500    35.36       72.17      11.51
        Employmentt= 1                                     30500     6.86        4.45       16.9
        Award amount/employmentt= 1                        30500    21880       33690      9106
        Average earnings ('000 2010 $)                     30500    64.15       38.55      57.85
        90/10 log earnings differential                     9600    1.809       1.053
        99/50 log earnings differential                     9600    0.951       0.702
        Standard deviation of log earnings                 9600     0.861       0.325
        Revenue ('000 2010 $)                              13000    4834        11410
        Firm age                                           30500    12.38       8.539
        Subsequent patent citations (3 year window)        30500    2.071       10.81
        Never previously won an award                      30500     0.57

        Log growth statistics (base is t =   1)
                                                             N       Mean      Std Dev    Median
        Payroll                                            30500     -0.105     1.245     -0.0015
        Employment                                         30500     -0.082     1.008        0
        Earnings                                           30500     -0.023     0.825        0
        Revenue                                            13000     -0.048     1.078
        90/10 differential                                  7500    -0.0015     0.983
        99/50 differential                                  7500     0.0028     0.599
        Standard deviation                                 7500     0.0048      0.334

Note: These panels show summary statistics about the SBIR data that were matched to U.S. Census data.
Growth measures use the year before the application year as the base year (t = 1 ). Application year is
first application year if the firm never won a grant, and first winning year if it ever won.  Median is
calculated as the average of the 49th and 51st percentiles, as statistics associated with a specific firm or
individual may not be disclosed. It was not disclosed for all variables. The numbers of observations are
rounded to meet Census disclosure requirements. This table reports results from disclosures CMS request
7276 and CBDRB-FY19-452.



                                                      40
                                 C. Employee variables (SBIR applicant firms)

                                                         N       Mean    Std Dev    Median       Level of
                                                                                                observation

   # unique individuals in sample                    73000                                       Person
   Earnings at SBIR firm ('000 2010 $)              257000       63.50    86.54      49.99     Person-year
   Earnings all jobs ('000 2010 $)                  909000       58.92    84.39      44.45     Person-year
   Tenure at SBIR firm (years)                      257000        3.85     3.11         3      Person-year
   Percent raise from last year of previous          62000        0.24     1.32      -0.061      Person
   job to first year at SBIR firm

   As of 2nd year after award, firm # of:
     Incumbent employees                               2300      6.689    12.38          5         Firm
     New employees                                     2300      4.036    24.32          0         Firm


                         D. Employee characteristics by incumbent or new hire status

                                                 Incumbent workers           New hires

                                                   N          Mean         N         Mean          P-value for
                                                                                                  diff of means
 Employee-level within 2 yrs of award yr
  HighEduck (BA or above)                        49500         0.45      11500       0.358            0.00
  Agek,t (years)                                 49500        43.11      11500       36.99            0.00
  Earningsk,t ('000 2010 $)                      49500        68.98      11500       39.70            0.00
  Percent raisek,t ('000 2010 $)                 49500        0.224      49500       0.243            0.09

 Firm-level, all years
   10th pctile earningsi,t   ('000   2010   $)    8200        19.34       3200       12.46            0.00
   50th pctile earningsi,t   ('000   2010   $)    8200        40.54       3200       22.93            0.00
   90th pctile earningsi,t   ('000   2010   $)    8200        76.88       3200       44.80            0.00
   99th pctile earningsi,t   ('000   2010   $)    8200        94.85       3200       50.51            0.00

Note: These panels show summary statistics about employees at SBIR applicant firms. Incumbent
employees are those present at the firm in the year of grant application. New employees are those hired
after the year of grant application. Growth measures use the year before the application year as the base
year (base is t = 1 ). Application year is first application year if the firm never won a grant, and first
winning year if it ever won.  Median is calculated as the average of the 49th and 51st percentiles, as
statistics associated with a specific firm or individual may not be disclosed.  The statistics for tenure are
very similar when restricted to the award year and thus only to incumbent workers. The numbers of
observations are rounded to meet Census disclosure requirements. This table reports results from
disclosures CMS request 7276, CBDRB-FY19-452, and CBDRB-FY19-452.




                                                         41
                          Table 2: Grant Effect on Earnings (Firm-Level)

   Dependent variable:                Log earnings                             Log earnings growth

   Sample:                                   Incumbent New                                       2 year
                                                                                                 window

                            (1)      (2)       (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)      (7)         (8)

   PostAwardi,j,t         .0931** .0751** .137***          0.0607     .134*** .133*** .0946** .126***
                          (.0387) (.0373) (0.0482)         (0.0753)   (0.048) (0.0481) (0.0391) (0.0406)

   Controls
   Awardi,j                  Y        Y         Y            Y          Y         Y        N           Y
   Posti,j,t                 Y        Y         Y            Y          Y         Y        Y           Y
   Ranki,j , Rank2 i,j       Y        Y         Y            Y          Y         N        N           Y
   Rank | win/losei,j        N        N         N            N          N         Y        N           N
   Agei,t , Age2
               i,t           Y        Y         Y            Y          Y         Y        Y           Y
   Yeart FE                  Y        Y         Y            Y          Y         Y        Y           Y
   Competitionj FE           Y        Y         Y            Y          Y         Y        N           Y
   State, Top MSA FE         N        Y         N            N          N         N        N           N
   Firm-appi,j FE            N        N         N            N          N         N        Y           N

   N                      30500     30500     8200         3200       30500     30500    30500       20000
   R2                     0.0924     .119     0.142        0.135      0.0988    0.099    0.449       0.0738


Note: This table shows the effect of the grant on earnings levels (columns 1-4) and earnings growth (columns
5-8), using Equation 1. The base year for growth measures is t = 1, the year before the application year.
Rank is controlled for quadratically, on either side of the cutoff, or through firm-application fixed effects
(Firm-appi,j FE, which also absorb award and competition). Column 8 restricts the post sample to the
two years after the grant application year (this includes the application year). Control coefficients are not
reported to minimize disclosure requirements. Data are observed at the firm-year level. Standard errors
are clustered by competition. , , and  denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. This table
reports results from disclosures CMS request 7276 and CBDRB-FY19-369.




                                                      42
                      Table 3: Grant Effect on Earnings (Employee-Level)

 Dependent variable: Log earnings

 Sample:                                        2 year                Incumbent   New
                                                window

                               (1)      (2)      (3)         (4)        (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)

 PostAwardi,j,t               .032**   .029**   .042**      .076***   .038***      -.044   -.126***   -.125***
                              (.014)   (.014)   (.021)       (.012)    (.013)     (.193)     (.033)    (.0321)
 PostAwardi,j,t ·                                                                           .096***    .153***
 Incumbentk
                                                                                            (.029)     (.029)
 Incumbentk                                                                                .584***    .113***
                                                                                            (.010)     (.016)
 Controls
 Posti,j,t                      Y        Y        Y           Y          Y          Y         Y          Y
 Ranki,j , Rank2   i,j          N        Y        N           N          N          N         N          N
 Agei,t , Age2 i,t              N        Y        N           N          N          N         N          N
 Posti,j,t · Incumbentk         N        N        N           N          N          N         Y          Y
 Employee controlsk,t=    1     N        N        N           N          N          N         N          Y
 Yeart FE                       Y        Y        Y           Y          Y          Y         Y          Y
 Employeek FE                   Y        Y        Y           Y          Y          Y         N          N
 Firmi FE                       N        N        N           Y          N          N         Y          Y

 N                            257000   257000   95000       909000    177000      80000    257000     257000
 R2                            .762     .762     .819        .699      .745        .78      .187       .385


Note: This table shows the effect of the grant on employee earnings, using Equation 1. Column 3 restricts
the post sample to the two years after the grant application year (this includes the application year).
Column 4 identifies the effect off employees who switch jobs by including employee-years after and before
an employee worked at the SBIR applicant firm, and including both firm and employee fixed effects.
Columns 5 and 6 restrict the sample to incumbent and new employees, respectively. Columns 7 and 8
interact whether the firm wins a grant with being an incumbent employee. Note that Awardi,j is defined
at the firm level, so is absorbed by either employee or firm fixed effects. Control coefficients are not
reported to minimize disclosure requirements. Employee controlsk,t= 1 include tenure, age, high education
(BA or above), and log wage in the year before the award year. Data are observed at the employee-year
level. Standard errors are clustered by employee. , , and  denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and
1% levels. This table reports results from disclosure CBDRB-FY19-369.




                                                       43
       Table 4: Grant Effect on Firm Earnings among Incumbent and New Employees

 Dependent variable: Log earnings at the firm's:
                          10th pctile            50th pctile              90th pctile          99th pctile

 Sample:                Incumbent New          Incumbent New           Incumbent New        Incumbent New

                          (1)       (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)       (6)         (7)       (8)

 PostAwardi,j,t          .15**      0.058       .121**      0.0587     .156***    0.0453     .146**    0.0362
                        (0.0706)   (0.0755)    (0.0503)     (0.0871)   (0.0559)   (0.103)   (0.0655)   (0.117)
 Controls
 Awardi,j                  Y         Y            Y           Y           Y         Y          Y         Y
 Posti,j,t                 Y         Y            Y           Y           Y         Y          Y         Y
 Ranki,j , Rank2 i,j       Y         Y            Y           Y           Y         Y          Y         Y
 Agei,t , Age2
             i,t           Y         Y            Y           Y           Y         Y          Y         Y
 Yeart FE                  Y         Y            Y           Y           Y         Y          Y         Y
 Competitionj FE           Y         Y            Y           Y           Y         Y          Y         Y

 N                        8200     3200         8200        3200        8200      3200       8200      3200
 R2                       0.17     0.103        0.129       0.14        0.13      0.137      0.183     0.148


Note: This table shows the effect of the grant on earnings percentiles by employee type using Equation 1.
Incumbent employees are those who were present at the firm in the year before the grant award year. Control
coefficients are not reported to minimize disclosure requirements. Data are observed at the firm-year level.
Standard errors are clustered by competition. , , and  denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels. This table reports results from disclosure CMS request 7276.




                                                       44
Table 5: Grant Effect on Earnings Among Incumbent Employees by Tenure (Employee-Level)

 Dependent variable: Log earnings
 Sample:                                                                                Hired 3 yrs after
                                                                                        firm first observed
                                       (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)                (5)

 PostAwardi,j,t · Tenurek,t          .0119**     .0107**     .0114***     .0565***             .014**
                                     (.00465)    (.00417)       (.004)       (.016)          (.00625)
 PostAwardi,j,t                        -.0106      -.0276       -.0346     -.103***            -.0365
                                      (.0285)     (.0264)      (.0256)      (.0373)           (.0353)
 Posti,j,t · Tenurek,t              -.0213***   -.0148***    -.0147***    -.0637***          -.018***
                                     (.00389)    (.00333)     (.00318)       (.013)          (.00525)
 Tenurek,t                           .129***    .0747***     .0569***      .208***            .127***
                                     (.00288)    (.00246)     (.00254)      (.0058)          (.00341)
 Posti,j,t                          .0931***    .0641***     .0632***     .0969***           .0659***
                                      (.0193)      (.017)      (.0164)      (.0272)           (.0235)
 PostAwardi,j,t · Tenure2 k,t                                             -.0058***
                                                                           (.00143)
 Posti,j,t · Tenure2 k,t                                                  .00666***
                                                                           (.00126)
 Tenure2 k,t                                                              -.0129***
                                                                          (.000426)
 Controls
 Agek,t                                N            Y            Y            Y                 N
 HighEduck                             N            Y            Y            Y                 N
 WagePctilesk,t=     1   FE            N            Y            N            N                 N
 Wagek,t= 1                            N            N            Y            Y                 N
 Yeart FE                              Y            Y            Y            Y                 Y
 Firmi FE                              Y            Y            Y            Y                 Y

 N                                   177000       177000      177000        177000            133000
 R2                                   .241         .406         .44          .459              .236


Note: This table shows the effect of the grant on employee earnings, using Equation 1. The sample is
restricted to incumbent workers who were at the firm before the application year. Column 5 further restricts
the sample to include only those hired at least three years after the firm is first observed, to test whether
owners drive the interaction effect with tenure. Control coefficients are not reported to minimize disclosure
requirements. Note that Awardi,j is defined at the firm level, so is absorbed by firm fixed effects. Data
are observed at the employee-year level. Standard errors are clustered by employee. , , and  denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. This table reports results from disclosure CBDRB-FY19-369.




                                                     45
Table 6: Grant Effect on Earnings Among Incumbent Employees by Employee Age,
Education, and Preexisting Earnings (Employee-Level)

 Dependent variable: Log earnings

                                          (1)         (2)           (3)      (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)

 PostAwardi,j,t
     ·Agek,t                           .00278***     .00108
                                       (.000869)   (.000761)
      ·HighEduck                                                  .0715*** .0344**
                                                                   (.0179)  (.015)
      ·Wage 2 10, 50k,t=           1                                                  .115**    .0916*
                                                                                     (.0573)   (.0553)
      ·Wage 2 50, 90k,t=           1                                                   .0935     .0709
                                                                                     (.0623)   (.0584)
      ·Wage 2> 90k,t=          1                                                     .235***   .178***
                                                                                     (.0648)    (.062)
      Wagek,t=    1                                                                                      .0333*
                                                                                                         (.0176)
 Controls
 PostAwardi,j,t                           Y           Y             Y        Y         Y         Y         Y
 Posti,j,t                                Y           Y             Y        Y         Y         Y         Y
 Posti,j,t · X                            Y           Y             Y        Y         Y         Y         Y
 Tenurek,t                                N           Y             N        Y         N         Y         N
 Agek,t                                   Y           Y             N        Y         N         Y         N
 HighEduck                                N           Y             Y        Y         N         Y         N
 WagePctilesk,t=      1   FE              N           N             N        N         Y         Y         N
 Wagek,t= 1                               N           Y             N        Y         N         N         Y
 Yeart FE                                 Y           Y             Y        Y         Y         Y         Y
 Firmi FE                                 Y           Y             Y        Y         Y         Y         Y

 N                                      177000      177000        177000   177000    177000    177000    177000
 R2                                      .222        .439          .213     .439      .357      .406      .439


Note: This table shows the effect of the grant on employee earnings, using Equation 1. The sample is
restricted to incumbent workers, those at the firm before the application year. In columns 5-6, the omitted
percentile earnings group is Wage < 10pctk,t= 1 . Control coefficients are omitted for space considerations,
but are available upon request.  P osti,j,t is interacted with characteristic of interest (e.g. Agek,t in column
1). Note that Awardi,j is defined at the firm level, so is absorbed by firm fixed effects. Data are observed
at the employee-year level. Standard errors are clustered by employee. , , and  denote significance at
the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. This table reports results from disclosure CBDRB-FY19-369.




                                                             46
                          Table 7: Grant Effect on Within-Firm Inequality

               Dependent variable: Inequality growth
                                               90/10                           99/50       Std Dev
               Sample:                           within 2 yrs

                                            (1)               (2)               (3)          (4)

               PostAwardi,j,t          .236***            .265***              .0791*      .0727***
                                       (0.0822)           (0.0866)            (0.0458)     (0.0268)

               Controls
               Posti,j,t                     Y                Y                  Y            Y
               Ranki,j , Rank2 i,j           Y                Y                  Y            Y
               Agei,t , Age2
                           i,t               Y                Y                  Y            Y
               Yeart FE                      Y                Y                  Y            Y
               Competitionj FE               Y                Y                  Y            Y

               N                         7500              6000                7500         7500
               R2                       0.0615            0.0571              0.0703       0.0469


             Dependent variable: Inequality levels
                                                90/10                            99/50       Std Dev
             Sample:                           Incumbent             New

                                       (5)          (6)               (7)            (8)          (9)

             PostAwardi,j,t           .151**      0.00531           -0.0127      .116**      .0556**
                                     (0.0683)     (0.0769)          (0.115)     (0.0539)     (0.0217)

             Controls
             Posti,j,t                  Y            Y                Y               Y            Y
             Ranki,j , Rank2 i,j        Y            Y                Y               Y            Y
             Agei,t , Age2
                         i,t            Y            Y                Y               Y            Y
             Yeart FE                   Y            Y                Y               Y            Y
             Competitionj FE            Y            Y                Y               Y            Y

             N                        9600         8200              3200        9600          9600
             R2                        0.1         0.174             0.12        0.136        0.0441


Note: This table shows the effect of the grant on inequality measures using Equation 1. Column 2 restricts
the post sample to the two years after the grant application year (this includes the application year). Control
coefficients are not reported to minimize disclosure requirements. Data are observed at the firm-year level.
Standard errors are clustered by competition. , , and  denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1%
levels. This table reports results from disclosure CMS request 7276.
                                                         47
                        Table 8: Grant Effect on Firm Growth Outcomes

 Dependent                          Employment growth                            Revenue growth
 variable:

 Sample:                                                  2-year                                     2-year
                                                          window                                     window

                           (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)       (7)       (8)

 PostAwardi,j,t         .271***       .262***    .27***   .142**      .19*** .183***       .273*** .159**
                        (0.0984)      (0.0968)   (0.0795) (0.0573)    (0.0614) (0.0613)    (0.0707) (0.0624)
 Awardi,j                 -0.073       0.0348     0.019
                        (0.0752)      (0.0889)   (0.0333)
 Posti,j,t               -0.0333       -0.0321
                        (0.0374)      (0.0375)
 Ranki,j                0.00352
                       (0.00773)
 Rank2
     i,j                0.000107
                       (0.000189)
 Rank | wini,j                        -0.0584
                                      (0.036)
 Rank | losei,j                      0.000996
                                     (0.0024)

 Controls
 Awardi,j                  -             -         -        Y            Y         Y          N         Y
 Posti,j,t                 -             -         N        Y            Y         Y          Y         Y
 Ranki,j , Rank2 i,j       -             N         N        Y            Y         N          N         Y
 Rank | win/losei,j        N             -         N        N            N         Y          N         N
 Agei,t , Age2
             i,t           Y             Y         Y        Y            Y         Y          Y         Y
 Yeart FE                  Y             Y         Y        Y            Y         Y          Y         Y
 Competitionj FE           Y             Y         N        Y            Y         Y          N         Y
 Firm-appi,j FE            N             N         Y        N            N         N          Y         N

 N                       30500         30500     30500     20000       13000     13000      13000     9500
 R2                       0.21          0.21     0.532     0.244       0.143     0.141      0.528     0.426


Note: This table shows the effect of the grant on log growth outcomes, using Equation 1. The base year
for the dependent variables is t = 1, the year before the application year. Columns 4 and 8 restrict the
post sample to the two years after the grant application year (this includes the application year). We show
control coefficients only in columns 1-3 to minimize disclosure requirements. Data are observed at the firm-
year level. Standard errors are clustered by competition. , , and  denote significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% levels. This table reports results from disclosure CMS request 7276.



                                                     48
                  Table 9: Relationship between Growth and Earnings Effects

         Dependent variable: Earnings growth
         Sample:                                                            within 2 years
                                                       (1)          (2)          (3)            (4)

         Revenue instr w/ PostAwardi,j,t              .0813*
                                                     (0.0473)
         PostAwardi,j,t · RevGrowthi,t20,2                        -0.0988
                                                                 (0.0716)
         PostAwardi,j,t · EmpGrowthi,t20,2                                     -0.0704
                                                                               (.0752)
         PostAwardi,j,t · PatentCitesi,t20,2                                                 -.0162***
                                                                                             (0.00511)
         PostAwardi,j,t                                          .118***       .18***         .168***
                                                                 (0.0424)      (.0453)        (0.0412)
         RevGrowthi,t20,2                                        .111***
                                                                  (0.019)
         EmpGrowthi,t20,2                                                     -.105***
                                                                                (.022)
         PatentCitesi,t20,2                                                                  -0.000514
                                                                                             (0.00161)
         Controls
         Awardi,j,t                                     Y            Y            Y             Y
         Posti,j,t                                      Y            Y            Y             Y
         Awardi,j,t · 2yrRevGrowthi,t                   N            Y            N             N
         Posti,j,t · 2yrRevGrowthi,t                    N            Y            N             N
         Awardi,j,t · 2yrEmpGrowthi,t                   N            N            Y             N
         Posti,j,t · 2yrEmpGrowthi,t                    N            N            Y             N
         Awardi,j,t · 2yrPatentCitesi,t                 N            N            N             Y
         Posti,j,t · 2yrPatentCitesi,t                  N            N            N             Y
         Ranki,j , Rank2   i,j                          Y            Y            Y             Y
         Agei,t , Age2 i,t                              Y            Y            Y             Y
         Yeart FE                                       Y            Y            Y             Y
         Competitionj FE                                Y            Y            Y             Y

         N                                            13000       20000        20000          20000
         R2                                           0.143       0.0802       0.0763         0.0827


Note: This table shows how effects on earnings growth vary by measures of subsequent growth. Column
1 shows how much of the effect may come through revenue by instrumenting for revenue with the award.
Columns 2-4 restrict the post sample to the two years after the grant application year and interact the effect
of the grant with three characteristics, using Equation 1: revenue growth, employment growth, and citations
to granted patents applied for in the two years following the grant. Data are at the firm-year level. Standard
errors are clustered by competition. , , and  denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. This
table reports results from disclosures CMS request 7276 and CBDRB-FY19-452.
                                                     49
Table 10: Grant Effect on Earnings Among Incumbent Employees by Firm Size, Age, Growth

 Dependent variable:                         Log earnings                                Percent raise in first year
                                                                                           of job relative to last
                                                                                            year of previous job

 Sample:                                     Incumbents

                                  (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)        (5)            (6)        (7)      (8)
 PostAwardi,j,t ·
    Largei,t= 1                 -.178**
                                 (.083)
      Oldi,t=      1                      -.176***
                                            (.032)
      Growthi,t2       3, 1                           .104***
                                                      (.0242)
      HighPayi,t=       1                                       -.25***
                                                                 (.071)
      Pct Raisek                                                          -.0257**
                                                                           (.0128)
 PostAwardi,j,t                  .21**    .177***     .0363*** .279***    .0436***
                                (.0823)    (.028)      (.013)   (.069)     (.0134)
 Tenurek,t=        1                                                                     -.025***
                                                                                           (.005)
 Largei,t=     1                                                                                     .062***
                                                                                                      (.010)
 Oldi,t=   1                                                                                                   .023*
                                                                                                               (.012)

 Controls
 Posti,j,t                        Y           Y         Y          Y          Y              N         N         N
 Posti,j,t · X                    Y           Y         Y          Y          Y              N         N         N
 Yeart FE                         Y           Y         Y          Y          Y              Y         Y         Y
 Employeei FE                     Y           Y         Y          Y          Y              N         N         N

 N                              177000     177000     177000    177000     177000         21500      62000     62000
 R2                              .743       .743       .759      .743       .743           .002      .0008     .0007


Note: This table shows the effect of the grant on employee earnings, using Equation 1. Large, Old and
HighPay are indicators for top quartile employment, age, and average wage in the year before the award.
Growth is the revenue growth in the three years before the award. P ctRaisek is employee k 's percent raise
in the first year of his job at the SBIR applicant firm relative to earnings in the last year of the previous job 
Note that Awardi,j is defined at the firm level, so is absorbed by firm fixed effects. Data are at the employee-
year level in columns 1-5 and at the employee level in columns 6-8. "Year FE" in columns 6-8 control for
the year before the award year (t = 1). Standard errors are clustered by employee. , , and  denote
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. This table reports results from disclosures CBDRB-FY19-369,
CBDRB-FY19-452, and CBDRB-FY2020-CES005-010.
                                                       50
                              Figure 1: Effects on Quarterly Earnings




                 s
Note: This figure shows the results from estimating Equation 3 on quarterly levels of log firm-year earnings.
Each point is a coefficient on a quarter around the award quarter interacted with winning an award. The
base quarter is -1 (immediately before the quarter of award). 95% confidence intervals are shown. This
figure reports results from disclosure DRB-B0086-CDAR-20180607.




                                                     51
                    Figure 2: Effect of Award per Employee by Firm Size Bin




          s
Note: This figure shows the effects of winning on log earnings per employee within five firm size bins,
corresponding to the quintiles of firm size, measured as the number of employees in the year before the
award. Each point is a coefficient from a regression with separate independent variables for each bin of
firm size, using a variant of Equation 1. The coefficient shows the effect of winning in award dollars per
employee conditional on being within a given quintile of firm size. The omitted group is firms that failed to
win an award and that were in the bottom size quintile. The blue dashed line is the best-fit line between the
coefficients. The red solid horizontal line shows the effect of grant per worker estimated on the full sample,
which is the prediction from assuming constant elasticity with respect to grant per worker. 95% confidence
intervals are shown for the quintile coefficients. This figure reports results from disclosure CBDRB-FY2020-
CES005-010.




                                                     52
                     Figure 3: Incumbent Employee-Level Effects by Tenure




          s
Note: This figure shows the effects of winning on log earnings by years of tenure, among incumbent employees.
Each point is a coefficient from a regression with separate dummies for years of tenure interacted with
winning, using a variant of Equation 1. The omitted group is those with one year of tenure, and more than
ten years are excluded (the coefficients are noisier). 95% confidence intervals are shown. This figure reports
results from disclosure CBDRB-FY19-369.




                                                     53
                                     Appendix
                                         sss
                                              A
                                       (For Online Publication)
                                                 sss


                 Table A.1: Additional Summary Statistics of Firm-Year Data

     Probability in industry (most common 3 digit NAICS)
                                                                       N       Mean
     Administrative and Support Services                             30500      0.013
     Chemical Manufacturing                                          30500     0.0167
     Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing                   30500      0.079
     Electrical Equipment, Appliance, and Component                  30500     0.0324
     Manufacturing
     Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing                          30500     0.0241
     Machinery Manufacturing                                         30500     0.0495
     Merchant Wholesalers, Durable Goods                             30500     0.0257
     Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services                30500     0.622

     Other firm and employee statistics
                                                                      N        Mean        Std Dev
     Firm age in application year                                    2000      8.309        6.378
     Worker age                                                      9600       43.1        8.398
     Share employees who are female                                  9600       0.223
     Share employees who are Asian                                   9600       0.173
     Share employees who are Black                                   9600      0.0273
     Share employees who are Hispanic                                9600      0.0406
     Share employees who are White                                   9600      0.737
     Share employees with BA/advanced degree                         9600       0.515
     Share employees with some college                               9600      0.250
     Share employees with high school degree                         9600      0.169
     Share employees with no high school degree                      9600      0.0642
     Share employees who are U.S. born                               9600       0.714


Note: This table shows summary statistics about the SBIR data that were matched to U.S. Census data.
The share of firms in the most common eight 3-digit NAICS codes are shown (there are a total of 99 3-digit
NAICS). Firms may change NAICS codes across years. Worker-related variables are from linked
W-2-Individual Characteristics File data. "White" indicates non-Hispanic White. The number of
observations rounded to meet Census disclosure requirements. This table reports results from disclosure
CMS request 7276.




Online Appendix A                                                                                       1
  Table A.2: Grant Amount Per Employee Effect on Earnings (Firm & Employee-Level)

 Dependent variable:                                        Log earnings                           Log
                                                                                                earnings
                                                                                                 growth

 Level of analysis:                                     Employee                             Firm

                                               (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)               (5)

 PostAwardAmtPerEmpi,j,t                     .00423*** -.00754**   -.309***       .00953**      .0142***
                                             (.00151)    (.0034)    (.0249)       (.00418)      (.00518)
 PostAwardAmtPerEmpi,j,t · Incumbentk                   .00703**
                                                        (.00315)
 PostAwardAmtPerEmpi,j,t · Tenurek                                  .28***
                                                                    (.0221)
 Incumbentk                                             .585***
                                                        (.0102)
 Tenurek                                                            .123***
                                                                    (.00276)
 AwardAmtPerEmpi,j,t                                                              .00722        .0134***
                                                                                  (.00489)      (.00474)
 Controls
 Posti,j,t                                      Y          Y           Y            Y                Y
 Ranki,j , Rank2   i,j                          N          N           N            Y                Y
 Agei,t , Age2 i,t                              N          N           N            Y                Y
 Posti,j,t · Incumbentk                         N          Y           N            N                N
 Posti,j,t · Tenurek                            N          N           Y            N                N
 Yeart FE                                       Y          Y           Y            Y                Y
 Competitionj FE                                N          N           N            Y                Y
 Employeek FE                                   Y          N           N            Y                Y
 Firmi FE                                       N          Y           Y            N                N

 N                                           257000      257000     177000        30500             30500
 R2                                           .762        .187       .245         .0915             .0955


Note: This table shows the effect of the grant amount per employee on earnings, using Equation 1.
Columns 1-3 use employee-level data. Column 2 interacts the award amount per employee with an
indicator for the employee being an incumbent worker. Column 2 interacts the award amount per employee
with the employee's tenure at the firm. Note that AwardAmtPerEmpi,j,t is defined at the firm level, so is
absorbed by either employee or firm fixed effects in columns 1-3. Columns 4-5 use firm-level data, and
show the effects on levels and growth of earnings. Standard errors are clustered by employee. , , and
 denote significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% levels. This table reports results from disclosure
CBDRB-FY2020-CES005-010.



Online Appendix A                                                                                           2
                                Figure A.1: Applicant Firm Locations




s
Note: This figure shows the location of all applicant firms in the data. In the main figure, a darker color for
a metropolitan statistical area (MSA) indicates higher firm density. In the insets, actual firm locations are
overlaid as orange dots.




Online Appendix A                                                                                            3
                            Figure A.2: Effects around the award cutoff
                                                     s
                    A: Earnings                                         B: Inequality (90/10)




                     C: Employment                                            D: Revenue




                                                     s
Note: These figures show the results from estimating Equation 2 on levels of log firm-year earnings,
employment, revenue and the 90/10 inequality measure.. Each point is a coefficient on a specific DOE-
assigned rank around the award cutoff, where positive ranks are winning applicant firms, and negative ranks
are non-winning applicant firms. 95% confidence intervals are shown. We only report two positive ranks for
inequality, because the smaller sample led to a very large confidence interval for the firm three ranks away
from the cutoff (which exists in competitions with at least three winners). The coefficient magnitude is in
line with the previous two. This table reports results from disclosure DRB-B0086-CDAR-20180607.




Online Appendix A                                                                                         4
                         Figure A.3: Survey email and sample response




Note: This figure shows the survey email with an actual sample response, provided with permission from
the responder.



Online Appendix A                                                                                   5
                                Appendix
                                    sss
                                         B
                                  (For Online Publication)
                                            sss

   This appendix considers six additional theoretical predictions for why a cash flow shock
might affect wages, beyond our preferred mechanism in Section 6 of the main text.



B.1      Standard Model
   With perfect capital markets, a neoclassical model predicts that the money goes to
shareholders because (a) workers are paid their marginal product and (b) the firm is
financially unconstrained, so the grant should not affect investment. Like much of the
existing empirical literature, the results in the preceding sections are clearly at odds with
this model, as it predicts no effect of a cash flow shock on wages. The grant could be paid
to shareholders via wages to owner-employees, who likely have the longest tenures.
However, in this case we would not expect a linear effect of tenure, as shown in Figure 3.
We would expect a convex relationship, but instead we observe a slightly concave
relationship. Furthermore, we show in Table 5 column 5 that the effect of tenure interacted
with winning persists among incumbents hired at least three years after the firm is first
observed, who are not plausibly owners.


B.2      Match quality or search frictions
   Several theories seek to explain the strong relationship between wages and tenure. In light
of the strong interaction between the grant and tenure, these theories deserve particular
attention. In an influential model, Jovanovic (1979) theorizes that the wage may reflect
expected productivity, but this is subject to imperfect information about the quality of the
match between the firm and the employee. It is possible that after the award, expected
productivity or information about match quality changes in such a way as to cause the firm
to pay wages that reflect what has been learned over time about the quality of the match.
An alternative is that upward-sloping wage-tenure profiles reflect frictions in the search
process (Burdett & Coles 2003). Shi (2009) models a scenario in which firms commit to
labor contracts but workers, who are risk-averse, cannot commit not to quit. In the model,
wages strictly increase with tenure to prevent employees from quitting; the mechanism is

Online Appendix B                                                                           1
that the chances of a better outside offer fall as wages rise. This relationship depends on the
worker being risk-averse. Stevens (2004) treats workers as risk neutral, and finds it optimal
to backload wages but in a non-linear way.
       These models predict a wage-tenure relationship, but no effect of a cash flow shock.
Also, in the Jovanovic (1979) model, the employee does not accept payment less than his
expected productivity. Therefore, a financially constrained firm would have simply hired
fewer workers. Similarly, a cash flow shock effect on wages, whether increasing with tenure
or not, is at odds with the predictable increases in tenure to prevent departures modeled
by Stevens (2004) and Shi (2009). If the original labor contract indicated that wages would
increase with tenure to prevent quitting only in the event of rent increases, that would
effectively be the same as employee lending to the firm.


B.3         Efficiency wages
       It is possible that the grant enables a formerly constrained firm to pay a wage that exceeds
market-clearing level to maximize labor productivity, often called an "efficiency wage." There
are four varieties of efficiency wage models. First, efficiency wages may be paid to reduce
turnover (Salop 1979, Becker 1964). Second, efficiency wages may deter shirking if there is a
cost to losing the job, which would not exist at the market-clearing wage (Shapiro & Stiglitz
1984). Third, higher wages may attract higher quality applicants, which may be valuable to
a firm that cannot perfectly observe applicant quality (Weiss 1980). Fourth, efficiency wages
may reflect fairness considerations (Solow 1980, Kahneman, Knetsch & Thaler 1986, Fehr
& Schmidt 1999).1 Here, employee effort is a function of the wage relative to the perceived
fair wage, which the employee arrives at by comparing pay with coworkers at the same firm
(Akerlof & Yellen 1990) or with similar workers at other firms (Summers 1988). An efficiency
wage channel predicts a symmetrical effect among new hires. The absence of any benefit
among new hires is inconsistent with a purely efficiency wage channel. However, below we
will employ the notion from this literature that fairness concerns are important in labor
contracts.
   1
    This is distinct from shirking models such as Shapiro & Stiglitz (1984) because it does not reflect the
costs of losing a job, and because it relies on "gift relationships" as described in Akerlof (1982).




Online Appendix B                                                                                        2
B.4        Incentive contracting
   It may be that the result reflects deferred compensation in the form of implicit incentive
contracting, which might help to retain employees (Lazear 1981). That is, the labor contract
might be designed to maximize effort by rewarding it. This is one explanation for why
firms provide broad-based employee stock option grants (Oyer & Schaefer 2005). Relatedly,
Becker (1962) theorizes that wage increases with tenure reflect human capital accumulation.
In such a case, we expect the firm to reward employees who contributed to the grant or, in
the Becker (1962) case, who are more skilled.
   A payout that reflected incentive contracting should be proportional to the individual's
effort to get the grant. In this case, more direct measures of employee skill (proxies for being
the scientists and managers at a small firm who would have applied for the grant) would offer
the strongest cross-sectional sources of heterogeneity, or at least would interact significantly
with tenure. However, they do not. Instead, heterogeneity is strongest in tenure, and all
incumbent employees, including low wage workers, benefit. It seems unlikely that low wage
workers, such as administrative assistants, would have contributed to receiving an R&D
grant.
   We also expect that this type of "bonus" should yield only temporary effects on pay, not
permanent increases. Conversely, we observe long term increases in the wage for incumbent
workers.    Finally, there is no reason an incentive contracting mechanism would reflect
measures of financial constraints.


B.5        Bargaining Power
   Many wage-setting models center around a bargaining parameter that weighs employee
productivity and the outside option (Brown & Ashenfelter 1986, Abowd & Lemieux 1993,
Stole & Zwiebel 1996, Hall & Milgrom 2008). In the simplest static model similar to what
we use to compare our rent-sharing finding to the literature (Equation 5 in the main text),
the wage can be written as:


                                 wi,k = (1    ) oi + i,k                                    (1)
                                     i,k = f productivityi,k


where the outside option is denoted oi . In general, the rent-sharing literature is interested

Online Appendix B                                                                             3
in modeling how revenue productivity (or total factor productivity) passes through to
wages (e.g. Card, Devicienti & Maida 2014 Kline et al. Forthcoming). Employees with low
bargaining power (low ), who also likely have low wages, should have wages that move
closely with the outside option. If the employee has high bargaining power, he will be paid
all of the surplus that he creates (exactly his productivity).
   When a cash windfall occurs, the worker's productivity has not changed, quite unlike the
theoretical model in Kline et al. (Forthcoming), where wage effects come from the changes
to marginal productivity that happen following a patent grant. Thus, bargaining models
predict no effect of the cash windfall on wages. The firm's greater ability to pay does not
affect its cost of hiring a replacement worker, and thus does not change a worker's bargaining
power. Our results regarding the effect of a cash windfall on wages are very inconsistent with
a benchmark, static bargaining model. First, the immediate effects suggest rent-sharing that
is not related to productivity. We observe the entire effect on wages within the second quarter
after the grant, while the long term effect on revenue is halved when we limit observation to
the first two years after the grant. A bargaining model predicts no immediate effect of the
cash windfall on wages, but only effects that come through productivity.
   A variant model would allow the worker to bargain over expected productivity growth,
potentially helping to explain the immediate effect.      The grant does appear to enable
investment that leads to growth, which might be associated with training or other effects
that increase an employee's productivity. In this case, the effect should be proportional to
the benefit that the employee will provide. Higher wage and higher education individuals
should be the largest future contributors to future productivity growth, and this should not
vary across incumbent and new workers. However, we do not find economically meaningful
variation in these variables, and new workers get no share of the windfall at all.
   Indeed, it is inconsistent with a bargaining model that new hires do not benefit. In
a bargaining model, they should benefit just as much as incumbents in an estimate that
includes employee fixed effects. Relatedly, we expect both oi and i,k to be at least as
relevant for new hires. Information about the grant is public, so it is not the case that
insiders know more about the windfall.
   A further variant focuses on replacement costs. The firm may pays their most important
workers more to prevent them from leaving, and the longer tenure workers have more firm-
specific human capital or are more productive. However, this faces the same challenge
described above: after a cash flow shock, the worker's bargaining power based on his own

Online Appendix B                                                                            4
productivity has not changed.
   More generally, bargaining power is at odds with the grant having similar effects at
all points in the incumbent wage distribution, as the most important employees are likely
already relatively high earners. (As mentioned above, there is adequate within-firm wage
variation in the years immediately around the award to reasonably expect previous wage
heterogeneity tests to be useful.) The effect does not robustly increase with proxies for skill;
while it increases with pre-existing wage and education, the effects are economically small.
   Relatedly, in a bargaining model, we expect workers with less power to have wages
that move more closely with their outside option. To assess whether retention channels
are important, we interact the effect of the award with measures of labor market tightness,
specifically annual state and industry unemployment. The grant effects do not vary with
these measures. This null interaction persists throughout the wage distribution, and it also
persists when the sample is restricted to new hires, for whom the outside option should be
more immediately available as they are likely more actively searching for a new job.
   Finally, the effect is larger among more financially constrained firms, which we would
not expect if employee bargaining power primarily explained the positive average effect.
This would only apply if the worker had foregone previous wages, which is observationally
equivalent to the backloaded wage contract mechanism. That is, if an unconstrained firm
receives a cash windfall, a bargaining power story should enable workers at that firm to
benefit at least as much as workers at a constrained firm.


B.6      Agency frictions
   An alternative to standard economic models is an agency story. Here, the employee may
accrue agency power he becomes more entrenched. This is related to the idea that employees
become entrenched and thus earn a higher wage over time, particularly in more distressed
firms, as in Berk, Stanton & Zechner (2010). Since new employees have not had time to
become entrenched and incumbent employees likely accrue more agency power over time as
they become more entrenched, the findings that only incumbent employees benefit and their
wage gain increases in tenure are consistent with an entrenchment hypothesis. However, one
challenge to the agency frictions channel is that the effect persists over time. We would
normally expect agency rents to cease when the free cash flow is exhausted.
   More importantly, at a fundamental level descriptions based on agency or entrenchment


Online Appendix B                                                                             5
are observationally equivalent to the backloaded wage explanation. To illustrate this, suppose
an employee is not paid his reservation wage, and there are two possible explanations: (1)
He has implicitly agreed to a backloaded wage and knows that when a cash windfall occurs
he will be compensated for foregone wages; (2) He knows that the employer will treat him
"fairly" by sharing with him in proportion to his tenure at the firm. In the second model,
we must ask why his agency power didn't allow him to previously receive a higher wage.
The answer must be that the firm faced financial constraints, and did allow him to extract
more agency rents. Therefore, we have the same prediction from a cash flow shock in both
models, which is that constrained firms pay out based on tenure at the firm. Importantly,
the difference between the two models is the source for the wages implicitly owed to the
employee. In a more classical interpretation, it relates to the employee's productivity and
outside option. In the agency interpretation, it reflects something like the employee being
"friends" with the owner. This is orthogonal to the key components of the model, which
are that the constrained firms owes wages to employees and this unvested human capital is
increasing in their tenure, leading a cash windfall to be shared proportionally with tenure.




Online Appendix B                                                                           6
References
Abowd, J. A. & Lemieux, T. (1993), `The effects of product market competition on collective
 bargaining agreements: The case of foreign competition in canada', The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics 108(4), 983­1014.
Akerlof, G. A. (1982), `Labor contracts as partial gift exchange', The quarterly journal of
  economics 97(4), 543­569.
Akerlof, G. A. & Yellen, J. L. (1990), `The fair wage-effort hypothesis and unemployment',
  The Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(2), 255­283.
Becker, G. S. (1962), `Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis', Journal of
  political economy 70(5, Part 2), 9­49.
Becker, G. S. (1964), Human capital: A theoretical and empirical analysis, with special
  reference to education, University of Chicago press.
Berk, J. B., Stanton, R. & Zechner, J. (2010), `Human capital, bankruptcy, and capital
  structure', The Journal of Finance 65(3), 891­926.
Brown, J. N. & Ashenfelter, O. (1986), `Testing the efficiency of employment contracts',
  Journal of political economy 94(3, Part 2), S40­S87.
Burdett, K. & Coles, M. (2003), `Equilibrium wage-tenure contracts', Econometrica
  71(5), 1377­1404.
Card, D., Devicienti, F. & Maida, A. (2014), `Rent-sharing, holdup, and wages: Evidence
  from matched panel data', Review of Economic Studies 81(1), 84­111.
Fehr, E. & Schmidt, K. M. (1999), `A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation', The
  quarterly journal of economics 114(3), 817­868.
Hall, R. E. & Milgrom, P. R. (2008), `The limited influence of unemployment on the wage
  bargain', American economic review 98(4), 1653­74.
Jovanovic, B. (1979), `Job matching and the theory of turnover', Journal of political economy
  87(5, Part 1), 972­990.
Kahneman, D., Knetsch, J. L. & Thaler, R. (1986), `Fairness as a constraint on profit seeking:
 Entitlements in the market', The American economic review pp. 728­741.
Kline, P., Petkova, N., Williams, H. & Zidar, O. (Forthcoming), `Who profits from patents?
  Rent-sharing at innovative firms', The Quarterly Journal of Economics .
Lazear, E. P. (1981), `Agency, earnings profiles, productivity, and hours restrictions', The
  American Economic Review 71(4), 606­620.
Oyer, P. & Schaefer, S. (2005), `Why do some firms give stock options to all employees?: An
 empirical examination of alternative theories', Journal of financial Economics 76(1), 99­
 133.
Salop, S. C. (1979), `A model of the natural rate of unemployment', The American Economic
  Review 69(1), 117­125.
Shapiro, C. & Stiglitz, J. E. (1984), `Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline
  device', The American Economic Review 74(3), 433­444.

Online Appendix B                                                                           7
Shi, S. (2009), `Directed search for equilibrium wage­tenure contracts', Econometrica
  77(2), 561­584.
Solow, R. M. (1980), `On theories of unemployment', American Economic Review 70(1), 1­
  11.
Stevens, M. (2004), `Wage-tenure contracts in a frictional labour market: Firms' strategies
  for recruitment and retention', The Review of Economic Studies 71(2), 535­551.
Stole, L. A. & Zwiebel, J. (1996), `Organizational design and technology choice under
  intrafirm bargaining', The American Economic Review pp. 195­222.
Summers, L. H. (1988), `Relative wages, efficiency wages, and keynesian unemployment'.
Weiss, A. (1980), `Job queues and layoffs in labor markets with flexible wages', Journal of
 Political economy 88(3), 526­538.




Online Appendix B                                                                        8
