                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 ECONOMIC INCENTIVES SURROUNDING FERTILITY:
              EVIDENCE FROM ALASKA'S PERMANENT FUND DIVIDEND

                                       Nishant Yonzan
                                      Laxman Timilsina
                                      Inas Rashad Kelly

                                      Working Paper 26712
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26712


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 2020




Order of authors is reverse alphabetical. The authors thank Dhaval Dave, Fulya Ersoy, and
seminar participants at the CUNY Graduate Center and Loyola Marymount University for helpful
comments on earlier drafts of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Nishant Yonzan, Laxman Timilsina, and Inas Rashad Kelly. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Economic Incentives Surrounding Fertility: Evidence from Alaska's Permanent Fund Dividend
Nishant Yonzan, Laxman Timilsina, and Inas Rashad Kelly
NBER Working Paper No. 26712
January 2020
JEL No. H7,I1

                                         ABSTRACT

Starting in 1982, the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend allows each full-time resident in Alaska,
including infants born in the qualifying year, to receive a sizable dividend. This dividend, which
represents a form of a Universal Basic Income on a small scale, could alter incentives
surrounding fertility. Using synthetic control and difference-in-differences models to account for
confounding factors and unobserved heterogeneity, we model the effect of income on fertility by
exploiting this income shock around 1982 using Natality files from Vital Statistics and abortion
data from the Centers for Disease Control, merged with data from the Census on various state
characteristics. Primary results suggest that the dividend increased fertility and reduced the
spacing between births, particularly for females in the 20-44 year age group. Our results suggest
that policies aimed at increasing income should consider fertility consequences and their
implications for economic growth.

Nishant Yonzan                                  Inas Rashad Kelly
The Graduate Center, CUNY                       Loyola Marymount University
365 Fifth Avenue                                Economics Department
New York, NY 10016                              University Hall 4200
nyonzan@gradcenter.cuny.edu                     1 LMU Drive
                                                Los Angeles, CA 90045
Laxman Timilsina                                and NBER
The Graduate Center, CUNY                       inas.kelly@lmu.edu
365 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10016
ltimilsina@gradcenter.cuny.edu
Alaska Constitution Article IX, Section 15

Section 15. Alaska Permanent Fund.

At least twenty-five percent of all mineral lease rentals, royalties, royalty sale proceeds, federal mineral
revenue sharing payments and bonuses received by the State shall be placed in a permanent fund, the
principal of which shall be used only for those income-producing investments specifically designated by
law as eligible for permanent fund investments. All income from the permanent fund shall be deposited
in the general fund unless otherwise provided by law.




1    Introduction


Fertility decisions can be complicated, but from an economic perspective, being financially ready

is key when analyzing the demand for children.1 We exploit the introduction of an unconditional

cash transfer in Alaska in 1982, the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend (or APFD), in answering

the question of whether cash transfers affect fertility. Since all residents in Alaska are eligible for

the funds, we correct for endogeneity concerns through the use of synthetic control methods to

generate appropriate comparison groups. We employ natality data from Vital Statistics combined

with comprehensive data from the Census and Current Population Survey going as far back as

1976 in order to gauge the effects of this unconditional cash transfer on fertility. We find a 13.1

percent increase in the fertility rate for women between 15 and 44 years of age in Alaska due to the

APFD. Our estimates support the theory that positive income shocks increase fertility, one of these

channels being through reducing birth spacing.


In addition to providing some of the first estimates on the effects of the APFD on fertility, our

study is also broadly situated within the literature that has assessed the effects of cash transfers on

fertility decisions, such as those that have analyzed the effects of welfare and the earned income

tax credit (EITC) on fertility decisions (Baughman and Dickert-Conlin, 2009). Compared to such

welfare transfers in the U.S., the APFD has the advantage of not being tied to an individual's labor

market status. Moreover, the APFD is independent of the composition of the members in the

individual's household. APFD is a universal transfer to all residents in Alaska. Indeed, the amount
   1 A USDA (2015) report estimates that a married, middle-income couple will spend approximately $233,610 from
birth through age 17 (or $13,742 annually) raising a child born in 2015.


                                                      2
of APFD linearly increases in a household with an increase in the number of members within the

household. This latter point is extremely important for our case. Insofar as we are concerned, the

dividend transfer to a household is linear function of the size of the household--that is, the larger

the household, the larger the amount of the dividend the household receives. The only condition

on the dividend is one's residency status in Alaska. While any migrant would first need to establish

residency before being eligible for the funds, a newborn of a resident is by default a resident of

the state, and hence eligible for appropriation of the funds. Given this, our study focuses on the

incentives on fertility decisions due to the APFD transfer.


First, this paper fits the existing literature on the economic incentives of fertility. Recent literature

in economics has been driven by Becker's (1981) theoretical work, which suggests that the price

of children and real income help to explain familial decisions surrounding fertility. This paper

provides further empirical evidence.


Second, this paper provides one of the first estimates of fertility changes due to a universal cash

transfer program. APFD is closely related to the Universal Basic Income (UBI). According to Hoynes

and Rothstein (2019), a UBI is defined as transfers which: (a) provides a sufficiently generous cash

benefit to live on, without other earnings; (b) does not phase out or phases out slowly as earnings

rise; and (c) is available to a large proportion of the population, rather than being targeted to a

particular subset (e.g., to single mothers). While the size of the fund is an important quantifier for

Hoynes and Rothstein, Ghatak and Maniquet (2019) qualify UBI as: (a) cash transfer as opposed to

in-kind transfer; (b) universal coverage; and (c) implicitly assumes a change in the tax system for it

to be a budget-balanced or revenue-neutral proposal.


Broadly, there seems consensus on two key characteristics of the UBI: (1) unconditional cash

disbursement, and (2) universal coverage.2 In this sense, APFD is a UBI.3 However, if one considers

the size of the transfer then the APFD is not large enough for an individual's subsistence. If indeed

the goal of a UBI is to provide sufficient funds for physical subsistence (see Lowrey, 2018), then the
   2 There are some suggestions that a UBI should be eligible only to adults. We think such targeting of UBI, combined
with reduction or elimination of other transfers, would make the transfer policy regressive for families with children.
   3 Other studies, such as Berman (2018) and Van Parijs and Vanderborght (2017) would also classify the Alaska
Permanent Fund Dividend as a UBI.




                                                          3
APFD would not qualify as such a program. This distinction is crucial because funding becomes a

seminal concern once subsistence funding is involved; the idea behind a full UBI is also to get rid of

other social programs.4 This point is also at the heart of criticisms of the UBI such as that put forth

by Acemoglu (2019). Nevertheless, it is useful to consider the Alaska dividend as a small-scale UBI

(or simply a UI) due to its simplicity and since behavioral responses may be similar. As with a UBI,

the problems of which population to target, which can cause administrative costs, inefficiencies,

corruption, and inclusion and exclusion errors, are bypassed (Ghatak and Maniquet, 2019).


It is also important to note that since the APFD is a dividend disbursement from earnings from oil

production in Alaska, it is not directly linked to the state's tax and transfer system. Additionally,

the APFD does not replace any of the existing federal transfer programs such as the EITC. The

APFD, then, can be defined as an annual unconditional lump-sum transfer to all residents in

Alaska.5


One concern for any significant cash transfers is that it provides disincentives for labor market

employment. However, recent evidence, both from the developing world (see Bastagli et al., 2019,

Banerjee et al., 2017, Evans and Popova, 2017) and from the developed world (see Jones and

Marinescu, 2018), suggests otherwise. Jones and Marinescu (2018) find no significant changes in

full-time employment in Alaska, relative to its control, due to the introduction of the APFD. If,

however, the goal of a UBI is to replace labor with leisure, especially in industrialized nations with

a high degree of automated production, then the size of the transfer would need to be significantly

larger than what the APFD is currently supplying. The relatively small size of the APFD transfer

may therefore be the reason why there are no labor market effects.


Nevertheless, the size of the APFD transfer might be sufficiently significant to induce other behav-

ioral response­namely fertility. If we do find fertility response to the APFD, then any significantly

larger disbursement would certainly amplify these effects. Van Parijs and Vanderborght (2017)
   4 This idea came originated through increased automation and globalization, and thus the threat of unemployment
(labor-displacing technological change), and also as an effective tool for poverty alleviation due to income inequality and
wage stagnation.
   5 Kearney and Mogstad (2019) suggest that "a UBI is a guaranteed cash benefit that the government provides to
all citizens." Although the APFD has been continuously disbursing funds since 1982, the disbursements are tied to
profits and, in this sense, not guaranteed. For our case, we will assume that the citizens of Alaska regard the APFD as a
long-term perpetual disbursement.


                                                            4
propose an annual UBI that is equal to one-quarter of country's GDP, or $16,000 in U.S. in 2018. In

comparison, the APFD transfer in 2018 was $1,600. In this sense, the effect we find on fertility due

to the APFD is a lower bound for any UBI transfers.


If fertility rates are positively affected by the cash transfers, then policy implications are both

important and varied. From an industrialized nation's perspective, it could boost the low birth

rates in these countries.6 Indeed, policy makers have targeted fertility by implementing policies

such as the child tax credits. One of the more generous programs was the Quebec Allowance for

Newborn Children which lasted from 1988 to 1997. This program paid $500 for the first child,

$1000 for the second child, and up to $8000 for the third child. Using the Canadian Census data,

Milligan (2005) finds that a one-time $500 transfer increases the likelihood of having a child by

9.8%.7


Concerns for a developing nation go at least as far back as Reverend Malthus. He argued that The

Poor Laws, a form of targeted basic income, would increase fertility rates and hence overpopulation.

In recent decades, cash transfers have been used as a tool to fight poverty. Arguing the benefits of

cash transfers, Banerjee et al. (2019) write: "One of the central goals of development economics

has been to understand how to raise the incomes of people who are poor ... universal basic income

does that by definition." However, if high fertility rates are putting a strain on the resources of the

developing countries, then adopting a basic income guarantee program, all else equal, would only

intensify these effects.8


The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section provides background on the APFD.

Section 3 provides a Theoretical Framework. Section 4 is devoted to Data and Methodology. Section

5 presents our findings. Section 6 provides a summary of our findings and concludes.
  6 For a list of some of the ongoing targeted UBI pilot programs in the high-income economies, see Kearney and
Mogstad (2019)
   7 See Baughman and Dickert-Conlin (2009) and Keane and Moffitt (1998) for further discussion.
   8 The Indian Congress Party, as one of their policies, proposed a UBI type scheme in the recent national elections.
Although there have been a number of cash-transfer programs in the developing countries, there has been nothing that
has been universal and for the long-term (Banerjee et al., 2019).




                                                          5
2   Background on the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend


The effect of cash transfers on behavioral changes in individuals and households are well-documented

but inconclusive. The majority of the literature focuses on the potential moral hazard effects that

programs that offer these transfers might have on labor market decisions (see, for example, Mari-

nescu (2018)). Others have analyzed their effects on education (for example, with Progressa),

migration (Kurland, 2017), and marriage (Low et al., 2018). The effects on fertility have generally

been limited to programs that are means-tested or related to earned income and employment, such

as Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families

(TANF), EITC, unemployment insurance, or income taxes (see Baughman and Dickert-Conlin

(2009) and their literature review for a more comprehensive overview of this literature). Baughman

and Dickert-Conlin (2009) use birth certificate data from 1990 to 1999 and find no effect of the

EITC on fertility (and even slight reductions in higher order fertility among white females). To

the best of our knowledge, no prior study has directly assessed how the Alaska Permanent Fund

Dividend affects fertility.


Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend


The Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend is a publicly-managed endowment established using the

proceeds from oil production on Alaska's North Slope (Alaska Department of Revenue, 2017;

Goldsmith (2012)). After the discovery of the petroleum and the subsequent increase in State

revenue, how to manage the fund in the future was hotly debated politically. The idea of the

creation of the APFD was put on vote in 1976; however, how to manage and how exactly the fund

works was up for debate. Finally, in 1982, the legislators passed a law that paid all resident on

equal amount regardless of age appropriate earnings from the fund (Goldsmith, 2008).


The first dividend payment, in the amount of $1000 in nominal terms ($2602 in 2018 dollars)

was made in 1982. The amount of the cash transfer varies from year-to-year based on a five-year

average of the investment earnings of the APFD (Alaska Department of Revenue, 2017). Table 1

shows the evolution of dividends paid each year.



                                                6
                                             [Table 1 about here]



In recent years, there has been debate regarding whether the amounts should be lowered in order

to cut the state deficit, and indeed, the 2018 amount was originally supposed to be $2700 before it

was lowered to $1600 (Herz, 2018; Rosen, 2018).


One unique feature of the APFD is that it is an income transfer available to all residents of Alaska

that is not linked to income, employment, or age. The main eligibility requirements are that the

individual intends to reside in Alaska indefinitely and that the individual is not incarcerated or

has not committed a felony. Individuals must have resided in Alaska for the whole year of the

qualifying year, which is the year prior to applying for the dividend. An exception is for children

born any time during the qualifying year; they are eligible for payment provided they have an

eligible sponsor. This may therefore create an incentive for potential mothers to give birth.9 The

amount of the dividend is announced every year, and so individuals are unlikely to change behavior

based on changes in the dollar amount. According to the U.S. Census Bureau (2017), in recent

years, the payment has provided more than 10 percent of the income for the average family in the

lowest income quintile in Alaska. A study also found that the dividend directly accounts for more

than 20 percent of household income for the majority of Alaska Native families in remote rural

areas (Knapp et al. 1984). This suggests that the amount of the dividend is sizable.


Timing of the Alaska Permanent Dividend Fund


As seen in Table 1, the amount of the dividend varies each year. Individuals apply in the first three

months of the year, and the dividend is paid out in early to mid-October. According to Berman

(2018), the amount of the year's dividend is known as much as six months in advance. This implies

that eligible individuals may know as early as April but also suggests that individuals do not know

the amount when they apply, nor can they make fertility decisions in time based on the amount.

Adults are therefore unlikely to decide to have a child due to the actual monetary amount in a

given year, so it would be difficult to exploit this variation to determine fertility. On average 95%

of the individuals who apply for the fund are accepted. This represents above 85% of the total
  9 Another mechanism could be increased adoption rate. Adoption is not explored in the current research.



                                                        7
state population.10


Effects of the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend


Empirical evidence on the effects of the APFD is limited. Goldsmith (2010) reviews the literature

and finds no prior studies of the relationship between the dividend and aspects of economic or

social behavior such as health, education status, or general welfare (p13). He says this deficit results

from the difficulty in identifying the effect of the dividend on these measures independent of all

the other programs and influences (p13). Furthermore, as Goldsmith (2012) notes, since most

Alaskans view the dividend as a distribution of their wealth, they see no reason to study it as a

phenomenon, and actually look on any attempt to study the dividend as a potential threat to its

existence (p49).


A couple of studies have analyzed the inter-temporal consumption response to the Alaska Perma-

nent Fund (Hsieh, 2003; Kueng, 2015). Jones and Marinescu (2018) find that the APFD has little

or no effect on labor market decisions. This suggests that in a simple labor-leisure model, leisure

hours are held constant and individuals move up to a higher utility curve and increase their total

income by the amount of the dividend. This amount is higher if the number of individuals in

the household is higher, and in fact increases proportionately with the number of children in the

household. The role of fertility may therefore partially explain the limited labor market response.


The focus on fertility is salient for several reasons. If adults face a quantity-quality tradeoff when

considering having children or additional children, an income transfer can potentially increase

both quantity and quality, allowing parents to better invest in more children. On the macro level,

fertility is related to population growth and, in turn, economic growth. If programs such as the one

being analyzed encourage quantity of children and discourage investing in quality, then the overall

impact on economic growth may be adverse. On the other hand, if they increase both quantity and

quality, the overall impact is expected to be beneficial. The net overall impact on social welfare is

therefore ambiguous.
 10 For further detail, see https://pfd.alaska.gov/Division-Info/Summary-of-Applications-and-Payments.




                                                   8
3    Theoretical Framework


In Becker and Barro (1988)'s economic theory of fertility, parents are assumed to be altruistic

toward their children, implying that their utility depends not only on their own consumption

but also on the utility of each child and the number of children. A dynastic utility function

is formulated that depends on the consumption and number of descendants in all generations.

Fertility is a function of expenditures on children. In line with Becker and Barro (1988), assuming

the utility of an adult11 in generation 0 is an additively separable function of own consumption

(c0 ) and the utility of each child (U1,i ), then the individual's utility function can be expressed as:


                                                             n0
                                       U0 = v (c0 , n0 ) +          i (U1,i , n0 ),                            (1)
                                                             i =1



where v is increasing in c and concave and n0 represents the number of children. Assuming siblings

are identical and U0 depends linearly on U1 , we can simplify the parent's utility function to:




                                          U0 = v (c0 , n0 ) + a(n0 )n0 U1 ,                                    (2)



where a(n0 ) measures the degree of altruism toward each child. The dynastic utility function can

be obtained by summing up over all generations i . The budget constraint faced by adults can be

expressed as:




                                      wi + (1 + ri )ki = ci + ni (i + ki + 1),                                 (3)



where w is the wage rate, r is the interest rate, k is capital (with ki + 1 representing the parent's

bequest of nondepreciable capital to their children) and  is the cost of raising a child. The left-hand

side is income (earned + unearned), while the right-hand side represents expenditures. Note that
  11 In line with Becker and Barro (1988), we ignore the effects of marriage, although the model can be extended to
include this.


                                                         9
this budget constraint does not include the labor-leisure choice, but it can be extended to do so

(Tamura, 1985). The first-order conditions imply that the marginal benefit of an additional child

must balance the marginal cost.12


The increase in wealth obtained by an increase in k , as is the case through the APFD, would imply

an unambiguous increase in both c0 and n0 in this model.13 In this particular unique case, the

increase in the number of children, n0 , would be even greater since k is a positive function of n0 ,

as the dividend amount increases with each additional child. We therefore expect an increase in

fertility due to the dividend.


Incorporating the labor-leisure choice would not change this general result, although it might

reduce k 's effects on c and n through an increase in leisure. We feel this is unlikely, however, since

employment is unlikely to decrease with this transfer. That employment levels are unlikely to

be greatly affected by these universal transfers is evidenced by Jones and Marinescu (2018) in

this particular context and other studies analyzing the effects of UBIs in general on employment

(Hoynes and Rothstein, 2019); this evidence is stronger from a theoretical perspective for low- and

middle-income countries (Ghatak and Maniquet, 2019).


The income transfer is expected to have both substitution and income effects in a model looking at

children versus all other goods. Since children are now (relatively) less expensive, the substitution

effect implies that people will have more children (fertility will rise). While the income effect can

theoretically go either way (fertility may rise or fall), there has been empirical evidence supporting

Becker's (1960) theory that children are "normal" goods, suggesting that fertility rises with income,

other factors held constant (Black et al., 2013; Cohen et al., 2013).14 Black et al. (2013) find that

fertility increases with the husband's income using U.S. data from the mid-1970s. Cohen et al.

(2013) exploit variation in Israel's child subsidy from 1999 to 2005 to find that overall fertility

increases with income (although effects are small and negative at low income levels). There is an
  12 The findings by Becker and Barro (1988) suggest that one of the reasons for low fertility in Western economies is the
declining international real interest rate and the increase in an economy's rate of technological progress. Since our study
focuses on one state in a Western economy, the effects of changes in the interest rate on fertility are likely negligible (but
nonzero and varying according to the monetary amount of the dividend).
  13 See Becker and Barro (1988) for more detail.
  14 Note that while, cross-sectionally, we generally observe a negative correlation between income and fertility, a more
careful analysis reveals a positive relationship (Black et al., 2013).


                                                             10
advantage to looking at unearned income, as we do here, since a female's opportunity cost of time

remains unaffected. Moreover, in this context, as well as that of Cohen et al. (2013), the income

transfer is a function of fertility, which affects the price of a marginal child.




4     Data and Methodology


4.1   Data and Variables


Our main outcome variable is fertility rate, which is defined as the number of live births per 1000

women between ages 15 and 44. Further, we calculate fertility rates for various sub-populations:

for age groups 15-19, 20-24, 25-34, and 35-44. For each age subgroup, we calculate fertility rate

using the number of live births per 1000 women in that particular age groups. To construct annual

fertility rates we use live-birth data available from the public use natality files from the Vital

Statistics.15 The public use Natality files have individual birth records by state across a number

of years. While for some years the public files have the full population of births, in other years,

for some states, they are restricted to 50 percent or 25 percent of births. As our interest is in the

calculation of the number of births per 1000 women, we impute the missing births.16 For data on

each state's female population, we use the Survey of Epidemiology and End Results US State and

County Population Data (SEER) available via the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER)

website.17 Overall population figures for each state are also available via the NBER.


We use birth spacing as our second outcome variable. We again construct this variable using the

Natality files. Birth spacing is defined as the gap, for a mother, in the number of months between

the births of two children. Our sample by definition only includes those women with two or more

children. We exclude twin births from this sample. There were a few observations with birth

spacing of less than 9 months. Since this is not usual, we exclude them from our sample. For

reasons unspecified in the public use Natality files, around 10 percent of the sample does not
  15 Public use Vital Statistics can be accessed here: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data access/vitalstatsonline
.htm.
  16 Annual natality data for each state and their coverage is presented in Appendix Table A.2.
  17 SEER data can be accessed here: https://www.nber.org/data/seer u.s. county population data.html



                                                    11
report birth spacing. In 1976 and 1977 some states did not report the birth gaps fully.18 While we

expect fertility rates to increase due to APFD, we expect the opposite for birth spacing. We expect

people to have more children, and for those who are planning to have additional children, to have

them sooner.


Our third outcome variable pertains to abortions. These data come from the Centers for Disease

Control, which have detailed information for age-specific groups. Comparisons are made with

abortion data from the Guttmacher Institute for the full sample.19 Abortion data were combined

with population data from the Census in order to calculate rates for the 15-44 female population.20

For Alaska in particular, data for age-specific groups is limited and is only available in 1970-1978,

1996, and 2003-2015. For this reason, we focus here on the full sample.21 We expect people to

have fewer abortions as a result of the APFD.


For the control variables we use data from the Current Population Survey (CPS) available from the

Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (Flood et al., 2018).22 Since Alaska can only be identified in

the CPS starting 1976, our annual time series for our variables, and our study itself, starts in this

year. All our variables are calculated for each state and year when appropriate for the 15-44 female

age group. For each state we calculate the total population, women's share of the total population,

level of education, labor market outcomes, and a variable that proxies for race--the share of white

individuals in the population. We divide the level of education into three categories--those having

less than high school, high school degree, or college degree--and calculate shares for each. We

include a measure of labor market participation for women in each state . Women's labor force

participation is measured as the share of the women aged 18 to 65 who earn positive labor income.

We further calculate the share of women in the labor force for each state. We also use percentage of

births occurring in Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). We calculate this variable for each state

using the Natality files.
 18 Appendix Table A.2 explains the detailed breakdown of the sample.
 19 CDC data for abortions are obtained from the Abortion Surveillance Report, available from 1970 onwards. Data from
the Guttmacher Institute are available at: https://www.guttmacher.org/united-states/abortion.
  20 State population by age from the Census can be found at: https://www.census.gov/data/datasets/time-series/
demo/popest/1970s-county.html.
  21 For the full sample, we have data for Alaska for 1970-1997 and 2003-2015. We therefore have information for the
period of analysis (1976-1988).
  22 IPUMS-CPS data are available here: https://www.ipums.org.




                                                        12
In addition, we include a measure of income. GDP per capita is derived from the Bureau of

Economic Analysis (BEA). Specifically, we use the following file: "SA1 Personal Income Summary:

Personal Income, Population, Per Capita Personal Income." From this file we use the Per Capita

Personal Income as our proxy for state per capita GDP.



4.2    Methodology


Below we present a brief discussion of the synthetic control (SC) methodology; for a detailed

explanation see Abadie et al. (2010). In what follows, we have used the term "treatment" and

"intervention" to imply the start of the APFD in 1982. Hence the years prior to 1982 are referred to

as pre-treatment and years after post-treatment. It follows that the "treated unit" in our study is

Alaska.


The synthetic counterfactual will be composed of a convex combination of J - 1 units in the vector

J  {2, 3, ..., j }, each contributing weights wj . Our treatment unit is j = 1. The weight vector, W , then

is a (J - 1) × 1 vector of unit weights use to construct the counterfactual. In line with Abadie et al.

(2010), we impose two restrictions on the weights23 : first, we impose that the weights are non-
                                                                                                         J
negative, wj  0 , and second, that their sum is bounded above to equal a single unit,                    j =1 wj   = 1.

The relaxation of the first restriction, which allows for negative weights, would in turn find controls

that better match the trend of the treatment unit in the pre-intervention period (see Jones and

Marinescu (2018) for further discussions).


We have a total of t  {1, 2, ..., T } periods. T0 is the period of intervention. So, there are t  {1, 2, ..., T0 }

pre-intervention periods and t  {T0 + 1, T0 + 2, ..., T } post-intervention periods.


We define Djt as the presence or absence of the treatment. So:
  23 Following Tanndal and Waldenstr¨  om (2018) we can assume that the weights are not negative, nor do they sum to
less than one due to the non-symmetric nature of fertility rates. Doudchenko and Imbens (2016) have suggested that it
may feasible to use non-restrictive weights for symmetric outcome variables.




                                                         13
                             
                             
                              1 for the treatment unit, t  {T0 + 1, ..., T },
                             
                       Djt =                                                                           (4)
                             
                              0 for the treatment unit t  {1, 2, ..., T0 }, and
                             
                             0 for the control units t  {1, 2, ..., T }
                             



Following Rubin (1974), we can think of the effect on the outcome variable without treatment as

follows:




                                   yjt (D = 0) = t + t Zj + t µj + jt ,                                (5)



where, yjt (D = 0) (yjt (0) henceforth) is the outcome without the intervention, t are the time fixed

effects, µj are unit fixed effects, and jt are unit-specific time shocks. Zj is a K × 1 vector of variables

that influence the outcome.


Then the treated outcome becomes:




                                            yjt (1) = jt + yjt (0),                                    (6)



where, jt is the effect of the treatment for the treated unit. The treatment is the difference between

the treated state, that is yjt (1), and the untreated state, yjt (0). In our framework, the effect of the

treatment can be expressed as follows:




                                 1t = y1t (1) - y1t (0), t  {T0 + 1, ..., T }.                         (7)



Since we do not observe y1t (0) in the post-intervention period for the treated unit, we estimate it

through a counterfactual. The SC estimator estimates y1t (0) using a combination of weights with a

pool of donor units. The SC estimator can be expressed as:




                                                     14
                                                         J
                                   ^1t = y1t (1) -
                                                              wj · yjt (1), t  {T0 + 1, ..., T }.                          (8)
                                                     j =2



Since we know the outcome for the treatment and control units, it remains for us to estimate the

weights, wj . These weights are chosen such that we minimize the pre-intervention gap between the

treated series and the estimated counterfactual series. The optimal weights are calculated such

that:


                                                                  J                                  J
                                
                             w (V ) = argmin X1 -                      wj · X j V X 1 -                      wj · X j ,    (9)
                                            w
                                                               j =2                                j =2



where, X is a (K + ty ) × 1 vector of variables with all the regressors and the outcome variable,

(Zj , yj 1 , yj 2 , ..., yjT0 ) . We pick V such that:


                                                                T0                  J                         2
                                                         1
                                    V  = argmin                            y1t -             
                                                                                            wj (V ) · yjt .               (10)
                                                v        T0
                                                               t =1                j =2



The synthetic control (SC) estimator can then be expressed as:


                                                         J
                                      ^1t = y1t -
                                                               
                                                              wj · yjt , t  {T0 + 1, ..., T }.                            (11)
                                                     j =2



Further, we can calculate the pre-treatment match between the treatment and control units. This is

given by the root mean squared prediction error (RMSPE):



                                                                      T0                J                2
                                                             1                                
                                       RMSP E =                             y1t -            wj · yjt .                   (12)
                                                             T0
                                                                  t =1              j =2



As the SC methodology does not have a traditional way to calculate the p-value, for inference we

follow Abadie et al. (2015). They define the p-value as:

                                                                       15
                                             J      T        ^1,T || ^j,t |}
                                             j =2   t    1{|     0
                                 p-value =                                                        (13)
                                                           Njt


where, Njt is the total number of placebo SC studies, and ^j,t is the treatment effect for these

placebo studies. Essentially, we will conduct SC methodology studies with each of the fifty states

as the treated unit and estimate equation 11. These studies are referred to as placebo studies. For

the p-value, we then compare the effect size of the actual treated unit, Alaska, to these placebo

effects. The p-value in equation 13 expresses the share of placebo effects that are larger than the

effect on the actual study.




5     Results


We first present results from the synthetic control studies using fertility rate as the outcome

variable. This is followed by the birth spacing and finally by the abortion rate variables of interest.

For each outcome variable, we discuss the raw trends followed by the results from the SC studies.

Additionally, we also compare and contrast the SC estimates for Alaska with those of the placebo

studies. Finally, to check the sensitivity of our SC estimates, we will present results using the

Difference-in-Differences specifications. The latter results are presented in the robustness checks

subsection. We limit our study to the years 1976 to 1988. This is in part due to the need to tighten

the window around the policy to mitigate potential confounding effects of macro factors and in

part due to data availability.



5.1     Results for Fertility Rate


5.1.1    Raw trends


Table 2 presents the average annual fertility rates for Alaska and the US excluding Alaska by each

age group over time. Fertility rates for Alaska are consistently higher than those for the rest of the



                                                    16
United States for all age groups. The fertility rate for the general population--that is, the 15-44

age group--has been declining steadily since the early 1980s both in Alaska and in all other states.

In the period between 1976 and 1988, the fertility rate in Alaska for the 15-44 population was

on average 88 births per 1000 women and the average fertility rate for the rest of the US was 68.

While this rate remained stable at around 69 annual live births in the 1976-1982 period for the rest

of the country, in Alaska it rose from 80 in 1976 to 95 annual live births in 1982. This increase in

fertility in Alaska was possibly driven by the migration boom corresponding to the building of

the oil pipeline in the mid-1970s. Post 1982, however, there is a decline in fertility rates in Alaska.

This decline in fertility rates post 1982 is driven by the decrease in fertility rates of women in the

youngest age groups (15-19 and 20-24). For the age groups 25-34 and 35-44, there is an increase in

fertility rates in the whole decade between 1976 and 1988 in Alaska. These fertility trends for the

various age groups mimics the trends in average fertility rates for the rest of the country.


                                         [Table 2 about here]



5.1.2   SC results


Table 3 reports descriptive statistics of the variables used for matching Alaska and its synthetic

control. The states and the weights of each state used for synthetic control counterfactuals are

presented in Table A.1. Columns (1) and (2) of Table 3 reports the pre-treatment averages of the

variables for the 15-44 age group for Alaska and its synthetic counterfactual respectively. The

variables are averaged for all the pre-treatment period. Note that we have used the average of the

outcome variable in the SC matching process. We provide SC results using only the last year of

outcome for matching in Appendix B. The balance between the series of the other age groups are

presented in columns (3)-(6). It is assuring to note that the averages of these variables across the

different controls are fairly close to the actual values for Alaska.


                                         [Table 3 about here]


Table 4 reports the estimated effects from the SC studies with fertility rate as the outcome of

                                                  17
interest. The SC effect is averaged over all the post treatment years­that is, for the years 1983 to

1988.24 Column (1) of this table reports the estimate for the overall population, the 15-44 age

group. This estimate suggests that the average post-treatment difference in fertility rates between

Alaska and its synthetic control was 11.3, or Alaska on average had 11.3 more annual live births

per 1000 women compared to its control. The p-value reported here is calculated using equation

13. It can be inferred from the p-value that the size of the estimate for Alaska was in the 98th

percentile compared to SC estimates of the placebo studies. We also report the pre-treatment

match, or the root mean square prediction error (RMSPE), in fertility trends between Alaska and

its synthetic control. Furthermore, we also present the ranking of this RMSPE from the Alaska

study relative to a distribution of the RMSPEs from all the placebo studies. The RMSPE-percentile

suggests that Alaska's pre-treatment match was better than the match in only 15 percent of the

placebo SC studies.


Columns (2)-(5) of Table 4 reports estimates from the SC studies for the 15-19, 20-24, 25-34, and

35-44 age groups, respectively. For the 15-19 age group, we do not find any significant difference

in fertility rates between Alaska and its control. We do, however, find significantly large effects

on fertility rate for all the other age groups. The 20-24 age group in Alaska has more than 20.3

births on average compared to its control in the period after the start of the APFD. Considering

that the average fertility rate for this age group before the introduction of APFD was 163.1, the

estimate of 20.3 suggests an increase in fertility rates of 12.4 percent. Similarly, the estimate for

the 25-34 group is 14.1, which is a 14.3 percent increase over the mean fertility of this group. The

estimate for 35-44 age group is 2.8, which is a 16.3 percent increase in fertility rate over the age

group's pre-treatment mean.



                                              [Table 4 about here]



Figure 1 presents the pre- and post-treatment trends in the fertility rate for various age groups

and its respective synthetic control series. For the 15-44 age group in panel A, we find a positive

impact on fertility in Alaska in the post-treatment period relative to its control. Recall that the
 24 The estimates in Table 4 are calculated using ^1,t from equation 11 as follows: ^1 =   T              1       ^
                                                                                           t =T0 +1 (T - (T + 1)) 1,t .
                                                                                                           0


                                                         18
average difference for the 1983-88 period was 11.3 births (see column (1) of Table 4). Given that

the pre-treatment average fertility rate for Alaska is 85.9, APFD effectively increased the fertility

rate in Alaska by 13.1 percent in the 1983-88 period. Note that this average effect on fertility rate

in Alaska is not driven by an odd year. It is clear from Panel A of Figure 1 that the effect remains

persistent in all periods after the implementation of APFD.


Similarly, we find visible effects of the APFD on fertility rates for all age groups over the age of 20

years. The effects are strongest for the oldest age group in our study. It is also interesting to note

the null effect for the 15-19 group.



                                         [Figure 1 about here]



Figure 2 reports the size of the annual effects from the SC study for Alaska and all placebo SC

studies. The size of the effect is the annual difference in trends between Alaska and its synthetic

control series presented in Figure 1. The annual effect size for Alaska is represented by the broken

line in all panels. The gray solid lines represent the size of the effects for each placebo study. In an

ideal scenario, we should expect to see zero annual effects before the intervention­that is, the effect

graph should perfectly align with the vertical line at zero. This would be the case if the trends

in Alaska exactly matched the trends in its control in Figure 1. The pre-treatment match of SC

studies for Alaska is fair considering the placebo studies. Relative to the placebo studies, the effect

size for fertility rate in Alaska is significantly large for all age groups besides the teen group in the

post-APFD period.


Note that, relative to the placebos, the effect for Alaska is large for all age groups over the age of 20

years. While the pre-treatment match for the 25-34 age group is not exact, the match for 20-24 and

35-44 is relatively better compared to their placebo studies.



                                         [Figure 2 about here]




                                                   19
5.2     Results for Birth Spacing


5.2.1    Raw trends


While the fertility rate in the 1976-88 period is higher in Alaska compared to the rest of the US,

birth spacing is lower. Table 5 presents descriptive statistics on birth spacing for Alaska and the

US excluding Alaska. Birth spacing is measured as the average number of months between the

birth of two children. This is again calculated for various age groups. For the 15-44 age group, the

gap between births is on average 43 months in Alaska and 45 months in the rest of the country.

Although small, this difference in birth spacing is primarily driven by the 25-34 and 35-44 groups.

The difference in birth spacing between Alaska and the rest of the US in the 1976-1988 period is

one month for the 20-24 age group and non-existent for the 15-19 age group. In the US in this time

period, conditional on having a child, the 15-19 and 20-24 age groups waited on average within 2-3

years for their next child, while the 25-34 and 35-44 groups waited on average between 4-7 years.



                                         [Table 5 about here]



5.2.2    SC results


Table 6 reports descriptive statistics of the variables used for matching Alaska and its synthetic

control. As with fertility rates in Table 4, the actual and synthetic control pre-treatment averages

for all age groups are fairly close.



                                         [Table 6 about here]



Table 7 reports the SC estimates for birth spacing. We find that estimates for the 15-44 age group is

not significantly different from zero. Or in this case, the estimate is not significantly large relative

to its placebos. This is also the case for all age groups below the age of 35 years. We do, however,

observe that the direction of all the estimates for birth spacing is consistent with our hypothesis.


                                                  20
We do find a large negative effect on birth spacing for the 35-44 age group. This estimate suggests a

3.9 month decline in birth spacing for the 35-44 age group in Alaska compared to its control. This

is about a 5.2 percent decline in the gap between births for this group. Another way of looking at

this is that on average a mother with a child was likely to have another child 3.8 months sooner

in Alaska relative its control. This magnitude of the effect size, although not significant in the

traditional sense, is larger than 70 percent of the placebos. The pre-treatment match for this group

is as good as half its placebos.



                                        [Table 7 about here]



The trends in birth spacing are presented in Figure 3 and the comparison of the effect size with

placebo effect sizes are presented in Figure 4. As with the fertility rate study, we find no effect for

the 15-19 group. There is, however, some evidence of declining trends in birth spacing for all the

age groups over 20 years relative to their controls.



                                        [Figure 3 about here]



                                        [Figure 4 about here]



5.3     Results for Abortion Rates


5.3.1    Raw trends


Abortion rate is measured as the number of reported abortions per 1000 women between the ages

of 15 and 44. Table 8 reports the the raw trends in abortion rates for Alaska and the U.S average

excluding Alaska. As explained in the data section, abortion rates are only reported here for the

overall (15-44) population. There are fewer abortions in Alaska compared to the average of all

other states in the U.S. Alaska in the 1976-1988 period had on average 13.6 abortions per 1000

women, while the US average, not including Alaska, had 21.5 abortions per 1000 women.


                                                  21
                                        [Table 8 about here]



5.3.2   SC results


Table 9 presents the pre-treatment balance of the variables, and Table 10 presents the SC estimates

for studies with abortion rate. The estimate in Table 10 suggests a small increase in abortion rate in

Alaska relative to its control. However, this effect size is smaller than two thirds of the placebo

studies.



                                        [Table 9 about here]



                                        [Table 10 about here]



Panel A of Figure 5 shows the trends in abortion rates for Alaska and its SC counterfactual. The

trends do not match well in the pre-treament period and they do not diverge from each other in the

post-treatment period. We can also confirm the relative no effect in abortion rates from the placebo

comparisons in Panel B of the same figure. We do not find any significant effect on abortion rates

in Alaska due to the APFD.



                                        [Figure 5 about here]



While our findings for fertility rate and birth spacing are consistent with our hypothesis, those

for abortion do not appear to be. This is unsurprising. The two former outcomes relate mostly to

planned pregnancy and hence are directly influenced by income shocks such as that represented

by the APFD. Abortions on the other hand, are generally unplanned pregnancies and hence the

effect due to income shocks is less likely to occur.




                                                  22
5.4   Robustness Checks


In this section, we test the sensitivity of our SC estimates using the Difference-in-Differences (DiD)

framework. The DiD framework differs from SC methodology in that while SC study forces a

pre-treatment match between the series for the treated and the control units, DiD relaxes this

assumption. DiD allows for a pre-treatment difference in levels of the trends for the treated and

control units. However, the DiD framework imposes a further assumption that the trends between

the treated and control units are "parallel." The DiD studies are especially important for robustness

of the estimates as the pre-treament match in the SC studies were not optimum.


We use the DiD methodology to compare Alaska with two sets of controls. Our first control does

not impose any restrictions on the states used as the counterfactual; that is, we perform a DiD

study with all states as part of the counterfactual for Alaska. For the second control, we use only

the states that had positive weights in the SC study. The states used in the latter control group are

listed in Table A.1.


We present results from the DiD study for fertility rate in Table 11, birth spacing in Table 12, and

abortion rate in Table 13. Panel A of each table presents the DiD study for the 15-44 age group;

the other panels present results from studies with various age groups. Columns (1)-(4) report DiD

estimates using various specifications for our first control group--all the states in the US. Columns

(5) and (6) present the DiD results from the restricted control group.


Column (4) of Table 11 presents DiD results using all states as the control. For the 15-44 age group,

we find an increase in fertility rate of 6.9 more births in Alaska per 1000 women; this represents

an 10.1 percent increase in fertility rate in Alaska over the sample average. The DiD estimates

for fertility are robust to controlling for time and state fixed-effects or a list of control variables

used in the SC study. The effect size increases if we restrict our control to the states used in the SC

study. For this age group, the DiD effect size is 11.6, which is a 13.6 percent increase over the mean

pre-treatment fertility of this age group.


As with the SC study, the DiD estimates for fertility rates are not significant for the teen group.



                                                  23
The DiD estimates for fertility rate are significant for all other age groups. For the 20-24 age group,

fertility rate in Alaska increased between 13.7 and 24.2 percent over its controls. For the 25-34

group, fertility rate increased between 14.4 and 15.0 percent, and for the 35-44 group, fertility rate

increased between 16.1 and 18.0 percent.



                                        [Table 11 about here]



Consistent with the SC study for birth spacing, we find negative effects from our DiD studies

for birth spacing. These estimates are reported in Table 12. Only the "oldest" age group for the

DiD studies shows consistently significant effects. As expected, the birth spacing for this group

decreases. However, this decrease remains very small, less than a percent over the mean of the

sample.



                                        [Table 12 about here]



As with the SC studies, we do not find any significant results for the abortion rates using the DiD

framework.



                                        [Table 13 about here]




6   Conclusion


Previous studies on the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend, which allowed each full-time resident

in Alaska to receive a sizable dividend starting in 1982, suggest that it had limited employment

effects, suggesting that the labor market consequences of having such a dividend as a UBI may be

minimal. Perhaps this is an effect due to the relatively small size of the disbursement. A channel

whereby this is occurring may be through increased fertility if the dividend encourages individuals

to have children. While studies have analyzed the effects of various welfare benefits on fertility,


                                                  24
no previous study to our knowledge has analyzed the effect of a universal dividend such as that

provided by Alaska on fertility outcomes. Using synthetic control models as the primary tool to

ensure our results are internally valid, we exploit the introduction of this dividend in Alaska in

1982 to explore the effects of the dividend on the number of children (fertility), birth spacing for

those with more than one child, and the number of abortions. Our analysis is done separately by

age groups (15-19, 20-24, 25-34, and 35-44) in addition to the pooled sample (15-44 year olds).

We find that fertility increases in Alaska by 11.3 births per 1000 females (all age groups) due to

the dividend. While we find no effect due to the cash transfer on the fertility of the teen group,

the effect is particularly pronounced for the age groups over 20 years of age. We find an effect of

20.3 births for 20-24 year olds, representing a 12.4 percent increase, 14.1 births for 25-34 year

olds, representing a 14.3 percent increase, and 2.8 births for the 35-44 year olds, representing

a 16.9 percent increase. The effects for birth spacing are generally in the expected direction but

imprecisely measured. We do not find significant effects for abortion rates.


While we argue that the Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend does not meet all of the requirements

to classify it as a UBI (as the amount, although sizable, is still too small), it is an unconditional

and universal transfer. This suggests that, when considering policies surrounding UBIs, one

consideration is the effect it may have on fertility. For those on the margin when deciding whether

to have a child or additional child, the increased income may increase both the quality and quantity

of children; the effect on quality, however, may not hold further away from the margin. These are

factors to consider when analyzing the long-run effects of increased fertility on economic growth

and the implications for skilled versus unskilled labor.25




  25 Please refer to the literature on fertility and economic growth, such as Day (2016) study that presents an overlapping
generations model in this context, for insights into this dynamic relationship.


                                                           25
References
Abadie, A., Diamond, A., and Hainmueller, J. (2010). Synthetic control methods for comparative
 case studies: Estimating the effect of californias tobacco control program. Journal of the American
 statistical Association, 105(490):493­505.

Abadie, A., Diamond, A., and Hainmueller, J. (2015). Comparative politics and the synthetic
 control method. American Journal of Political Science, 59(2):495­510.

Acemoglu, D. (2019). Why universal basic income is a bad idea. Project Syndicate, 7.

Alaska, D. o. R. (2017).      http://www.tax.alaska.gov/programs/programs/reports/
  AnnualReport.aspx?Year=2017. Accessed: 20 October 2018.

Alaska, D. o. R. P. F. D. D. (2019). https://pfd.alaska.gov/Division-Info/Summary-of
 -Applications-and-Payments. Accessed 30 October 2019.

Banerjee, A., Niehaus, P., and Suri, T. (2019). Universal basic income in the developing world.
  Annual Review of Economics, 11:959­983.

Banerjee, A. V., Hanna, R., Kreindler, G. E., and Olken, B. A. (2017). Debunking the stereotype
  of the lazy welfare recipient: Evidence from cash transfer programs. The World Bank Research
  Observer, 32(2):155­184.

Bastagli, F., Hagen-Zanker, J., Harman, L., Barca, V., Sturge, G., and Schmidt, T. (2019). The impact
  of cash transfers: A review of the evidence from low-and middle-income countries. Journal of
  Social Policy, 48(3):569­594.

Baughman, R. and Dickert-Conlin, S. (2009). The earned income tax credit and fertility. Journal of
  Population Economics, 22(3):537­563.

Becker, G. (1981). A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge, MA, Harvard UniversityPress.

Becker, G. S. and Barro, R. J. (1988). A reformulation of the economic theory of fertility. The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 103(1):1­25.

Berman, M. (2018). Resource rents, universal basic income, and poverty among alaskas indigenous
  peoples. World Development, 106:161­172.

Black, D., Kolesnikova, N., Sanders, S. G., and Taylor, L. J. (2013). Are children "normal"? The
  Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(1):21­33.

Cohen, A., Dehejia, R., and Romanov, D. (2013). Financial incentives and fertility. The Review of
  Economics and Statistics, 95(1):1­20.

Day, C. (2016). Fertility and economic growth: The role of workforce skill composition and child
 care prices. Oxford Economic Papers, 68(2):546­565.

Doudchenko, N. and Imbens, G. W. (2016). Balancing, regression, difference-in-differences and
 synthetic control methods: A synthesis. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
 No. 25538, Cambridge, MA.

Evans, D. K. and Popova, A. (2017). Cash transfers and temptation goods. Economic Development
  and Cultural Change, 65(2):189­221.

                                                 26
Flood, S., King, M., Ruggles, S., and Warren, J. R. (2018). Integrated public use microdata series,
  current population survey: Version 6.0. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota. DOI: https://
  doi.org/10.18128/D030.V6.0.
Ghatak, M. and Maniquet, F. (2019). Universal basic income: some theoretical aspects. Annual
 Review of Economics, 11:895­928.
Goldsmith, O. S. (2010). The Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend: A case study in implementation
 of a basic income guarantee.
Goldsmith, O. S. (2012). The economic and social impacts of the permanent fund dividend on
 Alaska. In Alaska's permanent fund dividend, pages 49­63. Springer.
Herz, N. (2018). Alaska house votes to more than double PFDs, splintering majority and
  threatening budget progress.     https://www.adn.com/politics/alaska-legislature/
  2018/03/26/alaska-house-votes-to-more-than-double-pfds-splintering-majority-and
 -threatening-budget-progress/. Accessed: 17 October 2018.
Hoynes, H. W. and Rothstein, J. (2019). Universal basic income in the US and advanced countries.
 National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 25538, Cambridge, MA.
Hsieh, C.-T. (2003). Do consumers react to anticipated income changes? evidence from the Alaska
  permanent fund. American Economic Review, 93(1):397­405.
Jones, D. and Marinescu, I. (2018). The labor market impacts of universal and permanent cash
  transfers: Evidence from the Alaska permanent fund. National Bureau of Economic Research
  Working Paper No. 24312, Cambridge, MA.
Keane, M. and Moffitt, R. (1998). A structural model of multiple welfare program participation
  and labor supply. International economic review, pages 553­589.
Kearney, M. S. and Mogstad, M. (2019). Universal basic income (ubi) as a policy response to current
  challenges. Report, Aspen Institute, pages 1­19.
Kueng, L. (2015). Revisiting the response of household spending to the Alaska Permanent Fund
  Dividend using CE data. Available at SSRN 2634005.
Kurland, S. (2017). Effects of transfer income on migration and rural unemployment: Evidence
  from the alaska permanent fund dividend, thesis, department of economics, stanford uni-
 versity, stanford ca. Available at: https://economics.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/
  publications/kurland sam honorthesis-final 5-4-17.pdf. Accessed: 19 October 2018.
Low, H., Meghir, C., Pistaferri, L., and Voena, A. (2018). Marriage, labor supply and the dynamics
  of the social safety net. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24356,
  Cambridge, MA).
Lowrey, A. (2018). Give People Money: The simple idea to solve inequality and revolutionise our lives.
  Random House.
Marinescu, I. (2018). No strings attached: the behavioral effects of us unconditional cash transfer
 programs. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 24337, Cambridge, MA.
Milligan, K. (2005). Subsidizing the stork: New evidence on tax incentives and fertility. Review of
 Economics and statistics, 87(3):539­555.

                                                 27
Quistorff, B. and Galiani, S. (2017). The synth runner package: Utilities to automate synthetic
 control estimation using synth. Stata Journal, (17):834­849.

Rosen, Y. (2018).  For 40 years, alaska has modeled a universal income. now thats
  in peril.   http://inthesetimes.com/article/21544/alaska-universal-basic-income
 -dividend-taxes-permanent-fund. Accessed 30 October 2019.

Rubin, D. B. (1974). Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and nonrandomized
  studies. Journal of Educational Psychology, 66(5):688.

Tamura, R. (1985). A note on the dynastic family. In Workshop in Applications of Economics,
  University of Chicago.

Tanndal, J. and Waldenstr¨
                         om, D. (2018). Does financial deregulation boost top incomes? evidence
  from the big bang. Economica, 85(338):232­265.

Van Parijs, P. and Vanderborght, Y. (2017). Basic income: A radical proposal for a free society and a
  sane economy. Harvard University Press.




                                                 28
                        Figure 1: Alaska and Synthetic Control Trends, Fertility Rate


                              Panel A: 15-44                                  Panel B: 15-19
                  95                                              65
                  90
                  85                                              60
                  80
                                                                  55
                  75
                  70
                                                                  50
                        -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                  -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                               Panel C: 20-24                                 Panel D: 25-34
                                                                  120
                  200

                  180                                             110


                  160                                             100

                  140                                              90
                         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                  -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                              Panel E: 35-44
                  24
                  22
                  20
                  18                                                       Alaska               SC Control
                  16
                  14
                        -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7




Notes: This figure shows the trends in fertility rate for Alaska and its respective synthetic controls by various age groups.
The states and their corresponding weights used for the construction of the synthetic controls are reported in Table A.1.
The x-axis measures periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was introduced, 1982,
is marked by a vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures number of live births per 1000 women in the respective
age group.




                                                            29
                 Figure 2: Comparison of Alaska and Placebo SC Effects, Fertility Rate


                                  Panel A: 15-44                              Panel B: 15-19
                   20                                             20

                   10                                             10
                       0                                           0
                  -10                                             -10
                  -20
                                                                  -20
                            -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7              -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                                  Panel C: 20-24                              Panel D: 25-34
                   30                                             20
                   20                                             10
                   10
                                                                   0
                       0
                  -10                                             -10

                  -20                                             -20
                            -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7              -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                                 Panel E: 35-44
                   4

                   2

                   0
                                                                            Alaska               Placebos
                  -2

                  -4
                           -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7




Notes: This figure shows the difference in fertility rate between Alaska and its synthetic controls (dashed series), and the
differences for all placebo states with respect to its corresponding synthetic controls (gray series). The x-axis measures
periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was introduced, 1982, is marked by a
vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures the number of live births per 1000 women in the respective age group.




                                                             30
                      Figure 3: Alaska and Synthetic Control Trends, Birth Spacing


                             Panel A: 15-44                               Panel B: 15-19
                 45                                            24

                 44                                            23

                 43                                            22

                 42
                                                               21
                      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                             Panel C: 20-24                               Panel D: 25-34
                 33                                            49
                                                               48
                 32
                                                               47
                 31                                            46
                                                               45
                 30
                                                               44
                      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                             Panel E: 35-44
                 80

                 75

                 70                                                    Alaska               SC Control

                 65

                      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7




Notes: This figure shows the trends in birth spacing for Alaska and its respective synthetic controls by various age
groups. The states and their corresponding weights used for the construction of the synthetic controls are reported in
Table A.1. The x-axis measures periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was
introduced, 1982, is marked by a vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures the average number of months
between two live births for a woman in the respective age group.




                                                         31
                 Figure 4: Comparison of Alaska and Placebo SC Effects, Birth Spacing


                                 Panel A: 15-44                              Panel B: 15-19
                  4                                               4
                  2                                               2
                  0
                  -2                                              0

                  -4                                              -2
                  -6
                                                                  -4
                           -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7              -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                                 Panel C: 20-24                              Panel D: 25-34
                  4                                               5
                  2
                  0
                                                                  0
                  -2
                  -4
                  -6                                              -5
                           -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7              -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                                  Panel E: 35-44
                  30
                  20
                  10
                       0                                                    Alaska              Placebos
                  -10
                  -20
                            -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7




Notes: This figure shows the difference in birth spacing between Alaska and its synthetic control (dashed series), and the
differences for all placebo states with respect to its corresponding synthetic controls (gray series). The x-axis measures
periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was introduced, 1982, is marked by a
vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures the average number of months between two live births for a woman in
the respective age group.




                                                             32
Figure 5: Alaska and Synthetic Control Trend, and a Comparison of Effects with Placebos, Abortion
Rate

                            Panel A: Synthetic Control                                                 Panel B: Placebo Comparisions
   20                                                                             40




                                                                                  20

   15


                                                                                   0




   10
                                                                                  -20




                                                                                  -40

    5
        -5   -4   -3   -2     -1      0     1   2    3       4   5   6   7              -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0      1   2   3      4   5   6   7

                                   Alaska       SC Control                                                       Alaska       Placebos




Notes: Panel A of this figure shows the trends in abortion rate for Alaska and its respective synthetic controls. Panel B
shows the difference in fertility rates between Alaska and its synthetic control (dashed series), and the differences for all
placebo states with respect to its corresponding synthetic controls (gray series). The states and their corresponding
weights used for the construction of the synthetic control for Panel A are reported in Table A.1. The x-axis measures
periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was introduced, 1982, is marked by a
vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures the number of abortions per 1000 women in the respective age group.




                                                                             33
                           Table 1: Annual Per Capita APFD Disbursement

            Year    Fund Amount (in 2018 USD)              Year   Fund Amount (in 2018 USD)
            1982                2,602.15                   2001              2,623.48
            1983                 973.54                    2002              2,150.61
            1984                 800.67                    2003              1,511.50
            1985                 942.82                    2004              1,222.75
            1986                1,274.46                   2005              1,087.44
            1987                1,565.42                   2006              1,378.80
            1988                1,755.27                   2007              2,003.12
            1989                1,768.20                   2008              2,413.07
            1990                1,830.24                   2009              1,527.45
            1991                1,717.08                   2010              1,475.16
            1992                1,639.16                   2011              1,310.58
            1993                1,649.94                   2012               960.27
            1994                1,667.10                   2013               970.12
            1995                1,631.70                   2014              1,998.37
            1996                1,809.57                   2015              2,195.17
            1997                2,028.48                   2016              1,069.27
            1998                2,373.78                   2017              1,126.87
            1999                2,667.58                   2018              1,600.00
            2000                2,863.76

Note: The amounts presented here are expressed in 2018 USD. Source: Alaska Department of Revenue Permanent Fund
Dividend Division (2019).




                                                      34
                                Table 2: Descriptive Statistics, Fertility Rate

              (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)         (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)
               15-44                15-19                 20-24                25-34                35-44
   Year    Alaska    US         Alaska    US         Alaska     US         Alaska    US         Alaska    US
  1976      79.84     67.74      56.47     54.42     154.80     116.93     89.37      85.44      14.33     12.19
  1977      82.46     69.77      61.74     54.51     156.72     119.77     91.33      88.81      16.04     12.37
  1978      84.92     68.31      59.77     52.96     158.18     116.35     97.89      87.83      16.70     12.29
  1979      86.33     70.08      58.46     53.82     160.42     119.09     101.72     90.46      15.93     12.66
  1980      89.79     70.82      63.88     54.58     167.65     121.25     105.21     90.69      16.99     12.68
  1981      91.94     69.73      65.41     53.68     180.76     117.81     108.02     89.75      17.79     12.56
  1982      95.46     69.54      63.81     53.73     204.39     117.49     112.11     90.74      19.98     13.45
  1983      93.16     67.62      58.69     52.46     204.82     113.36     111.69     89.50      19.09     13.67
  1984      92.64     66.88      60.97     50.90     198.37     112.44     112.79     89.86      21.52     14.04
  1985      93.07     67.04      55.98     50.83     193.01     113.20     119.36     91.09      22.37     14.57
  1986      87.13     65.63      52.87     49.37     178.43     112.03     113.87     90.44      21.89     14.81
  1987      85.61     65.40      56.12     49.39     166.95     111.87     115.22     91.37      22.77     15.42
  1988      82.09     66.35      55.63     51.36     161.10     113.43     110.83     93.42      23.56     16.20

Notes: This table presents the average annual fertility rate in Alaska and US excluding Alaska by various women's age
groups. Fertility rate for the 15-44 population is defined as the total annual births per 1000 women between the ages
of 15 and 44. Fertility rates for other age groups are similarly normalized per 1000 women in that age group. Source:
Authors' calculation using public use Natality files.




                                                        35
                           Table 3: SC Pre-Treatment Balance Table, Fertility Rate

                                 (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)
  Age Group                              15-44                             15-19                            20-24
                              Alaska         SC Control         Alaska        SC Control          Alaska        SC Control
  Fertility Rate               87.11            86.93            61.36           61.27            168.99           168.84
  FLP Rate                     57.54            60.58            57.54           59.64            57.54             60.01
  Share Female                 57.00            48.74            57.00           48.17            57.00             49.31
  Share White                  75.97            82.63            75.97           74.90            75.97             96.45
  Share Rural                   0.43             0.29             0.41            0.65             0.44             0.16
  Share LHS                    20.25            22.62            72.15           72.80            12.78             12.83
  Share HS                     42.45            40.14            24.17           21.87            53.94             48.81
  GDP per capita (in $)        14674            10399            14674           10764            14674            10330
                                                                           25-34                            35-44
                                                                Alaska        SC Control          Alaska        SC Control
  Fertility Rate                                                100.81           100.71           16.82            16.82
  FLP Rate                                                      57.54            61.24            57.54            61.27
  Share Female                                                  57.00            47.83            57.00            48.01
  Share White                                                   75.97            67.80            75.97            64.40
  Share Rural                                                    0.43             0.48             0.40             0.54
  Share LHS                                                      6.79             9.05            15.03            16.41
  Share HS                                                      40.76            38.00            40.00            38.73
  GDP per capita (in $)                                         14674            10546            14674            10536

Notes: This table presents the pre-treatment average statistics for each variable used in the SC methodology. The
variables are averaged over the years 1976-1982. Column (1) reports statistics for the actual Alaska series, while columns
(2), (3) and (4) report statistics for the synthetic counterfactual series for fertility rate, birth spacing, and abortion rate.
The statistics reported here are for females in the 15-44 age group. Abbreviations: FLP - Female Labor Force Participation;
LHS - less than high school degree; HS - high school degree.




                                                              36
                                       Table 4: SC Estimates, Fertility Rate

                                           (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
            Fertility Rate                15-44          15-19          20-24           25-34          35-44
            Average Effect Size          11.261          0.487          20.277         14.143          2.756
            p-value                      [0.020]        [0.746]         [0.034]        [0.026]        [0.091]

            Number of Placebos             357            357            357             357            357
            Pre-Preriod RMSPE             1.965          1.653          4.493           5.575          0.786
            RMSPE Percentile              0.847          0.584          0.894           0.951          0.802

Notes: This table presents estimates of SC studies with fertility rate as the outcome variable. The estimates are averaged
                                 ^1 = T                 1       ^
over the post-treatment period:          t =T0 +1 (T - (T + 1)) 1,t . p-value is calculated using permutation test described
                                                         0
in equation 13. Root Mean Square Prediction Error (RMSPE) is calculated for Alaska for the years 1976-1982. RMSPE
percentile is based on the RMSPE for each of the 50 placebo studies.




                                                            37
                               Table 5: Descriptive Statistics: Birth Spacing

               (1)       (2)       (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)       (9)       (10)
                15-44                15-19                20-24                25-34                35-44
    Year    Alaska    US         Alaska    US         Alaska    US         Alaska    US         Alaska    US
   1976      42.73     44.70      24.01     23.10      32.98     33.44      46.00     49.54     76.94      80.04
   1977      43.78     44.94      22.76     23.24      31.95     33.73      48.44     49.73     75.51      80.42
   1978      43.32     44.90      23.19     23.17      31.41     33.54      46.98     49.54     76.94      81.11
   1979      42.41     44.76      23.94     23.16      30.94     33.41      46.60     49.08     73.01      81.69
   1980      42.31     44.50      22.98     22.68      31.84     33.04      45.94     48.85     71.11      80.52
   1981      42.42     44.18      21.50     22.56      30.19     32.54      46.08     48.40     73.53      79.35
   1982      42.57     44.00      21.61     22.45      31.36     32.32      45.78     47.84     70.28      78.20
   1983      41.70     44.20      21.12     22.51      30.85     32.41      44.47     47.78     67.51      77.46
   1984      42.37     44.28      23.83     22.63      31.07     32.65      44.46     47.48     69.91      75.50
   1985      42.08     44.67      22.29     22.57      29.78     32.87      44.10     47.71     69.74      75.35
   1986      43.06     44.94      21.58     22.41      30.28     32.82      45.33     47.88     68.19      74.40
   1987      43.05     45.21      22.27     22.42      31.54     32.70      44.71     48.07     66.15      73.40
   1988      43.04     45.46      22.63     22.30      30.95     32.63      44.73     48.25     64.21      72.95

Notes: This table presents the average annual birth spacing in Alaska and US excluding Alaska for various women's age
groups. Birth spacing is measured as the average number of months between births of two children for women in the
respective age groups. Source: Authors' calculation using public use Natality files.




                                                         38
                           Table 6: SC Pre-Treatment Balance Table, Birth Spacing

                                 (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)              (6)
  Age Group                              15-44                            15-19                             20-24
                              Alaska         SC Control         Alaska        SC Control         Alaska         SC Control
  Birth Spacing                42.60           42.79            22.86            22.85            31.52           31.53
  FLP Rate                     57.54           61.52            57.54            60.04            57.54           59.83
  Share Female                 57.00           48.28            57.00            48.66            57.00           47.89
  Share White                  75.97           75.66            75.97            76.62            75.97           76.98
  Share Rural                   0.43            0.70             0.41             0.49             0.44            0.54
  Share LHS                    20.25           21.05            72.15            71.98            12.78           12.44
  Share HS                     42.45           41.07            24.17            22.97            53.94           48.23
  GDP per capita (in $)        14674           10037            14674            10469            14674           10550
                                                                          25-34                             35-44
                                                                Alaska        SC Control         Alaska         SC Control
  Birth Spacing                                                 46.55            46.50            73.90           74.06
  FLP Rate                                                      57.54            60.75            57.54           58.77
  Share Female                                                  57.00            48.74            57.00           47.70
  Share White                                                   75.97            77.71            75.97           74.10
  Share Rural                                                    0.43             0.74             0.40            0.77
  Share LHS                                                      6.79             8.09            15.03           16.35
  Share HS                                                      40.76            37.06            40.00           35.91
  GDP per capita (in $)                                         14674            10054            14674           10712

Notes: This table presents the pre-treatment average statistics for each variable used in the SC methodology. The
variables are averaged over the years 1976-1982. Column (1) reports statistics for the actual Alaska series, while columns
(2), (3) and (4) report statistics for the synthetic counterfactual series for fertility rate, birth spacing, and abortion rate.
The statistics reported here are for females in the 15-44 age group. Abbreviations: FLP - Female Labor Force Participation;
LHS - less than high school degree; HS - high school degree.




                                                              39
                                      Table 7: SC Estimates, Birth Spacing

                                           (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)
            Birth Spacing                 15-44          15-19          20-24           25-34          35-44
            Average Effect Size          -0.124         -0.255          -0.353         -0.879         -3.847
            p-value                      [0.580]        [0.363]         [0.423]        [0.463]        [0.280]

            Number of Placebos             357            357            357             357            357
            Pre-Preriod RMSPE             0.403          1.004          0.638           0.871          2.117
            RMSPE Percentile              0.507          0.862          0.787           0.753          0.520

Notes: This table presents estimates of SC studies with birth spacing as the outcome variable. The estimates are averaged
                                  ^1 = T                1       ^
over the post-treatment period:          t =T0 +1 (T - (T + 1)) 1,t . p-value is calculated using permutation test described
                                                         0
in equation 13. Root Mean Square Prediction Error (RMSPE) is calculated for Alaska for the years 1976-1982. RMSPE
percentile is based on the RMSPE for each of the 50 placebo studies.




                                                            40
                               Table 8: Descriptive Statistics, Abortion Rate

                                                        (1)           (2)

                                          Year        Alaska          US
                                          1976         12.21        18.69
                                          1977         10.58        19.66
                                          1978         6.42         21.44
                                          1979         17.97        22.72
                                          1980         17.82        23.19
                                          1981         17.14        22.71
                                          1982         16.33        22.29
                                          1983         15.00        21.41
                                          1984         12.40        25.57
                                          1985         14.27        20.54
                                          1986         12.56        20.06
                                          1987         13.10        20.32
                                          1988         10.71        20.62

Notes: This table presents the annual abortion rate in Alaska and in the US excluding Alaska for the 15-44 women's age
group. Abortion rates are measured as the number of reported abortions per 1000 women between the ages of 15 and 44.
Source: Abortion Surveillance Reports, Centers for Disease Control.




                                                         41
                           Table 9: SC Pre-Treatment Balance Table, Abortion Rate

                                                                   (1)               (2)
                                                                Alaska          SC Control
                                 Abortion Rate                   14.07             14.09
                                 FLP Rate                        57.54             60.12
                                 Share Female                    57.00             49.31
                                 Share White                     75.97             95.49
                                 Share Rural                      0.43              0.37
                                 Share LHS                       20.25             23.84
                                 Share HS                        42.45             41.67
                                 GDP per capita (in $)           14674             10448

Notes: This table presents the pre-treatment average statistics for each variable used in the SC methodology. The
variables are averaged over the years 1976-1982. Column (1) reports statistics for the actual Alaska series, while columns
(2), (3) and (4) report statistics for the synthetic counterfactual series for fertility rate, birth spacing, and abortion rate.
The statistics reported here are for females in the 15-44 age group. Abbreviations: FLP - Female Labor Force Participation;
LHS - less than high school degree; HS - high school degree.



                                      Table 10: SC Estimates, Abortion Rate

                                                                             (1)
                                                                           15-44
                                          Average Effect Size               1.368
                                          p-value                          [0.657]

                                          Number of Placebos                 357
                                          Pre-Preriod RMSPE                 3.729
                                          RMSPE Percentile                  0.856

Notes: This table presents estimates of SC studies with abortion rate as the outcome variable. The estimates are averaged
                                  ^1 = T                1       ^
over the post-treatment period:          t =T0 +1 (T - (T + 1)) 1,t . p-value is calculated using permutation test described
                                                         0
in equation 13. Root Mean Square Prediction Error (RMSPE) is calculated for Alaska for the years 1976-1982. RMSPE
percentile is based on the RMSPE for each of the 50 placebo studies.




                                                              42
                                    Table 11: DiD Estimates, Fertility Rate


                                  (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)             (5)           (6)

        Panel A: 15-44                        DiD with All States                         DiD with SC states
        DD Estimate            6.484***      6.484***      6.484***      6.901***        11.597**     11.597***
                                (0.702)       (0.707)       (0.736)       (1.265)         (4.155)      (1.456)

        R-squared                0.079         0.092        0.353         0.911            0.396         0.963
        Dep Var Mean             68.46         68.46        68.46         68.46            85.32         85.32

        Panel B: 15-19
        DD Estimate             -0.385        -0.385        -0.385       -0.158            1.249         1.249
                                (0.595)       (0.600)       (0.624)      (1.385)          (2.591)       (1.014)

        R-squared                0.016         0.023         0.483         0.950          0.290         0.947
        Dep Var Mean            52.593        52.593        52.593        52.593          58.871        58.871

        Panel C: 20-24
        DD Estimate            28.765***    28.765***     28.765***     28.292***        23.426**     23.426***
                                (1.045)      (1.054)       (1.096)       (1.354)         (10.013)      (2.831)

        R-squared               0.135         0.141         0.428         0.953           0.381         0.975
        Dep Var Mean           116.949       116.949       116.949       116.949         171.082       171.082

        Panel D: 25-34
        DD Estimate            12.684***    12.684***     12.684***     12.964***        15.563***    15.563***
                                (0.903)      (0.911)       (0.948)       (1.809)          (3.481)      (2.928)

        R-squared                0.038         0.049         0.441         0.923          0.723         0.899
        Dep Var Mean            90.285        90.285        90.285        90.285         103.475       103.475

        Panel E: 35-44
        DD Estimate            3.164***      3.164***      3.164***      2.472***        2.985***      2.985***
                                (0.311)       (0.313)       (0.326)       (0.292)         (0.878)       (0.498)

        R-squared                0.104         0.131         0.131                        0.810         0.967
        Dep Var Mean            13.716        13.716        13.716        13.716          18.497        18.497
        N                         663           663          663           663               26           26
        Time FE                                  x            x             x                              x
        Control Variables                                     x             x
        State FE                                                            x
        Clustered SE               x             x              x           x
        * < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** < 0.01

Notes: DiD coefficients are calculated using years 1976-1988. Columns (1) - (4) presents results for DiD studies with
unrestricted controls. In columns (5) and (6) the control states are restricted to the states with positive SC methodology
weights. The list of these states are presented in Table A.1. List of control variables includes: share of female labor
force participation, female share of less than high school education, share of female population aged 15-44, population
growth rate, share of white race, and GDP per capita.
                                                           43
                                    Table 12: DiD Estimates, Birth Spacing


                                     (1)          (2)           (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)

           Panel A: 15-44                      DiD with All States                       DiD with SC states
           DD Estimate            -0.295*      -0.295*      -0.295*      -0.593**        -0.189      -0.189
                                  (0.148)      (0.149)      (0.155)       (0.249)        (0.488)     (0.265)

           R-squared               0.008        0.027        0.561        0.929           0.056       0.861
           Dep Var Mean            44.63        44.63        44.63        44.63           42.78       42.78

           Panel B: 15-19
           DD Estimate           -0.360***    -0.360***    -0.360***    -0.701***        -0.354      -0.354
                                  (0.055)      (0.056)      (0.058)      (0.186)         (0.569)     (0.553)

           R-squared              0.084        0.023         0.272        0.606          0.231        0.644
           Dep Var Mean           22.705       22.705        22.705       22.705         22.636      22.636

           Panel C: 20-24
           DD Estimate            -0.064       -0.064       -0.064        0.037          -0.272      -0.272
                                  (0.133)      (0.134)      (0.140)      (0.193)         (0.549)     (0.447)

           R-squared              0.041        0.063         0.462        0.877          0.223        0.716
           Dep Var Mean           32.897       32.897        32.897       32.897         31.321      31.321

           Panel D: 25-34
           DD Estimate           -0.546***    -0.546***    -0.546***    -0.725***        -0.407      -0.407
                                  (0.172)      (0.174)      (0.181)      (0.266)         (0.554)     (0.378)

           R-squared              0.031        0.038         0.687        0.952          0.649        0.915
           Dep Var Mean           48.417       48.417        48.417       48.417         45.786      45.786

           Panel E: 35-44
           DD Estimate            -1.310**     -1.310**     -1.310**     -1.200**       -3.806**    -3.806***
                                   (0.512)      (0.516)      (0.537)      (0.531)        (1.378)     (1.130)

           R-squared              0.103        0.130         0.593        0.853          0.730        0.914
           Dep Var Mean           77.590       77.590        77.590       77.590         71.931      71.931
           N                        663          663            663        663             26           26
           Time FE                                x              x          x                            x
           Control Variables                                     x          x
           State FE                                                         x
           Clustered SE               x            x             x          x
           * < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** < 0.01

Notes: DiD coefficients are calculated using years 1976-1988. Columns (1) - (4) presents results for DiD studies with
unrestricted controls. In columns (5) and (6) the control states are restricted to the states with positive SC methodology
weights. The list of these states are presented in Table A.1. List of control variables includes: share of female labor
force participation, female share of less than high school education, share of female population aged 15-44, population
growth rate, share of white race, and GDP per capita.

                                                           44
                                    Table 13: DiD Estimates, Abortion Rate


                                      (1)         (2)           (3)       (4)            (5)           (6)

           Panel A: 15-44                     DiD with All States                      DiD with SC states
           DD Estimate              -0.352      -0.352      -0.352      -0.053          1.391        1.391
                                    (1.133)     (1.142)     (1.188)     (2.889)        (2.492)      (1.691)

           R-squared                 0.003       0.010       0.470       0.846          0.047        0.786
           Dep Var Mean              21.32       21.32       21.32       21.32          13.36        13.36

           N                          663         663         663         663            26            26
           Time FE                                 x           x           x                            x
           Control Variables                                   x           x
           State FE                                                        x
           Clustered SE                x           x            x          x
           * < 0.10, ** < 0.05, *** < 0.01

Notes: DiD coefficients are calculated using years 1976-1988. Columns (1) - (4) presents results for DiD studies with
unrestricted controls. In columns (5) and (6) the control states are restricted to the states with positive SC methodology
weights. The list of these states are presented in Table A.1. List of control variables includes: share of female labor
force participation, female share of less than high school education, share of female population aged 15-44, population
growth rate, share of white race, and GDP per capita.




                                                           45
A     Appendix

      Figure A.1: Raw Trends in Fertility Rate for Alaska and US Average (excluding Alaska)


                                 Panel A: 15-44                                Panel B: 15-19
                 100.00                                       65.00
                  90.00
                                                              60.00
                  80.00
                                                              55.00
                  70.00

                  60.00                                       50.00
                          1976   1979   1982   1985   1988            1976     1979     1982   1985   1988


                                 Panel C: 20-24                                Panel D: 25-34
                 200.00                                       120.00

                 180.00                                        110.00
                 160.00                                       100.00
                 140.00                                         90.00
                 120.00
                                                                80.00
                          1976   1979   1982   1985   1988              1976     1979   1982   1985   1988


                                 Panel E: 35-44
                 25.00

                 20.00

                 15.00                                                  Alaska                 US Average


                 10.00
                         1976    1979   1982   1985   1988




Notes: This figure shows the raw trends in fertility rate for various age group for Alaska (solid line) and for the US
excluding Alaska (dashed line). Fertility Rate is calculated as the number of live births per 1000 women in the
respective age group. The x-axis measures periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD
was introduced, 1982, is marked by a vertical line at period zero. Source: Natality Files, Vital Statistics.




                                                         46
      Figure A.2: Raw Trends in Birth Spacing for Alaska and US Average (excluding Alaska)


                                Panel A: 15-44                                Panel B: 15-19
                 46.00                                         24.00
                 45.00
                                                               23.00
                 44.00
                 43.00                                         22.00

                 42.00
                                                               21.00
                         1976   1979   1982   1985   1988              1976   1979   1982   1985   1988


                                Panel C: 20-24                                Panel D: 25-34
                 34.00                                         50.00

                 33.00
                                                               48.00
                 32.00

                 31.00                                         46.00

                 30.00                                         44.00
                         1976   1979   1982   1985   1988              1976   1979   1982   1985   1988


                                Panel E: 35-44
                 85.00

                 80.00

                 75.00
                                                                        Alaska              US Average
                 70.00

                 65.00
                         1976   1979   1982   1985   1988




Notes: This figure shows the raw trends in birth spacing for various age group for Alaska (solid line) and for the US
excluding Alaska (dashed line). Birth Spacing is calculated as the number of months between two live births for women
in the respective age group. The x-axis measures periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year
APFD was introduced, 1982, is marked by a vertical line at period zero. Source: Natality Files, Vital Statistics.




                                                          47
     Figure A.3: Raw Trends in Abortion Rate for Alaska and US Average (excluding Alaska)


                                30.00




                                25.00




                                20.00




                                15.00
                                        1976   1978   1980        1982       1984     1986   1988

                                                         Alaska          US Average




Notes: This figure shows the raw trends in abortion rate for various age group for Alaska (solid line) and for the US
excluding Alaska (dashed line). Abortion rate is calculated as the number of abortions per 1000 women in the respective
age group. The x-axis measures periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was
introduced, 1982, is marked by a vertical line at period zero. Source: Natality Files, Vital Statistics.




                                                             48
                                     Table A.1: Synthetic Control Weights

                                                       Panel A: Fertility Rate
                           State             15-44     15-19     20-24      25-34     35-44
                           California        0.000     0.489     0.000      0.000     0.000
                           Connecticut       0.000     0.000     0.000      0.031     0.000
                           DC                0.021     0.212     0.051      0.051     0.183
                           Hawaii            0.239     0.022     0.000      0.389     0.273
                           Utah              0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000     0.081
                           Wyoming           0.741     0.277     0.949      0.529     0.462
                                                       Panel B: Birth-Spacing
                                             15-44     15-19     20-24      25-34     35-44
                           California        0.000     0.000     0.000      0.000     0.642
                           Colorado          0.281     0.000     0.000      0.294     0.000
                           DC                0.000     0.000     0.000      0.031     0.055
                           Hawaii            0.295     0.202     0.285      0.241     0.175
                           Maryland          0.000     0.342     0.000      0.000     0.000
                           Minnesota         0.341     0.000     0.000      0.023     0.000
                           Nevada            0.000     0.000     0.185      0.000     0.013
                           New Jersey        0.000     0.000     0.025      0.000     0.000
                           Wyoming           0.083     0.457     0.505      0.410     0.115
                                                       Panel C: Abortion Rate
                           State             15-44
                           Nevada            0.326
                           Wyoming           0.674

Notes: This table presents the weights used to construct the synthetic control for Alaska. Column (1) gives weights for
synthetic Alaska for the females aged 15-44. Panels (2) - (4) gives weights by age groups 15-19, 20-24, 25-34, and 35-44.
Panel A provides weights for controls for study based on fertility rate, Panel B does this for birth spacing, and Panel C
does the same for abortion rate. Technical source: Quistorff and Galiani (2017).




                                                          49
                                           Table A.2: Birth Spacing Data

  Year    Nonreporting states       Missing data     Plural deliveries     Coded < 9 months        Share of births used
  1976           19.29%                3.15%                0.63%                 0.14%                    76.79%
  1977           18.27%                3.23%                0.63%                 0.12%                    77.75%
  1978            0.00%                10.39%               0.72%                 0.15%                    88.74%
  1979            0.00%                9.75%                0.73%                 0.17%                    89.35%
  1980            0.00%                9.73%                0.74%                 0.15%                    89.38%
  1981            0.00%                8.41%                0.77%                 0.13%                    90.69%
  1982            0.00%                8.25%                0.80%                 0.15%                    90.80%
  1983            0.00%                8.23%                0.82%                 0.15%                    90.80%
  1984            0.00%                8.40%                0.83%                 0.14%                    90.63%
  1985            0.00%                8.11%                0.86%                 0.13%                    90.90%
  1986            0.00%                8.20%                0.88%                 0.14%                    90.78%
  1987            0.00%                7.93%                0.90%                 0.15%                    91.02%
  1988            0.00%                8.45%                0.92%                 0.14%                    90.49%

Notes: Share of states that did not report data for birth spacing is reported in Non-reporting states. This variable is
coded in Natality files as: "Not applicable." Because of this, we exclude 1976 and 1977 from our analysis for births
spacing. Missing data reports the fraction of birth spacing data that is missing. Plural deliveries reports the percentage of
non-singleton births. Coded < 9 months are the share of births with birth spacing recorded as less than 9 months; we
code this as missing. Finally, Share of births used reports the percentage of data used for birth spacing analysis out of all
eligible births (two or more).




                                                            50
B     Sensitivity Checks: Using the last year before intervention as the
      only matching outcome variable

      Figure B.1: Alaska and Synthetic Control Trends, Fertility Rate using Last Year Method


                              Panel A: 15-44                                  Panel B: 15-19
                  95                                              65
                  90
                  85                                              60
                  80
                                                                  55
                  75
                  70
                                                                  50
                        -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                  -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                               Panel C: 20-24                                 Panel D: 25-34
                                                                  120
                  200

                  180                                             110


                  160                                             100

                  140                                              90
                         -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                  -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                              Panel E: 35-44
                  24
                  22
                  20
                  18                                                       Alaska               SC Control
                  16
                  14
                        -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7




Notes: This figure shows the trends in fertility rate for Alaska and its respective synthetic controls by various age groups.
The states and their corresponding weights used for the construction of the synthetic controls are reported in Table A.1.
The x-axis measures periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was introduced, 1982,
is marked by a vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures number of live births per 1000 women in the respective
age group. Only the last year of outcome is used in the synthetic matching process.




                                                            51
Figure B.2: Comparison of Alaska and Placebo SC Effects, Fertility Rate using Last Year Method


                                  Panel A: 15-44                              Panel B: 15-19
                   20                                             30

                   10                                             20
                                                                  10
                       0
                                                                   0
                  -10
                                                                  -10
                  -20
                                                                  -20
                            -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7              -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                                  Panel C: 20-24                              Panel D: 25-34
                   30                                             20
                   20
                                                                  10
                   10
                                                                   0
                       0
                  -10                                             -10
                  -20
                                                                  -20
                            -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7              -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                                 Panel E: 35-44
                   4

                   2

                   0
                                                                            Alaska               Placebos
                  -2

                  -4
                           -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7




Notes: This figure shows the difference in fertility rate between Alaska and its synthetic controls (dashed series), and the
differences for all placebo states with respect to its corresponding synthetic controls (gray series). The x-axis measures
periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was introduced, 1982, is marked by a
vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures the number of live births per 1000 women in the respective age group.
Only the last year of outcome is used in the synthetic matching process.




                                                             52
     Figure B.3: Alaska and Synthetic Control Trends, Birth Spacing using Last Year Method


                             Panel A: 15-44                               Panel B: 15-19
                 45                                            24

                 44                                            23

                 43                                            22

                 42
                                                               21
                      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                             Panel C: 20-24                               Panel D: 25-34
                 33                                            49

                 32                                            48
                                                               47
                 31
                                                               46
                 30                                            45
                 29                                            44
                      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                             Panel E: 35-44
                 80

                 75

                 70                                                    Alaska               SC Control

                 65

                      -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7




Notes: This figure shows the trends in birth spacing for Alaska and its respective synthetic controls by various age
groups. The states and their corresponding weights used for the construction of the synthetic controls are reported in
Table A.1. The x-axis measures periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was
introduced, 1982, is marked by a vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures the average number of months
between two live births for a woman in the respective age group. Only the last year of outcome is used in the synthetic
matching process.




                                                          53
Figure B.4: Comparison of Alaska and Placebo SC Effects, Birth Spacing using Last Year Method


                                 Panel A: 15-44                                  Panel B: 15-19
                  4                                               4
                  2                                               2
                  0
                                                                  0
                  -2
                  -4                                              -2
                  -6                                              -4
                           -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                  -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                                  Panel C: 20-24                                  Panel D: 25-34
                       5
                                                                       5

                       0                                               0

                   -5                                              -5

                  -10                                             -10
                            -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                  -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7


                                  Panel E: 35-44
                  30
                  20
                  10
                       0                                                        Alaska            Placebos
                  -10
                  -20
                            -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7




Notes: This figure shows the difference in birth spacing between Alaska and its synthetic control (dashed series), and the
differences for all placebo states with respect to its corresponding synthetic controls (gray series). The x-axis measures
periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was introduced, 1982, is marked by a
vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures the average number of months between two live births for a woman in
the respective age group. Only the last year of outcome is used in the synthetic matching process.




                                                             54
Figure B.5: Alaska and Synthetic Control Trend, and Comparison with Placebo SC Effects, Abortion
Rate using Last Year Method

                            Panel A: Synthetic Control                                                 Panel B: Placebo Comparisions

   20                                                                             20




                                                                                   0


   15
                                                                                  -20




                                                                                  -40
   10


                                                                                  -60




    5                                                                             -80
        -5   -4   -3   -2     -1      0     1   2    3       4   5   6   7              -5   -4   -3   -2   -1     0      1   2   3      4   5   6   7

                                   Alaska       SC Control                                                       Alaska       Placebos




Notes: Panel A of this figure shows the trends in abortion rate for Alaska and its respective synthetic controls. Panel B
shows the difference in fertility rates between Alaska and its synthetic control (dashed series), and the differences for all
placebo states with respect to its corresponding synthetic controls (gray series). The states and their corresponding
weights used for the construction of the synthetic control for Panel A are reported in Table A.1. The x-axis measures
periods, in years, before and after the introduction of APFD. The year APFD was introduced, 1982, is marked by a
vertical line at period zero. The y-axis measures the number of abortions per 1000 women in the respective age group.
Only the last year of outcome is used in the synthetic matching process.




                                                                             55
                         Table B.1: Synthetic Control Weights, Last Year Method

                                                      Panel A: Fertility Rate
                          State             15-44     15-19     20-24     25-34     35-44
                          Connecticut       0.000     0.201     0.000     0.000      0.000
                          DC                0.045     0.371     0.000     0.000      0.459
                          Hawaii            0.000     0.000     0.000     0.223      0.206
                          Utah              0.000     0.000     0.000     0.094      0.116
                          Wyoming           0.955     0.428     1.000     0.683      0.219
                                                      Panel B: Birth-Spacing
                                            15-44     15-19     20-24     25-34     35-44
                          California        0.000     0.000 0.000 0.000              0.335
                          Connecticut       0.000     0.108 0.000 0.000              0.000
                          DC                0.170     0.000 0.000 0.172              0.072
                          Hawaii            0.090     0.469 0.233 0.076              0.060
                          Minnesota         0.283     0.000 0.000 0.085              0.000
                          Utah              0.000     0.000 0.102 0.000              0.000
                          Washington        0.196     0.422 0.285 0.023              0.000
                          Wyoming           0.544     0.000 0.380 0.644              0.534
                                                      Panel C: Abortion Rate
                          State             15-44
                          California        0.365
                          DC                0.007
                          Wyoming           0.628

Notes: This table presents the weights used to construct the synthetic control for Alaska. Column (1) gives weights for
synthetic Alaska for females aged 15-44. Panels (2) - (4) gives weights by age groups 15-19, 20-24, 25-34, and 35-44.
Panel A provides weights for controls for study based on fertility rate, Panel B does this for birth spacing, and Panel
C does the same for abortion rate. Only the last year of outcome is used in the synthetic matching process. Technical
source: Quistorff and Galiani (2017).




                                                         56
                                  Table B.2: SC Estimates, Last Year Method

                                            (1)            (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)
          Panel A: Fertility Rate          15-44          15-19          20-24          25-34          35-44
          Average Effect Size              10.802          0.255         18.966         10.048          1.148
          p-value                          [0.020]        [0.631]        [0.031]        [0.031]        [0.237]

          Number of Placebos                357            357            357             357            357
          Pre-Preriod RMSPE                2.410          1.811          5.452           9.766          1.038
          RMSPE Percentile                 0.769          0.492          0.816           0.943          0.792

          Panel B: Birth Spacing           15-44          15-19          20-24          25-34          35-44
          Average Effect Size              -1.338          0.271          0.080         -2.104         -3.621
          p-value                          [0.174]        [0.374]        [0.254]        [0.089]        [0.360]

          Number of Placebos                357            357            357             357            357
          Pre-Preriod RMSPE                0.678          1.368          0.848           1.425          3.040
          RMSPE Percentile                 0.581          0.911          0.772           0.821          0.576

          Panel C: Abortion Rate           15-44
          Average Effect Size              -6.054
          p-value                          [0.243]

          Number of Placebos                357
          Pre-Preriod RMSPE                4.993
          RMSPE Percentile                 0.806

Notes: This table presents estimates of SC studies. The estimates are averaged over the post-treatment period:        ^1 =
  T              1       ^
  t =T0 +1 (T - (T + 1)) 1,t . p-value is calculated using the permutation test described in equation 13. Root Mean Square
                  0
Prediction Error (RMSPE) is calculated for Alaska for the years 1976-1982. RMSPE percentile is based on the RMSPE for
each of the 50 placebo studies. Only the last year of outcome is used in the synthetic matching process.




                                                           57
