                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 INTERACTION OF THE LABOR MARKET AND THE HEALTH INSURANCE SYSTEM:
       EMPLOYER-SPONSORED, INDIVIDUAL, AND PUBLIC INSURANCE

                                          Naoki Aizawa
                                            Chao Fu

                                       Working Paper 26713
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26713


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank Samuel Bailey and Shoya Ishimaru for excellent research assistants. We thank
Mariacristina De Nardi, Eric French, Martin Hackmann, Tom Holmes, Ami Ko, Jeremy Lise, Lee
Lockwood, Matthew Notowidigdo, Amil Petrin, Chris Taber, and seminars and conferences
participants at ASSA meeting, Barcelona GSE Summer Forum, CEME Conference at Chicago,
CUHK, Econometric Society Meetings, FRB New York, FRB Saint Louis, GCER/Cemmap
Conference, HKST, IFS, Purdue, SED, Stanford Institute of Theoretical Economics, UBC, U-
Minnesota, UNC, USC, UW-Madison, UW-Milwaukkee and Yale for helpful comments. We
thank Rachelle Hill at the Minnesota Census RDC, Robert Thomas at the Wisconsin Census
RDC, and Ray Kuntz at AHRQ for help with the restricted access MEPS data. A part of analysis
in this paper was conducted at the Minnesota RDC and Wisconsin Census RDC, and the support
of AHRQ is acknowledged. All results have been reviewed to ensure that no confidential
information is disclosed. Any opinions and conclusions expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Census Bureau, AHRQ, the
Department of Health and Human Services, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Naoki Aizawa and Chao Fu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.
Interaction of the Labor Market and the Health Insurance System: Employer-Sponsored, Individual,
and Public Insurance
Naoki Aizawa and Chao Fu
NBER Working Paper No. 26713
January 2020, Revised June 2020
JEL No. I11,J01

                                         ABSTRACT

We study regulations on the health insurance system for working-age U.S. households, consisting
of employer-sponsored health insurance (ESHI), individual health insurance exchange (HIX), and
Medicaid. We develop and estimate an equilibrium model with rich heterogeneity across local
markets, households, and firms, which highlights the inter-relationship between various
components of the health insurance system as well as their relationship with the labor market. We
estimate the model exploiting variations across states and policy environments before and after
the Affordable Care Act. In counterfactual experiments, we consider policies to cross subsidize
between ESHI and HIX, which include pure risk pooling between the two markets as a special
case. We find such policies would benefit most households, improve average household welfare,
and decrease government expenditure. Furthermore, the welfare gains are larger if the cross
subsidization is interacted with Medicaid expansion.


Naoki Aizawa
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
naizawa@wisc.edu

Chao Fu
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin - Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
cfu@ssc.wisc.edu




A data appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26713
1       Introduction
For the vast majority of working-age households in the U.S., health insurance is attainable via three
channels: employer-sponsored health insurance (ESHI), the individual insurance market, currently
known as the health insurance exchange (HIX), and public insurance mainly via Medicaid. Among
the three, ESHI is by far the most popular channel. For example, in 2015, of the U.S. population
aged 22 to 64, 68% was insured via own or spousal ESHI; around 10%, those at the lower end of
the income distribution, was insured via Medicaid; and among the remaining 22%, about a third was
covered via HIX.1
    Under current health insurance regulations, once choosing a job with ESHI or earning an income
low enough to qualify for Medicaid, a household is largely segregated from the risk pool on HIX.2
Together with the low insured rate in the U.S. relative to other developed countries, such a segregated
risk pool structure has triggered a series of heated policy debates. The most radical idea, known as
"Medicare for all," is to merge the entire U.S. population into one single risk pool. More moderately,
various incentive schemes have been proposed to enlarge and improve the risk pool on HIX, typically
by incentivizing uninsured households to participate in HIX. A new development is the Health Re-
imbursement Arrangement (HRA), which incentivizes small firms to insure their employees via HIX.
Like ESHI, HRA is bundled with a job and offered by firms that include health insurance in their
compensation schemes; but unlike ESHI, the insured are in the risk pool on HIX.
    Although specifics differ, all of these existing policy debates share the common theme of how to
structure health risk pooling in the population. Associated with these debates, a natural but yet-to-be-
answered question arises: what would various risk pool structures imply for the welfare of the overall
population and the welfare of various subpopulations?
    To answer this question properly, one has to consider several key factors. First, the U.S. health
insurance system is closely linked to the labor market. Directly, most of the working age population
obtains insurance from their employers, which choose to offer health insurance benefits. Indirectly,
household income is a key determinant of Medicaid eligibility and subsidies for HIX purchases. Sec-
ond, various insurance channels are inter-connected because households sort into different insurance
options (including staying uninsured) in the equilibrium. Third, the efficiency-equity policy trade-off
depends on heterogeneity across households and firms. Household choices differ across demographic
groups and across seemingly similar households. Similarly, ESHI offering appears to be related to
firms' labor demand: larger firms (i.e., firms with a larger labor demand) and firms with higher frac-
tions of skilled employees (i.e., firms demanding more skilled labor) tend to offer ESHI. A policy
change on the ESHI market, for example, may have differential impacts on different firms, and via
    1
    Statistics are calculated from the American Community Survey.
    2
    For example, the existing medical loss ratio regulation imposes that the premium in each Market k  {ESHI, HIX}
should closely reflect the risk among those insured within Market k .



                                                        1
worker-firm sorting, on different types of households. Finally, the composition of households and
policy environments differ across states, e.g., Medicaid eligibility rules are state-specific. The impact
of any counterfactual risk pool structure is likely to vary with these state-specific components.3
    In this paper, we provide a coherent framework incorporating all these factors. We develop and
estimate an equilibrium model, where each state is a market consisting of a labor market and two
insurance markets (HIX and ESHI). Markets are subject to various regulations, which may vary across
states and policy eras. Each state consists of a distribution of firms and households. Households differ
in their demographics (including health), skill levels and tastes. Skills and tastes are unobservable
to the researcher and may be distributed differently across states. A household chooses, for each
adult member, between full-time jobs with and without ESHI, part-time jobs with and without ESHI,
and non-employment. It also makes decisions about Medicaid enrollment (if eligible) and individual
health insurance purchases. Firms differ in their overall productivity and the degree to which their
technologies are skill-biased. Each firm chooses whether or not to offer ESHI, and the number of
workers in each (skill, full/part time) category, which are imperfect substitutes for one another. Wages
and premiums for HIX and ESHI clear the corresponding markets in the equilibrium.
    To estimate this model, which allows for unobserved heterogeneity across households, firms and
states, one needs data with rich variation. We utilize the opportunity provided by the 2010 Affordable
Care Act (ACA) and exploit 1) policy variation before and after the ACA; 2) the targeted nature of
certain components of the ACA that created variation in policy doses received by different firms and/or
households in the same market; and 3) the differential implementation across states of Medicaid
expansion, which leads to policy variation across states under the ACA. We estimate the model via
indirect inference, fully exploiting the aforementioned variation under the assumption that the state-
specific distribution of unobservables is the same pre and post ACA (conditional on observables).
    We use both pre- and post-ACA data from the American Community Survey, the Current Popu-
lation Survey, Medical Expenditure Panel Survey, and the Kaiser Family Employer Health Insurance
Benefit Survey. The first three data sets provide information on household characteristics, labor supply
and health insurance choices, earnings, and medical expenditure; while the fourth provides informa-
tion on firm size, ESHI provision, and employee composition in terms of wage levels and full/part
time status. For the purpose of model validation, we deliberately leave the post-ACA data for a non-
random sample of states out of the estimation. The estimated model matches patterns in both the
estimation and the hold-out samples.
    Our estimation results suggest a positive correlation between worker skill and their preferences
for health insurance. In the equilibrium, high-skill workers are more likely to sort into firms offering
ESHI, whose technologies are more likely to be skill-biased. Households who choose to be non-
employed or earn wages low enough to be eligible for Medicaid are more likely to be at the lower end
   3
       See, for example, Kowalski (2014) and Garthwaite et al. (2019).



                                                             2
of the skill distribution. Thus, households at both ends of the skill distribution are largely segregated
from the risk pool on HIX. Unlike ESHI, HIX insurance is not bundled with one's job and hence may
be more susceptible to adverse selection.4
    Given these findings, a natural thought experiment is to break the segregation of risk pools. How-
ever, a thought experiment would be of little practical value if it is hard to implement. We consider
new policy schemes that largely desegregate risk pools but involve little change to the health insur-
ance system. Specifically, these schemes regulate the ESHI-HIX premium differential by taxing ESHI
insurers and transferring the tax revenue to subsidize HIX insurers (e.g., by implementing risk adjust-
ment transfers between ESHI and HIX). These schemes differ in their tax rates (degrees of cross sub-
sidization), of which pure risk pooling between ESHI and HIX is a special case. We find that average
household welfare would increase by $189 to $340 (as measured by annual consumption equivalent
variation), depending on the degree of cross subsidization, and that over 70% of households would
gain in each case. Government expenditure would decrease. The uninsured rate would decrease by
0.1 to 0.3 percentage point (ppt) from the baseline (the ACA environment in 2015), and full-time em-
ployment would increase by 0.1 ppt. Furthermore, when we contrast the impact of ESHI-HIX cross
subsidization for the same state if it did and did not expand Medicaid, we find that ESHI-HIX cross
subsidization would lead to higher welfare gains with Medicaid expansion.
    Our paper contributes to the literature on the link between the health insurance system and the
labor market,5 especially those aimed at exploring counterfactual policies.6 Within this branch, one
set of studies use individual decision models (e.g., Rust and Phelan (1997), French and Jones (2011),
and De Nardi et al. (2016)). Pohl (2018) studies the effect of pre-ACA Medicaid policies; French et al.
(2018) study the impact of the ACA on retirement, savings, and welfare. Another set of studies use
labor market equilibrium models. Dey and Flinn (2005) estimate a search and bargaining model with
endogenous ESHI. Aizawa and Fang (2020), Aizawa (2019), and Fang and Shephard (2019) estimate
their models using pre-ACA data and simulate the impact of various components of the ACA (e.g.,
HIX subsidies for households and tax treatments of ESHI for employers).7
    Our paper well complements these studies. First, we have the different goal of exploring policies
that desegregate risk pools between ESHI and HIX, and how such policies interact with Medicaid.
Second, we incorporate richer heterogeneity at multiple levels. We model how households with dif-
ferent skills, health conditions, and demographics sort into various insurance options. We account
for the fact that a given change in risk pool regulations may affect different states differently, which
   4
      HRA policy was absent in our sample period. In both the data and the model, ESHI-covered households are more
likely to be healthy than HIX participants and the uninsured, who are in turn healthier than Medicaid beneficiaries.
    5
      See Currie and Madrian (1999) and Gruber (2000) for reviews of earlier work in this literature.
    6
      Our paper also relates to the set of work on the impact of in-kind public benefits (e.g., Keane and Moffitt (1998),
Chan (2013), Blundell et al. (2016), Low et al. (2018) and Gayle and Shephard (2019)).
    7
      See Pashchenko and Porapakkarm (2013), Nakajima and Tuzemen (2017), and Ozkan (2017) for examples of macroe-
conomic analysis of the ACA.



                                                           3
would be ignored if one treats the entire nation as one homogeneous market. We also allow for two-
dimensional firm productivity heterogeneity, which helps to explain not only why larger firms tend to
offer ESHI, but also why firms with higher fractions of skilled employees (regardless of their sizes)
tend to offer ESHI. Modeling this second layer of worker-firm sorting is important because the same
policy may have differential impacts on different firms and different types of households. Moreover,
many policies are targeted directly at firms, which calls for a better understanding of firm heterogene-
ity. Third, instead of evaluating the ACA's impact via counterfactual simulations, we exploit policy
variation associated with the ACA to estimate our model in order to study the effect of a new set of
counterfactual policies with relatively less dependence on the model structure.
    Our paper also complements the design-based literature on health insurance reforms, e.g., Finkel-
stein et al. (2012), Kolstad and Kowalski (2012), Garthwaite et al. (2014), Baicker et al. (2014),
Hackmann et al. (2015), and Kolstad and Kowalski (2016). Examples studying the ACA include
Kowalski (2014), Gooptu et al. (2016), Frean et al. (2017), Kaestner et al. (2017), Leung and Mas
(2018) and Garthwaite et al. (2019).
    A different but related literature focuses on policy designs on insurance markets in the presence
of selection (see Einav et al. (2010) and Chetty and Finkelstein (2013) for reviews). A set of studies,
e.g., Handel et al. (2015), Azevedo and Gottlieb (2017), Einav et al. (2019), Finkelstein et al. (2019b),
have conducted in-depth analysis focusing on the individual health insurance market. We complement
these studies and consider risk pooling across HIX and ESHI.
    In the following, Section 2 briefly describes ACA policies; Section 3 illustrates the main idea with
a simple model; Section 4 presents the full model; Sections 5, 6 and 7 describe the data, the estimation
strategy and results; Section 8 conducts counterfactual experiments; Section 9 concludes.


2        Background Information
We use sample periods both pre and post ACA (2012 and 2015) to exploit variation associated with
the ACA, which consists mainly of five components.
Individual Mandate: Since 2014, individuals are required to have a health insurance plan that meets
minimum standards, or pay a tax penalty that varies with household income and household size.8 In
2015, the penalty was the maximum of a) 2% of household income in excess of the 2015 income tax
filing thresholds and b) $325 per adult plus $162.5 per child, up to $975 per household.
Employer Mandate: Starting in 2015, every employer with more than N full-time-equivalent em-
ployees is required to provide a health insurance plan meeting minimum standards to full time em-
ployees (average weekly hours  30) and their dependent children, or pay a tax penalty. In 2015,
N = 100, and starting from 2016, N = 50. The tax penalty is $2,000 (indexed for future years) for
    8
        The individual mandate was abolished in 2019.


                                                        4
each full-time employee, excluding the first 30 employees.
Health Insurance Exchanges (HIX) are state-based, established in 2014. An individual can pur-
chase a plan from insurers only in his/her state. The design of health insurance plans is government-
regulated and categorized into four plans with different levels of generosity: bronze, silver, gold, and
platinum. Insurers need to offer the same plans to every consumer. Insurance premiums are subject to
modified community rating: premiums are based only on age and smoking status, with the variation
specified by the government.9
Income-Based Subsides for Plans from HIX: Participants on HIX may obtain both premium and
coinsurance subsidies. Individuals are eligible for subsidies if 1) they are unable to get affordable
coverage through an eligible employer plan that provides the minimum generosity; 2) they are inel-
igible for any other government health insurance program (e.g., Medicaid); and 3) their household
income is between 100% and 400% of the Federal Poverty Line (FPL). The subsidy amount varies by
income, family size, and states of residence: the maximum premium contribution by the household is
2% (9%) of its income if its household income is around 100% (400%) of FPL.10 In addition, individ-
uals purchasing the silver plan can obtain an income-based tax credit.
Medicaid: The ACA specifies (not mandates) that Medicaid expand to cover the uninsured whose
household income is below 133% of FPL. By 2015, 32 states (including DC) had complied.11


3        A Simple Model for Illustration
To illustrate the implications of risk pool segregation, consider a simple economy with a competi-
tive labor market and two competitive insurance markets (ESHI and HIX). There is a continuum of
workers with the same skill and the same concave preference over consumption U (·), but different
health risks x  (0, x) and disutility of work d  0, d , drawn from F (x, d) . If x > x , the distribu-
tion of medical cost G cmed |x first-order-stochastically dominates G cmed |x . A worker chooses
(h, z1 )  {(0, 0) , (1, 0) , (1, 1)}, where h denotes whether or not one works, and z1 denotes whether
or not the job has ESHI. If z1 = 0, one can choose whether or not to enroll in HIX z2  {0, 1}. A
worker is uninsured if z1 = z2 = 0. There is a continuum of firms with homogeneous production
technologies, which decide whether to offer ESHI z1 and how many workers to hire. Health insur-
ance is available only via ESHI or HIX. Both markets offer an identical insurance product, which
fully insures health risks, and neither market can price discriminate. The insurance premium on each
market is equal to the average medical cost among enrollees in that market (risk pool segregation).
     9
     Regulations are set by the federal government, based on which, state governments can set further restrictions.
    10
     If states offer Medicaid to individuals whose income is below 100%, then they are not eligible for these subsidies.
For additional details, see https://www.irs.gov/Affordable-Care-Act/Individuals-and-Families/Questions-and-Answers-
on-the-Premium-Tax-Credit
  11
     Most states in the Northeast complied, while only half of the states in the South did.



                                                           5
Equilibrium prices include the premium on HIX (r), the premium on ESHI (q ) and the wage rate for
each type of jobs (w = [w0 , w1 ]).

Worker's Problem Given (r, w) , a worker's problem is

                                             max E [U (C (h, z1 , z2 )) |x] - dh                                        (1)
                                             h,z1 ,z2

                  s.t. C (h, z1 , z2 ) = (1 - h) b + hwz1 - z2 r - (1 - z1 ) (1 - z2 ) cmed ,

where C (·) is one's net consumption, and the expectation is taken over cmed |x. One's income is b
(wz1 ) when non-employed (employed with z1 ).12 If z2 = 1, one pays the HIX premium r. If uninsured
((1 - z1 ) (1 - z2 ) = 1) , one pays a random medical cost cmed .
    A worker's problem can be solved via backward induction, and as shown in Online Appendix
A, optimal decisions at both stages follow cutoff rules. At Stage 2 (HIX choice z2 ), given z1 = 0
and h, there is an x (y, r) , with y = (1 - h) b + hw0 , such that a worker would choose z2 = 1
if x > x (y, r) .13 At Stage 1 (employment choice (h, z1 )), for each x, there is a d (x; w, r), such
that one would work if d  d (x; w, r); in addition, there exists an x (w, r) , such that z1 = 1 if
x > x (w, r). For both HIX and ESHI, workers with higher health risks tend to enroll (adverse
selection), and the severity of adverse selection may differ across the two markets in the equilibrium.

Firm's Problem Firm solve the following

                                    max f (n) - z1 (w1 + q )n + (1 - z1 )w0 n.
                                     z1 ,n

Optimality requires that f (n ) = w1 + q if z1 = 1 and f (n ) = w0 if z1 = 0.

Equilibrium with both ESHI and Non-ESHI Jobs We focus on equilibriums when both types of
jobs exist, as is the case in the U.S. In these equilibriums, w0 - w1  r; otherwise, ESHI jobs are
inferior to non-ESHI jobs for all workers, and the supply for ESHI jobs would be zero. If w0 - w1 = r,
it follows that q = r, i.e., ESHI and HIX markets feature the same degree of adverse selection. If
w0 - w1 < r, then 1) all employed workers who are insured are enrolled in ESHI, and all HIX
enrollees are non-employed; 2) q < r, i.e., the risk pool on ESHI is less adversely-selected than that
on HIX. The existence of these equilibriums depends on primitives. As shown in Online Appendix
A, w0 - w1 < r is more plausible if workers with poorer health incur higher disutility of work
(corr (d, x) > 0) and/or U (·) does not feature a very strong income effect.
  12
      Given that working involves disutility for workers and that workers value insurance, in equilibrium, the following
must be true: w0 > b and w0 > w1 .
   13
      The property of x (·; r) depends on U (·) , e.g., x (y ; r) increases with y (the income effect) if U (·) is CRRA, and
is independent of y if U (·) is CARA. We consider x (w0 ; r)  x (b; r).


                                                             6
    From this simple example, we have established that under risk pool segregation policies, if both
ESHI and non-ESHI jobs exist, the risk pool on ESHI will be less adversely-selected than that on HIX
and q  r. Moreover, when q < r, the segregation policy imposes a regressive welfare effect, where
lower-income households (the non-employed in this example) face higher premiums than higher-
income households. Given that marginal utility is higher for the lower-income households, it may
be reasonable to consider policies that can reduce the premium differential (e.g., via risk pooling
between ESHI and HIX). However, this simple model is insufficient for one to realistically evaluate
alternative risk pool structures.14 To do that, one needs to consider the presence of other policies (e.g.,
Medicaid, HIX subsidies, ESHI tax exemption) and, as discussed in the introduction, to incorporate
heterogeneity at the firm, the household and the state level.


4        Model

4.1      Environment
There are M isolated markets defined by state and policy era (pre-ACA and ACA), each consisting
of a labor market, an individual health insurance market, and an ESHI insurance market. In each
market m, there is a distribution of heterogeneous households, choosing labor supply and health
insurance status; and a distribution of firms that use labor inputs to produce a homogeneous goods
with heterogeneous technologies. A firm chooses the combination of labor inputs and ESHI provision.
    A household is characterized by (x, s, , ) , where x is a vector of characteristics, (s, , ) are
unobservable to the researcher.15 In particular, s and  are both two-dimensional vectors of discrete
variables: s consists of each spouse's human capital level and  consists of their preference types; s
and  may be correlated.16 The distribution, Pr ((s, ) |x, state) , varies with x and across states. is
a vector of choice-specific taste shocks that are i.i.d. across households.
                                                                   m
    Each labor market is competitive with a vector of wages {wshz    } for each category (s, h, z ), where
s is skill level, h  {P, F } denotes part/full time and z  {0, 1} denotes ESHI or not. Exchanges on
the labor market are based on (s, h, z ) and blind to (x, , ).

4.1.1     Insurance and Out-of-Pocket Health Expense

A worker's health insurance status is described by a vector IN S  {0, 1}4 , where IN S1 = I (ESHI),
IN S2 = I (spousal ESHI), IN S3 = I (Medicaid), IN S4 = I (individual insurance). We assume that
    14
     For example, in this simple model, ESHI provision is random across firms, and HIX enrollees are all non-employed,
both of which which are at odds with the data.
  15
     x includes marital status, number of young children, and each spouse's gender, age, education, and health status.
  16
     In the case of singles, the second entry of the vector is irrelevant.




                                                          7
the four statuses are mutually exclusive, so that 4
                                                  s=1 IN Ss  {0, 1} with
                                                                            4
                                                                            s=1 IN Ss = 0 indicating
no insurance. Let INS be the 4 × 2 matrix of health insurance status of a couple.
    A household's out-of-pocket health expense OOP varies with its x (including health statuses
of household members), its insurance status, the market it belongs to, and the individual insurance
premium (r). In addition, OOP is subject to medical expenditure shocks that are realized after the
household makes its decisions.17 The distribution of OOP is given by

                                          OOP  FOOP (x, INS,m, r) .

A major role of insurance is to make the OOP distribution less dispersed for a household.

4.1.2    Household Preference

A household's utility depends on consumption C , leisure, and health insurance status, the trade-offs
among which may be viewed differently by households with different (x, ) , such that

                                                            1- 
                                                       C
                                                       nx
                          u(C, h, INS; x, ) =                     +     INS   - D (h, , x) ,
                                                       1 - 

where nx is an adult-equivalence factor that varies with family size.18   is a risk-aversion parameter
that may differ by household type. INS captures non-pecuniary preferences for different types of
insurance. h = [h, h ] is the vector of labor supply status of the household and D (h, , x) is disutility
from work.

4.1.3    Production Function

At each human capital index/level s, we denote ks as the corresponding amount of human capital. Let
njsh be the number of employees with human capital level s and working status h hired by Firm j.
Let ljsh be the Type-(s, h) labor input in Firm j , which is the total amount of ks possessed by the njsh
employees. Firm j 's production is governed by the following modified CES function
                                                                                                            
                                                                                           S                
                                                                                                     
                   Yj = Tj Aj               BsF ljsF + (1 - Aj )             BsF ljsF +         BsP ljsP       ,      (2)
                                      ss                               s<s                s=1
          where ljsh = ks njsh .
  17
    Given the static nature of the model, we treat a health shock purely as an expenditure shock.
  18
    We follow the literature and set nx = 1 for singles without children, nx = 1.3 for singles with children, nx = 1.5 for
couples without children, and nx = 1.8 for couples with children.




                                                            8
The parameters ,  and B are common across firms, with s,h Bsh = 1. Firms differ in (Tj , Aj ) :
Tj denotes Firm j 's TFP, Aj  (0, 1) measures the degree to Firm j 's technology biases toward high
skilled workers (s  s ) who works full time.19 The two factors Tj and Aj may be correlated, which
would help shape the equilibrium sorting between a firm's productivity and the skill composition of
its employees.20 Moreover, together with the correlation between a worker's skill and demand for
health insurance, (Tj , Aj ) correlation also underlies the correlation between firm productivity and
ESHI provision.


4.2     Household's Problem
A household's problem can be solved in two steps. First, it chooses labor supply status (h, z) 
{(0, 0) , {P, F } × {0, 1}}2 , where each worker in the household can be non-employed or working in
one job category. Second, it chooses its health insurance status INS given (h, z). A household solves
the following problem21

                                         max               {V (x, m, , s, h, z) +       h,z } ,                          (3)
                              (h,z){(0,0),{P,F }×{0,1}}2


where V (·, h, z) is the value function associated with the choice (h, z) , as we specify below. The
last term, h,z , is household's taste shocks associated with choice (h, z) , assumed to be drawn from
a Type-I extreme value distribution with a scale parameter  . Let (h , z )(x,m,,s, ) be the solution to
(3) .
    V (·, h, z) is the household's expected utility with its optimal INS choice given (h, z) :


             V (x, m, , s, h, z) = max                   u(C, h, INS; x, )dFOOP (x, INS, m, r)                           (4)
                                             INS

                       s.t.        C = max {y - OOP, c}
                                        m      m                    m      m
                                   y = wshz + ws h z + b (x, m, r, wshz + ws h z , INS)

                               INS   (x, y, m, z) ,

where the expectation is taken over the distribution of OOP that reduces household consumption, but
households are guaranteed a minimum consumption level c.22 Household total income y consists of
                               m
the couple's labor earnings (wshz = 0 if h = 0), and a net government transfer b (·). The function
  19
      Empirically, we allow for 5 skill levels and define the top 40% in the skill distribution as s  s , i.e., s = 4 in our
application.
   20
      See Eeckhout and Kircher (2018) for a theoretical study of a competitive labor market equilibrium with endogenous
firm sizes and firm-worker sorting.
   21
      We present the problem for a coupled household. The problem is simpler for singles, with h = z = 0.
   22
      As specified later, welfare programs such as SNAP are included in b (·); c is explicitly introduced as a buffer against
extreme health expenditure shocks.



                                                             9
b (·) accounts for taxes, welfare programs and health-insurance-related transfers, such as insurance
premium subsidies and penalties on the uninsured (see Section 2). As such, b (·) depends on market
                                            m       m
m, household characteristics x, earnings (wshz + ws  h z ), premium r and insurance status INS. The
last constraint in (4) specifies that INS can only be chosen from  (x, y, m, z) , which reflects the
link between a household's choices of INS and job status.

4.2.1   Health Insurance Choice Set  (·)

A household's health insurance choice set  (·) depends on its job status z, which leads to the intrinsic
connection between the insurance system and labor market. For example, ESHI (IN S1 ) and spousal
ESHI (IN S2 ) are both directly governed by z.23 If neither of the spouses are covered by ESHI,
(z, z ) = 0, the household may be eligible for Medicaid governed by function M C (x, y, m). There-
fore, via income y, a household's labor supply decision indirectly affects IN S3 and IN S3 (Medicaid).
In addition to these natural links and the assumption that the four IN S statuses are mutually exclu-
sive, we impose the following simplifying assumptions on  (·), which are in line with the observed
choices among most households.
1) If only one spouse works on a job with ESHI, the other spouse and children will be covered, e.g.,
z = [1, 0] implies IN S1 = IN S2 = 1.
2) If both spouses are covered by ESHI (z, z ) = 1, they are indifferent between whose employer
covers their children. As such, in expectation, the burden of child health insurance will be split evenly
between the two employers.
3) Conditional on choosing (z, z ) = 0, if a household is eligible for Medicaid (M C (x, y, m) = 1) ,
it chooses between using Medicaid (IN S3 = IN S3 = 1) or staying uninsured (INS = 0).24 If
M C (x, y, m) = 0, it chooses between individual health insurance and staying uninsured, and IN S4 =
IN S4 , so that individual health insurance purchase are made for the entire household.25
  23
      IN S1 = z  {0, 1} ; and IN S2 = 0 if z = 0.
  24
      In the data, only 5.7% of households eligible for Medicaid chose individual insurance.
   25
      In our empirical application, when z = z = 0 and hence the household faces a non-degenerate choice set of health
insurance status, we introduce additional preference shocks  for Medicaid versus no insurance (if Medicaid eligible)
and for individual insurance versus no insurance (if Medicaid ineligible). These shocks help explain some variation in
observed choices and are assumed to be realized after the labor supply choice has been made. When z = (0, 0), the value
function (4) is modified to

          V (x, m, , s, h, z = (0, 0))   = E max        u(C, h, INS; x, )dFOOP (x, INS, m, r) + INS                 (5)
                                               INS

                          s.t.      C    = max {y - OOP, c}
                                            m      m                    m      m
                                    y    = wshz + ws h z + b (x, m, r, wshz + ws h z , h, INS)
                                 INS       (x, y, m, z =[0, 0]) .




                                                          10
Therefore, the choice set  (·) is given by

             (x, y, m, z =[1, 0]) = {([1, 0, 0, 0] , [0, 1, 0, 0])} ,                                               (6)
             (x, y, m, z =[0, 1]) = {([0, 1, 0, 0] , [1, 0, 0, 0])} ,
             (x, y, m, z =[1, 1]) = {[1, 0, 0, 0]2 },
                                                      M C (x, y, m) [0, 0, 1, 0]2 , [0, 0, 0, 0]2
             (x, y, m, z =[0, 0]) =                                                                       .
                                                   (1 - M C (x, y, m)) [0, 0, 0, 1]2 , [0, 0, 0, 0]2

4.3     Firm's Problem
Firm j chooses the quantity njsh of labor inputs in each (s, h) category, and whether or not to provide
ESHI. For tractability and due to data limitation, we assume that a firm's health insurance provision
is the same for all of its employees with the same working status h.26 Consistent with the data, we
also assume that ESHI is offered to part-time workers only if it is also offered to full-time workers.
That is, zj = {zjh }h{P,F }  {(1, 1) , (0, 1) , (0, 0)} . In the following, we describe a firm's problem
without ESHI mandates. The case with ESHI mandates is described in Online Appendix B.
    Firm j solves the following problem,


   j =          max             Yj -                m
                                             njsh [wshz (1 +  m      m    m
                                                              w ) + q zjh sh ] - I (zj = (0, 0)) +  zj         ,    (7)
          {zjh ,{njsh }s
                           }h          s,h


where Yj follows the technology (2) ,  m   w is a payroll tax, q
                                                                 m
                                                                   is the price of ESHI on Market m,
m sh is the expected demand for health insurance by a worker s. The cost of hiring a worker involves
wage payments (plus payroll tax), and, if zjh = 1, the expected cost of ESHI. The latter involves
expectation because households differ in demands for health insurance, which in turn leads to different
labor supply decisions. A firm needs to infer the expected demand for health insurance from a worker
with skill s for his/her family (msh ), conditional on the household's decision to let him/her work h
                   27
hours with ESHI.  is a fixed cost of providing ESHI,  zj is the an i.i.d. Type-I extreme-value
distributed shock (with a scale parameter   ) for choosing each zj option. Notice that following the
tax exemption treatment for ESHI, the firm does not pay payroll tax on ESHI, nor does the worker
pay taxes on ESHI. Given the progressive income tax structure, this tax exemption provides a higher
benefit for higher-skill workers.
  26
     In Kaiser data we use for our estimation, we observe a firm's ESHI provision status only by worker's work status h,
but not by wage levels.
  27

                    m
                    sh =         (x, m, , s, s , ) dF x, , s , |s, m, (h , z  )(x,m,,s, ) = (h, 1) ,                 (8)

where  (x, m, , s, s , ) is the adult-equivalent measure of the unit of health insurance demanded by a household from
one employer with characteristics (x, m, , s, s , ) . It depends on household size, and whether or not the spouse also
works on an ESHI job.


                                                            11
                                   
    Firm j 's optimal decision zjh   , n jsh s     can be derived in two steps. First, given a particular
                                                 h
vector z, Firm j chooses its optimal demand for each type of worker {n            sh (z )}sh , which gives the
maximum profit     j (z ) conditional on z. Second, it chooses the z associated with the highest profit.
For a researcher, who has no information about  zj , the probability that a particular z  is chosen
follows
                                                                 (z  )
                                                       exp j
                            Pr(zj = z  ) =                               
                                                                                .
                                                                         j (z )
                                               z {(0,0),(1,0),(1,1)} exp 



4.4    Insurance Premiums
We assume a single product on HIX as in Hackmann et al. (2015) and a single product on ESHI.
Our counterfactual experiments are likely to change the risk pools on HIX and ESHI markets, and
hence the health insurance premiums. Although it is beyond the scope of this paper to incorporate a
full-blown model of health insurance markets into our setting, we endogenize equilibrium insurance
premiums in our counterfactuals such that on both ESHI and HIX, insurers are break-even.28 Break-
even on market m and insurance type k  {ESHI, HIX } refers to the equalization of the total
                                                                       m
premium and the total reimbursement multiplied by the loading factor lk  on the (m, k ) market.
    For HIX, we incorporate its key feature that premiums are set according to a standard age-rating
                                                   m
curve and are otherwise non-discriminatory. Let rb   be the base premium on Market m, and  (·) be
the exogenous age-rating curve, the premium faced by someone with characteristics x (including age
as one component) is given by
                                       rm (x) =  (rb m
                                                       , age) .                                  (9)
                                   m
On each HIX market m, the premium rb adjusts to satisfy the break-even condition (as in Handel
et al. (2015)).


4.5    Equilibrium
Definition 1 An equilibrium on Market m is a tuple
  (h , z )(x,m,,s, ) , {zh
                           , {n                     m          m m
                               sh }s }h (T,A) , {wshz }shz , rb , q     that satisfies
              m
(1) Given {wshz  }shz and rm (x) , (h , z )(x,m,,s, ) solves household problem for each (x, m, , s, ).
                                         
              m
(2) Given {wshz  }shz and rm (x) , {zh     , {n sh }s }h (T,A) solves firm problem for each (T, A).
(3) Equilibrium consistency:
              m
1) wages {wshz  }shz equate the aggregate demand and supply for each (s, h, z ) category;
                        m
2) the base premium rb    and rm (x) implied by (9) satisfy the break-even condition on the HIX market;
  28
     The pre-ACA individual health insurance premium structure was much more complex. We use the pre-ACA data only
for estimating the model. The estimated model is used to conduct counterfactual experiments with premium regulations
similar to HIX. For estimation, it suffices to take the observed equilibrium insurance premiums as given.


                                                        12
q m satisfies the break-even condition on the ESHI market.

Discussion Several aspects of the model deserve further discussion. First, we have assumed away
market imperfections such as search friction. However, because of adverse selection on HIX and
ESHI, the severity of which may differ between the two markets (as discussed in Section 3), the
competitive labor market equilibrium need not be efficient.
Second, we take the distribution of x directly from the data, which may differ for the same state
across policy eras for reasons our model is silent about, e.g., migration.29 Via the correlation between
x and unobservables, our model allows the distribution of (s, ) in a state to differ across policy eras.
However, we assume that the conditional distribution Pr ((s, ) |x, state) is constant across policy
eras, which is key to identifying state-level heterogeneity.
Third, we allow firms' technologies to differ in both TFP (T ) and skill-biasedness (A) , which allows
us to capture how ESHI provisions relates to both firm sizes and within-firm worker compositions.
All else equal, higher-T firms would demand more labor and would have a cost advantage for offering
ESHI, which involves a fixed cost; higher-A firms would have higher demand for skilled labor relative
to unskilled labor, and if skilled workers have higher demand for health insurance, higher-A firms
would tend to offer ESHI.


4.6     Further Empirical Specifications
4.6.1   Household Unobservables

A worker's human capital level s is observed by both the worker and the firm. The researcher observes
neither human capital nor household types, the distribution of which varies with x and states, given
by
                        Pr ((s, ) |x, state) = Pr (|x, state) Pr (s|x, ) ,

where s  {1, ...S }2 ,   {1, 2}2 .30 We set the total number of skill levels S = 5, which leads to
20 categories of jobs defined by (s, h, z ) , 10 unobserved types of singles defined by (s, ) and 100
unobserved types of coupled households defined by (s, ) .

Preference Type Denote the components in x such that the sub-vectors x1 and x2 refer to the indi-
vidual characteristics of Spouse 1 and Spouse 2 and that x0 refers to household level characteristics.
We assume that types of a couple follow a bivariate Probit distribution, with the latent variables drawn
  29
     Some studies have examined migration responses to ACA, e.g., Goodman (2017) finds no effect of the ACA Medicaid
expansion on migration.
  30
     For singles, only the first entry of s and that of  are relevant.




                                                        13
from
                                            x0  0 + x1  +  state             1,
                                   N                                    ,              .                              (10)
                                            x0  0 + x2  +  state              ,1
where  state is a state-specific parameter that introduces state-level unobservables into the model, and
 allows for matching on unobservables between a couple.31

Skill The probability that a worker's skill is of level s follows a discretized log-normal distribution:
                       
                        (ln(ks ) - x  -  ) - (ln(ks-1 ) - x  -  ) for 1 < s < S,
                       
          Pr (s|x, ) =  (ln(ks ) - x  -  )             for s = 1,                                                     (11)
                       
                        1 - (ln(ks-1 ) - x  -  )         for s = S,
                       


where  is a type-specific parameter that allows for correlation between s and , with 2 normal-
ized to zero. The mass points of the amounts human capital (ks ) are assumed to be quantiles from
ln N (x , 1), where x is the national average of x. That is, one's rank in the skill distribution is corre-
lated with the distance of one's x from the national average.32
The distribution of a couple's skills is given by

                                       Pr (s|x, ) = Pr (s|x, ) Pr (s |x,  ) .

Notice that a couple's skill levels are correlated because 1) household characteristics x enter the skill
distributions for both, and 2) types  and  are correlated between spouses and type enters the skill
distribution via  .
    Remark 1 Our modeling of household unobservables is motivated by the following. First, in
the data, the distribution of household outcomes conditional on x differ across states, which may
arise partly from differences in state policies but presumably also from state-level unobservables. To
account for the latter without imposing too much structure, we introduce a state-specific  state into the
conditional distribution of |x. Second, due to the income effect, the CRRA utility function implies a
negative relationship between the probability of being insured and income, ceteris paribus. As shown
in Online Appendix C.3, this relationship is violated in the data. Without excluding other possible
explanations, we rationalize this pattern by allowing for a correlation, via  , between preferences
and skills conditional on x.33
  31
      For singles, Pr ( = 2) =  (x0  0 + x1  +  state ) .
  32
      Worker's skill and firm's TFP (two unobservable levels) jointly map into one observable object, i.e., wage. Therefore,
one of the two unobservables (skill, TFP) needs to be normalized. We use the quantiles of ln N (x , 1) as the mass points
of ks levels, which serves as a normalization.
   33
      For example, this data fact can also be rationalized via heterogeneous non-pecuniary preferences for insurance
( INS ), but both types of heterogeneity cannot be separately identified. Since heterogeneous risk aversion is commonly
allowed for in the literature (e.g., Handel et al. (2015)), we assume a common INS .



                                                            14
4.6.2     Firm Technology

We allow Tj and Aj to be correlated within a firm, but {(Tj , Aj )}j are assumed to be independent
across firms. Firm's TFP Tj follows a Pareto distribution,

                                                Tj  P areto (T , T ) ,

where T is the scale parameter (the minimum value of Tj ) and T is the shape parameter. As a
convenient way to guarantee that Aj  (0, 1) , the weight Aj is assumed to follow a logit normal
distribution, such that

                           Aj                              µA
                   ln               |Tj  N          ln                +  (ln (Tj ) - ln (µT ))),  2
                                                                                                  A ,
                         1 - Aj                          1 - µA

where µA is the median of A for firms with T = µT  E [T ], and  governs the correlation between
Tj and Aj .


5        Data
For household information, we use three data sources: the American Community Survey (ACS),
the Current Population Survey Annual Social and Economic Supplement (CPS), and the Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). We focus on the population aged 22 to 64. For firm information,
we use the Kaiser Family Employer Health Benefit Survey (Kaiser), supplemented with information
from Statistics of U.S. Businesses (SUSB). To exploit policy variation, we use data from 2012 (pre-
ACA era) and 2015 (ACA era).34
    ACS and CPS both provide information on households' health insurance, labor market status,
demographics and residential states. Given the inconsistency in the health insurance information in
CPS arising from the re-design of relevant questions (Pascale (2016)), we rely mainly on ACS (a 5%
random sample) and supplement it with information on household members' health status from CPS.
We estimate a logistic probability function  (healthy |x, state) from CPS, which we use to simulate
the health status for those in the ACS sample.35 This CPS-supplemented ACS sample contains most
of the information we need to estimate the model except for medical-expenditure-related information,
for which we resort to MEPS.
    34
      To reduce the computation burden, we use only two years of data, which nevertheless contain rich variation for
identification. Moreover, we use data in 2012 as opposed to 2013 to mitigate concerns about anticipatory responses by
households and firms.
   35
      Health status is self-reported as one of the 5 categories: excellent, very good, good, fair or poor. We define the first
3 categories as being healthy. As shown in Online Appendix D.1, this variable is highly correlated with gross medical
costs. In addition, self-reported measures are also highly correlated with labor market outcomes as shown in Blundell
et al. (2017).



                                                             15
    MEPS is a set of large-scale surveys of families and individuals, their medical providers, and
employers across the U.S. We use its Household Component, a panel survey with several rounds of
interviews covering two full calendar years. Key to our analyses, MEPS collects detailed information
on each household member's demographic characteristics, health conditions, health status, the use of
medical services, charges and source of payments, health insurance coverage, income, and employ-
ment. We use the restricted MEPS data with geocode, which identifies 30 states with the remaining
states encrypted. The 30 identified states account for 89% of households in the U.S., from which we
exclude Massachusetts and Hawaii, i.e., the two states that already implemented state-wide (nearly)
universal coverage before the ACA. Of the remaining 28 states, 15 expanded Medicaid by 2015. We
use MEPS to estimate the medical expenditure distribution for each of the 28 states and restrict our
ACS and CPS sample to households in these 28 states as well.
    Kaiser is a cross-sectional survey of firms representative of U.S. firms with at least 3 workers.
Crucial to our analyses, it contains information on firm size and health insurance provision, as well
as employee composition in terms of wage levels and full/part time status. We focus on private-
sector employers. Our sample consists of all private employers for which the information on ESHI
offering is not missing.36 Firm locations are known up to the Census Region (Northeast, Midwest,
South, and West), which allows us to estimate firm-side parameters separately for each region.37 To
supplement statistics from Kaiser, which only covers firms with at least 3 workers, we resort to SUSB
for information on the overall distribution of firms of all sizes.


5.1     Summary Statistics
Table 1 summarizes individual-level statistics from ACS (Panels A and C) and health information
from CPS (Panel D), before and after the ACA and separately for ACA Medicaid expansion and
non-expansion states.38 Panel A shows that the demographic distribution in each group of states is
largely stable before and after ACA, and that residents in expansion states tend to have more education
than those in non-expansion states. Panel B shows that the uninsured rate declined significantly from
19.2% to 10.8% in expansion states, and from 26.3% to 19.4% in non-expansion states. In 2012,
ESHI and Medicaid coverage rates were higher in expansion states (even before the expansion). After
ACA, although shares in all three insured status increased, the biggest share increase occurred in
Medicaid for expansion states, but in individual insurance for non-expansion states. Panel C shows
  36
      The distribution of other firm-level variables in this sample is similar to that in the entire private-firm sample (e.g.,
MEPS IC components). Therefore, we assume that the ESHI offering information is missing at random and this sample
is representative.
   37
      Ideally, we should focus on the same 28 states for both firm and household sides of the data, which is not feasible given
that a firm's state ID is not available in Kaiser. We have compared, for each region, the distribution of firm characteristics
(e.g., size) available in Statistics of U.S. Businesses (SUSB), using all states and using only the states included in the
household sample. The distributions are extremely similar. See Figure A1 in Online Appendix F.
   38
      Table A1 in Online Appendix F shows the joint distribution of characteristics and outcomes between spouses.


                                                             16
                               Table 1: Individual Level Summary Statistics
          Residents in                       Medicaid Expansion States   Non-Expansion States
          (%)                                2012          2015           2012      2015
          A. Demographics: ACS
          Edu Low (below high school)        12.13          11.49         13.10       12.13
          Edu High (at least some college)   33.35          34.89         28.63       29.77
          Single                             42.09          42.82         42.80       44.24
          Childless                          61.62          62.31         61.34       62.21
          B. Insurance Status: ACS
          Uninsured                          19.20          10.76         26.28       19.42
          ESHI                               68.08          69.29         63.73       66.81
          Medicaid                            7.71          12.97          4.56        5.54
          Ind. Insurance                      5.01           6.98          5.43        8.23
          C. Work Status: ACS
          Non-employment                      22.16         20.00         22.59       21.18
          Full-time                           70.81         73.12         71.47       72.67
          Number of Individuals (ACS)        27,140        27,465        18,927      19,734
          D. % Unhealthy: CPS
          All                                 7.48          7.28          8.06        7.68
          ESHI                                5.42          5.22          5.92        5.88
          Medicaid                            18.43         17.45         22.99       20.56
          Ind. Insurance                       5.99          7.29          7.12        8.79
          Number of Individuals (CPS)        31,866        25,325        19,977      19,933



that the distribution of employment status was very similar across the two groups of states in 2012.
From 2012 to 2015, there was a 2.2 percentage points (ppt) growth in employment in expansion
states and a 1.4 ppt growth in non-expansion states. Panel D shows that Medicaid enrollees are
disproportionally unhealthy. Moreover, as predicted by the simple model in Section 3, individual
insurance enrollees are more likely to be unhealthy than ESHI enrollees, especially after the ACA. As
shown in Online Appendix D, for any given health insurance status, the average medical expenditure
among the unhealthy is over 3 times as large as that among the healthy.
    For a closer look at the data, we run regressions of the following form:

             yist = xist 1 + ds + I (t = 2015)xist [M EPs 2 + (1 - M EPs ) 3 ] +         ist .       (12)

where yist is an outcome variable for individual i, with characteristics xist in state s and year t, ds is
a state fixed effect. M EPs  {0, 1} indicates whether or not State s expanded Medicaid under the
ACA. The vector of parameters 2 reflects (2015 versus 2012) changes in outcomes among different
demographic groups (x) in Medicaid expansion states; and 3 reflects these changes in non-expansion
states. ist is an error term.


                                                      17
                                  Table 2: Insurance and Work Status Regressions
                          Uninsured Medicaid                ESHI         Nonemployed             Full time
          ACA*Medicaid Expansion States (2 )
          20                -0.059      0.049               0.007            -0.014                0.015
                           (0.011)    (0.013)              (0.012)           (0.007)              (0.008)
          Edu Low (21 )     -0.055      0.064               -0.006           -0.005                0.015
                           (0.015)    (0.014)              (0.012)           (0.013)              (0.015)
          Edu High (22 )    0.071      -0.059              -0.013             0.022               -0.010
                           (0.011)    (0.010)              (0.012)           (0.005)              (0.009)
          Childless (23 )   0.003      -0.012              -0.004             -0.003               0.001
                           (0.012)    (0.010)              (0.011)           (0.008)              (0.009)
          Single (24 )      -0.104      0.060               0.025            -0.026                0.020
                           (0.013)    (0.012)              (0.017)           (0.010)              (0.011)
          ACA*Non-Expansion States (3 )
          30                -0.058     -0.001               0.045            -0.027                0.022
                           (0.011)    (0.008)              (0.017)           (0.012)              (0.011)
          Edu Low (31 )     0.019      -0.025              -0.003             0.033               -0.020
                           (0.015)    (0.014)              (0.013)           (0.020)              (0.020)
          Edu High (32 )    0.012      0.012               -0.015             0.010               -0.001
                           (0.017)    (0.006)              (0.013)           (0.008)              (0.007)
          Childless (33 )   -0.013      0.023               -0.017            0.027                -0.023
                           (0.015)    (0.007)              (0.013)           (0.009)              (0.009)
          Single (34 )      -0.019     -0.008               0.005            -0.026                0.017
                           (0.015)    (0.007)              (0.013)           (0.009)              (0.009)
          Other control variables: state dummies, education, gender, I(childless), marital status, age and age2 .
          Standard errors are clustered at the state level.



    Each column of Table 2 shows the estimates from one outcome regression. The two panels report
coefficient vectors on the post-ACA dummy in Medicaid expansion states (2 ) and non-expansion
states (3 ) separately, which exhibits some noticeable differences across demographic groups and
across the two groups of states. For example, after ACA, the uninsured rate decreased significantly
among the low-educated and/or singles living in Medicaid expansion states, mostly via the increased
Medicaid coverage. Relative to changes in insurance status, changes in work status are not as signifi-
cant.39
    The upper panel of Table 3 summarizes firm level statistics from Kaiser data (cross-firm standard
deviations are in parentheses), which consists of about 1,900 firms in each of the two years. In the
2012 sample, 56% of firms provided ESHI. In the 2015 sample, 51% did so. For firm size and worker
  39
     Our findings are consistent with Leung and Mas (2018), who also find that Medicaid expansion significantly increased
Medicaid coverage but did not reduce "employment lock" among childless adults. Note that empirical findings of effects
of the ACA components have been mixed (e.g., Frean et al. (2017) and Lurie et al. (2019)). Our estimated regression
coefficients serve to summarize the data, which should not be interpreted as causal effects.



                                                           18
                                                 Table 3: Summary Statistics: Firms
                                                                 Kaiser
                                            a
 Year         Obs.      ESHI           Size           Size500 (%) % Full-time workers                % High-wage workers
                         %         All      ESHI      All  ESHI      All     ESHI                      All          ESHI
 2012        1,981      56.1       22.0      32.8     0.71  1.25    74.5      84.6                     23.6          32.3
                          -       (55.0)    (70.6)      -     -    (29.6)    (19.6)                   (26.6)        (26.2)
 2015        1,852      51.4       22.1      34.5     0.74  1.42    72.8      79.3                     26.9          33.7
                          -       (56.3)    (75.5)      -     -    (30.5)    (26.5)                   (28.7)        (29.0)
 a
     Firm sizes in Kaiser are top coded at 500, and treated so in this calculation. .
                                                                      SUSB
 Year                      All Firms            Size4                  4<Size< 100              100Size< 500           Size 500
 2012       %Firms            100                61.43                    36.71                     1.26                  0.60
             Size            19.5                 1.7                      15.9                    151.4                 1063.6
 2015       %Firms            100                61.23                    36.75                     1.41                  0.64
             Size            20.3                 1.6                      16.2                    151.2                 1082.4



compositions, we present the statistics among all firms and among firms with ESHI. The average and
standard deviation of sizes are subject to the caveat that firm sizes in Kaiser are top coded at 500, so we
also present the fraction of firms of size 500.40 With this caveat, we can see that compared to average
firms, firms with ESHI are larger, have more full-time workers and more high-wage workers.41 The
lower panel of Table 4 shows the size distribution of all firms in SUSB.42 Between the two years, we
see a slight shift of the distribution to the right.


6        Estimation

6.1       Parameters Estimated outside of the Model
To reduce computational burden, we estimate the following objects outside of the model: the out-of-
pocket health expenditure distribution FOOP (·), government health-care-related policies, and the net
transfer function. We briefly describe each, with further details in Online Appendix D.
Out-of-pocket health expenditure consists of the health insurance premium rm (x) and out-of-
pocket medical costs, which are estimated using data from MEPS. For rm (x) used in the estimation
sample, we use the observed average premium among households with rm (x) .43 A household's out-
    40
      The top-coding of firm sizes in Kaiser data is taken into account in our estimation, as we explain in Footnote 56.
    41
      Kaiser only specifies three crude division of wage levels: $24, 000 ($23, 000) is the upper bound for low earnings and
$55, 000 ($58, 000) is the lower bound for high earnings in 2012 (2015) in real dollar terms.
   42
      SUSB firm size is categorical, and size 4 is the first category, while Kaiser data only contains firms with size 3.
   43
      Similarly, q m is set at the average ESHI premiums reported by firms in Kaiser on each market m. Notice that
the premium entering OOP and the ESHI premium q m are both estimated directly from the data only for estimating
the model. For counterfactual policy simulation, premiums on both HIX and ESHI will be equilibrium objects to be



                                                               19
of-pocket medical cost is the sum of its members' gross medical costs minus the total reimbursement
based on the most common health insurance plan. We estimate each household member's gross medi-
cal cost as a stochastic function of one's own characteristics, household characteristics, and insurance
status, where the distribution of the random component is market-specific.
Health-care-related government policies are parameterized as precisely as we can, including those
implemented under the ACA. In particular, we specify the Medicaid eligibility and coverage rule
M C (x, y, m) as a market-specific function of household characteristics and income, which varies
before and after the ACA and across states. We parameterize M C (x, y, m) using information from
Kaiser Family Foundation.44
Government net transfer function is broken down into its components including household income
tax, welfare benefits (TANF), food stamps (SNAP), HIX premium subsidies, and tax penalties for the
uninsured with ACA individual mandates. We parameterize each component. In particular, we follow
Chan (2013) in specifying the eligibility and benefits of TANF and SNAP.


6.2     Structural Estimation: Overview
6.2.1    Estimation Sample and Validation Sample

We divide the household data into two samples: one for estimation and the other for model validation.
The estimation sample, from which our auxiliary models are calculated, includes the pre-ACA data
of all 28 states in our sample, and the post-ACA data of all but the 7 states with the lowest poverty
rates. The post-ACA data for these 7 states are held out for model validation.45
    We use the data in this fashion for the following reasons. First, information of a state in at least
one policy era is necessary to identify state-specific parameters; and information of multiple states in
both policy eras gives us the variation to identify policy-invariant household preference parameters
without having to rely entirely on the model structure. Second, several major ACA components were
targeted at low-income households, leading to potentially different impacts in states with different
poverty rates. It will increase credibility of our model and its counterfactual policy implications if the
model is able to fit the post-ACA patterns in this non-random hold-out sample. As shown in Table 4,
the hold-out sample (lowest-poverty) states are indeed quite different from the other states: they are
                                                               5         10
disproportionally more likely to have expanded Medicaid ( 7       versus 21 ); and the population in these
states are more educated.
determined internally.
   44
      See https://www.kff.org/state-category/medicaid-chip. We abstract from asset testing for Medicaid, which would
require detailed asset data and non-trivial complication in our setting. See French et al. (2019) for a study of how asset
testing for Medicaid affects individuals' retirement decisions.
   45
      The hold-out model validation is limited to the household-side estimation. We use all of the firm data in the firm-side
estimation, given the relatively small sample size and that firm locations are known only at the Census Region level.




                                                            20
                                    Table 4: State Characteristics (Sample Split)
   States Groups               #States    #Medicaid Exp States        Edu=high      Edu=low      Singles    Childless
   Lowest Poverty States          7                5                   38.5%          8.0%       40.7%       62.0%
   Other States                  21               10                   30.9%         13.3 %      43.3%       61.8%



6.2.2    Equilibrium Prices in the Estimation

Taking the observed equilibrium as given, our estimation procedure does not require solving for the
equilibrium. Households and firms take equilibrium prices as given in making their optimal decisions.
Among equilibrium prices, health insurance premiums are directly observable in the data; while wages
   m
{wshz } are not, because skill s is unobservable (although we observe both the types of jobs (h, z )
chosen and the wages earned by individuals with different characteristics x). However, since the
                                m
realized equilibrium wages {wshz   } are taken as given by households and firms, they can be treated as
parameters to be estimated together with structural parameters.
                                                                              m
    To keep the estimation tractable, we assume that wages without ESHI {wsh    0 } can be approximated
                                            46
by a discretized log-normal distribution. In particular, within each hour (h) category on Market m,
                                    m     S
the skill-specific log wages {ln (wsh 0 )}s=1 without ESHI are quantiles from


                                          N 0    0        0       2
                                            h +  state +  year ,  wh ,


where  0 is a vector of dummies for part/full time (h), state and year. To capture the idea of com-
pensating wage differentials, we assume that wages with ESHI are proportional to their non-ESHI
counterparts. The wage ratio, and hence the magnitude of compensating differentials, is allowed to
vary with wage levels, as given by47
                                          m
                                         wsh 1             1
                                          m
                                               =                         .
                                         wsh0    1 + exp ( 1    1 m
                                                           0 +  1 wsh0 )


We treat { 0 ,  1 ,  w } as parameters to be estimated, which jointly imply {wshz
                                                                              m
                                                                                  }. Notice that { 0 ,  1 ,  w }
are not structural parameters, which are used in the estimation only; in counterfactual policy simula-
tions, wages and insurance premiums are all determined internally as equilibrium outcomes following
Definition 1.48
  46
     Similar approaches have been used in the literature to approximate equilibrium objects that are too complex to com-
pute exactly, e.g., Lee and Wolpin (2006) and Meghir et al. (2015).
  47
     In particular, if  1                                                                              1
                        1  0, compensating differentials will increase with skill levels; however, if  1 > 0 the wage ratio
will decrease with skill and hence compensating differentials need not be higher for higher-skilled workers.
  48
     Functional form assumptions on wages are used during the estimation to keep the exercise feasible. In simulating the
equilibrium, all prices will be treated non-parametrically, and obtained by solving a fixed point problem.




                                                           21
6.2.3   Two-Stage Estimation via Indirect Inference

Stage 1: Estimate household-side parameters H and { 0 ,  1 ,  w } by matching model-predicted
household decisions with the observed household choices, where H consists of the parameters gov-
erning household preferences and the conditional distribution of unobserved household skill and pref-
erence types Pr ((s, ) |x, state).
Stage 2: Given parameter estimates in Stage 1 (hence household decision rules and equilibrium
wages), estimate firm-side parameters F by matching firms' optimal decisions with the observed
firm choices.
    In both stages, the estimation is via indirect inference, an approach that involves two steps: 1)
compute from the data a set of "auxiliary models" that summarize the patterns in the data; and 2)
repeatedly simulate data with the structural model, compute corresponding auxiliary models using
the simulated data, and search for model parameters that match model-generated auxiliary models
with those from the true data. In particular, let  denote our chosen set of auxiliary model parameters
computed from data; let  () denote the corresponding auxiliary model parameters obtained from
simulating a large dataset from the model (parameterized by a particular vector ) and computing the
same estimators. The structural parameter estimator is then the solution

                                   = argmin [ () -  ] W [ () -  ],

where W is a diagonal weighting matrix. We obtain standard errors for  () by numerically comput-
ing 
     
      and applying the delta method to the variance-covariance matrix of  .


6.3     Structural Estimation: Auxiliary Models
Our auxiliary models exploit the rich variation across states and policy eras, as well as the varying
policy doses across different households and firms. We summarize how this directly observable vari-
ation (prices and known policy rules) is embedded in our model.49
Household Side: 1) Variation in the equilibrium premiums rm (x) for individual health insurance
affect household out-of-pocket expenditure OOP if they choose to get individual insurance. 2) Med-
icaid eligibility rules M C (·) , and hence the choice set of household insurance status  (·) , differ
across states and across time in states that expanded Medicaid. 3) HIX premium subsidies and the
individual mandate both affect household budget via the net government transfer function b (·) that
depends on their insurance status.
Firm Side: The cost/incentive of ESHI provision is changed via 1) changes in the equilibrium premi-
  49
   Prices are endogenous. However, during the estimation, we only need to solve individual household/firm problems,
who takes the observed equilibrium prices as given.




                                                        22
ums q m and 2) the employer mandate.50
   We now describe our auxiliary models, followed by brief identification arguments that guide our
choice of these auxiliary models.

6.3.1     Stage 1

We target the following auxiliary models, all of which are based on the estimation sample only.
1. Individual level targets from ACS
    a. Regressions as reported in the data section for insurance status and work status, i.e.,

                yist = xist 1 + ds + I (t = 2015)xist [M EPs 2 + (1 - M EPs ) 3 ] +                 ist .


       b. Earnings regression of the following form:

  ln (wist ) = xist w    w               w                 w           w           w
                    1 + ds + I (t = 2015)2 + I (hist = F ) 3 + ESHIist 4 + IN Dist 5 +
                                                                                                                  w
                                                                                                                  ist ,

where dw                                        w     w
          s is a state dummy, coefficients 3 to 5 capture the correlation between earnings and
full/part time status (h), ESHI status, and individual insurance purchase.51
    c. E (ln (wist ))2
    d. Moments overall and by one-way demographics (marital status, presence of children, education,
age groups):
          i. Fractions of uninsured, insured via ESHI, and insured via Medicaid.
          ii. Fractions of non-employed and employed full time.
          iii. Fractions of uninsured×part time, uninsured×non-employed, Medicaid×part time, Medicaid×non-
employed, and ESHI×full time
2. Individual level moments (by pre/post-ACA×Medicaid expansion/non-expansion states) from CPS
that are informative of health-related utility parameters:
    a. Fractions of uninsured×healthy, ESHI×healthy, and Medicaid×healthy
    b. Fractions of non-employed×healthy and full time×healthy
3. Moments of joint outcomes between couples from ACS that are informative the correlation of types
between spouses:
    a. Covariance of log earnings between two spouses.
    b. Fractions of couples who both work, who both work full time.

   The household-side model to be estimated in Stage 1 is essentially a generalized Roy model
(Heckman and Vytlacil (2007)), with parameters governing (i) the wage offer distribution, (ii) house-
  50
    On average ESHI premiums increased by about 4% between 2012 and 2015.
  51
    Coefficients in regression Targets 1a and 1b should not be viewed as causal, rather, they are a succinct way to sum-
marize data patterns that are informative of our structural model parameters, as we discuss below.


                                                          23
hold preferences and (iii) the conditional distribution of unobserved household skill and preference
types Pr ((s, ) |x, state). As summarized in French and Taber (2011), identifying this class of mod-
els in a cross section requires exclusion restrictions that affect the payoff in the relevant sector, but not
payoffs in other sectors. Although we also impose exclusion restrictions and functional form assump-
tions, identification of our model is greatly facilitated by the fact that our data, although not a panel,
contain much more information than what is available in a cross section. We observe the distribution
of household outcomes in each state both before and after the ACA. This data structure allows us to
exploit ACA policies and their interactions with household characteristics, such as those reflected in
Targets 1a, to inform us of (policy-invariant) parameters in (ii) and (iii). For example, state dummies
in 1a are informative of the state-specific shifter parameters in Pr ((s, ) |x, state), while cross-era
comparison of household choices as captured by 2 and 3 are informative of household preferences.
    Specifically, this policy variation is first exploited in the work status regressions in 1a, which are
targeted jointly with the earnings regression and variance (1b and 1c). To correct the self selection
problem that may affect correct inference for (i), we supplement policy variation with an exclusion
restriction, where we exclude the presence of children from the skill distribution and thus from wage
offers.52 By itself, this variable increases the disutility of work and, via medical expenses, increases
the value of ESHI jobs relative to non-ESHI jobs. Moreover, it interacts with policy changes. For
example, although the ACA-induced change in equilibrium wages equally affected households of
the same skill type within a state (which will be partly captured by w         2 in Target 1b), the ACA-
induced change in individual insurance premiums affected these households differently depending on
the presence of children. Moreover, some policy changes under ACA, such as insurance premium
subsidies, for which ESHI-covered workers are not eligible, interact with the size of the households.
As such, ACA premium subsidies directly increase the value of non-ESHI jobs and differentially so
for households with and without children, which creates policy variation within the same unobservable
type of households, given our exclusion restriction.
    This policy variation is also exploited in the insurance status regressions in Target 1a. Because
insurance premium subsidies and the individual mandate directly affected the monetary incentive to
obtain insurance, and because Medicaid expansion directly changes households' choice set of in-
surance status, these regressions are informative of the non-pecuniary benefits/costs associated with
insurance status ( IN S ) and risk aversion coefficients   .
    Moreover, it also helps that for the same household, we observe not only their labor market out-
comes but also their choice of whether or not to get individual insurance/Medicaid if not covered by
ESHI. Conditional on (x, state, year), the correlation between the latter choice and income is informa-
tive of how skill and preferences are correlated, as discussed in Remark 1. In particular, coefficients
w          w
  4 and 5 in Target 1b capture how earnings correlate with ESHI and individual insurance status
  52
       The x entering Pr ((s, ) |x, state) includes education, age, gender and marital status.



                                                             24
(relative to Medicaid and uninsured), which, together with the set of regressions 1a, are informative
of how skill and preference may be correlated.

6.3.2     Stage 2

Borrowing from the literature (e.g., Garicano et al. (2016)), we set parameter  = 0.75 in the produc-
tion function (2), because it is neither the focus of our paper nor clearly identified. For each Census
Region, we estimate {Bsh } , ,  and parameters governing the distribution of (Aj , Tj ) by targeting
sets of moments that map closely to firm's optimal decisions and an additional set of moments that
impose labor market equilibrium conditions. Specifically, for each region, we target the following
region-specific auxiliary models:
1. Moments from Kaiser: (by policy era)
    a. Mean and variance of firm size, fraction(full time employees), fraction(employees earning
low/high wages)
    b. Fraction of firms with ESHI = 1
    c. Cov(ESHI , firm size), Cov(ESHI , fraction of employees earning high wages), Cov(ESHI ,
fraction of full time)
    d. Cov(firm size, fraction of full time employees), Cov(firm size, fraction of employees earning
low/high wages).
2. (by policy era): The aggregate supply of labor for each (s, h, z ) category derived from Stage 1
estimates.
3. Moments from SUSB (by policy era): Fraction of small firms.53 .

       Given ESHI choices zjh , firms' first order conditions with respect to labor inputs are given by54
                                            
                                        T L  -1 A B k  (n )-1 if s  s and h = F,
                  m                      j j     j sh s   jsh
                 wshz + q m zjh m
                                sh   =                                                                             (13)
                                        T L  -1 (1 - A ) B k  (n )-1 otherwise.
                                               j   j           j     sh s    jsh


The marginal cost of labor (the LHS of (13)) consists of wage and the expected cost of ESHI, both
of which are known given estimates from Stage 1 and vary across markets m, i.e., state×policy era.55
Given {ks } implied by the skill distribution parameters estimated in Stage 1, the marginal productivity
  53
    Firm size is known up to size groups in SUSB, with the first category being size  [1, 4] . We target the fraction of
firms belonging to this group.
  54

                                                                                            
                         Lj = Aj        BsF ljsF + (1 - Aj )         BsF ljsF +        BsP ljsP   .
                                   ss                          s<s                 s

   55
      Wages are Stage-1 parameter estimates, ESHI price q m is data and m
                                                                        sh is derived from household preference param-
eters.



                                                          25
of labor (the RHS of (13)) is known up to parameters (Aj , Tj , {Bsh } , ). Via (13) , these parameters
govern firms' size and labor composition, as captured in Moments 1a.
    Moments 1b and 1c focus on firm's choice of ESHI offering and its correlation with labor inputs.
The relative profitability of different choices of ESHI offering depends on (1) wage differentials be-
tween ESHI and non-ESHI jobs, equilibrium ESHI premium (q m ) and household expected demand
for ESHI (m  sh ), (2) the employer mandate, (3) the fixed cost of ESHI provision and (4) a firm's pro-
ductivity (Aj , Tj ). Among these, (1) is known from Stage 1 and varies across states and policy eras,
(2) follows a known formula that is relevant only under ACA and only for bigger (more productive)
firms. Given variation in (1) and (2), Moments 1b and 1c inform us of the policy-invariant parameters
governing (3). Moreover, joint with 1a, 1b and 1c also inform us of the distribution of (Aj , Tj ) , where
the identification benefits from the assumption that the fixed cost and the random shocks associated
with ESHI offering are independent of (Aj , Tj ) .
    Moments 1d are informative about the correlation between Aj and Tj for the following reason.
As implied by Condition (13), given ESHI choice, the ratio of different types of labor is independent
of Tj but dependent on Aj ; TFP Tj , however, directly affects the size of a firm. As such, given ESHI
choice, the correlation between labor ratio and firm size arises from the correlation between (Aj , Tj ) .
Conditional on the correlation between firm size and worker composition that is associated with ESHI
offering (i.e., Moments 1b and 1c), Moments 1d provides direct information on the correlation be-
tween (Aj , Tj ) .
    Moments 2 serve two purposes. First, they discipline the estimation algorithm to favor parameters
that guarantee equilibrium consistency, which we deem as important for equilibrium counterfactual
analyses. Second, Kaiser only includes crude measures of wages; skill-specific labor supply from
Stage 1 supplements Moments 1 in pinning down the production technology parameters. Similarly, to
overcome the limitation that only firms with more than 3 workers are represented in Kaiser, we target
the fraction of small firms (Moments 3) from SUSB, which, together with Moments 1, provide a more
complete picture of the distribution of firms.56


7     Estimation Results

7.1     Parameter Estimates
We report a selected set of parameter estimates in this section and the others in Online Appendix
F. The standard errors are reported in parentheses, which tend to be larger for firm-side parameters
than household-side parameters. Panel A of Table 5 shows selected parameters governing household
  56
     Our model-simulated firms can be of any size. In calculating Moments 1 from our simulated data, we only use
simulated firms with at least 3 workers and top code their sizes at 500, as is the case in the data. For Moments 2 and 3, all
simulated firms are included in the calculation and their sizes are not top coded. Details are in Online Appendix D.3.


                                                            26
                                 Table 5: Selected Parameter Estimates: Household
 A. Preferences
   : Type 1 singles or (Types 1, 1) couples         4.12   (0.003)    Disutility of Working
   : Type 2 singles or (Types 2, 2) couples         2.11   (0.003)    Full-time job (unhealthy)         -3.29     (0.03)
   : (Types 1, 2) couples                           3.29    (0.01)    Part-time job (unhealthy)         -3.16     (0.03)
 Consumption floor ($10,000)                        0.26   (0.001)    Full-time job (Type1)             -2.10    (0.004)
 Nonpecuniary value: Medicaid                      -0.40   (0.002)    Part-time job (Type 1)            -2.32     (0.01)
 Nonpecuniary value: Individual insurance          -0.13   (0.001)    Full-time job (Type 2)            -3.36     (0.01)
 Nonpecuniary value: ESHI                           1.43   (0.003)    Part-time job (Type 2)            -4.23     (0.01)
 B. Type and Skill Distribution
                       Pr ( = 2|x, state)                                                Pr (s|x, )
 Age                                         -0.42 (0.002) Age                               0.82 (0.001)
 Education = middle                           0.94     (0.01) Education = middle            -2.64     (0.01)
 Education = low                              1.10     (0.01) Education = low               -3.88     (0.01)
 Married                                      0.40 (0.001) Female                           -0.92 (0.002)
 Female                                       0.58 (0.002)  = 1                              1.51 (0.003)
   : type correlation between a couple        0.77     (0.01)
 C. Simulated Type Distribution in the Sample: Pr( = 1|·) (%)
                       By Demographics                                    By State of Residence
 All                                               85.4       Expansion States                    92.0
 Singles                                           79.1       Non-Expansion States                75.1
 Edu=low                                           75.6       State Poverty Rate (Lowest)         94.6
 Edu=high                                          95.3       State Poverty Rate (Q2)             93.8
 Age>40                                            93.1       State Poverty Rate (Q3)             85.2
 Childless                                         85.8       State Poverty Rate (Highest)        70.6



preferences. The left columns show that Type 1 singles and (Type 1, Type 1) couples have higher
relative risk aversion   compared with their Type 2 counterparts; households with mixed types of
spouses have   closer to Type 1 households. These estimated  's are in the range of the estimates
in other studies (e.g., French and Jones 2011 and Cohen and Einav 2016). The annual consumption
floor (against health expenditure shocks) is estimated at $2,600, which is very close to the estimate
in De Nardi et al. (2010). The nonpecuniary values of both Medicaid and individual insurance are
negative, while that of ESHI is positive. These parameters help to explain household choices beyond
what is explained by the pecuniary values of insurance per se, which may capture factors such as
the inertia against taking up Medicaid and the psychic cost associated with applying for individual
insurance. Based on our parameter estimates, we have calculated the elasticity of the demand and the
willingness to pay for health insurance, both of which are comparable to those found in the literature
(e.g., Finkelstein et al. (2019b) and Finkelstein et al. (2019a)).57
  57
    Following Finkelstein et al. (2019b), who focus on the population faced with the choice between participating in HIX
and staying uninsured, we find that among them, the HIX enrollment rate would be 49% if 75% of the premium costs are
subsidized and 61% if 90% of the costs are subsidized. The corresponding enrollment rates in Finkelstein et al. (2019b)


                                                           27
                                 Table 6: Selected Firm-Side Parameter Estimates
      Region                          Northeast                   Midwest            West             South
      A. TFP Distribution Tj  P areto (T , T )
      Scale T (2012)               24.53 (3.52)              25.50      (4.71)   25.57   (1.58)   25.09    (4.09)
      Scale T (2015)               25.11 (1.40)              25.95      (3.15)   26.41   (3.37)   25.50    (3.09)
      Shape T                       3.49 (0.26)              3.76       (0.51)    3.90   (0.21)    4.14    (0.19)
                          Aj                       µA
      B. Skill Bias ln   1-Aj
                                 |Tj  N ln        1-µA
                                                            +  (ln (Tj ) - ln (µT ))),  2
                                                                                        A
      µA                                  0.67    (0.122)        0.73   (0.04)    0.74   (0.04)    0.68    (0.02)
      A                                   1.41    (0.198)        1.61   (0.35)    2.19   (0.23)    1.27    (0.22)
                                          0.86    (0.661)        0.93   (0.19)    1.55   (0.85)    1.15    (0.04)
      C. Other Selected Parameters
       (CES power parameter)              0.42    (0.03)         0.41   (0.02)    0.40   (0.01)    0.45    (0.01)
      Fixed cost of ESHI ($10,000)        3.57    (0.53)         3.07   (0.84)    2.99   (0.56)    5.09    (1.84)
        (ESHI decision shock)             1.92    (0.43)         1.87   (1.02)    1.91   (0.77)    1.92    (1.19)



    The right columns of Panel A show that, compared to others, unhealthy individuals and those with
children incur larger disutility from working. In general, Type 1 individuals incur lower disutility from
working. In addition, we find that the disutility of working full time is lower than that of working part
time, which may seem counter-intuitive. However, it should be noted that the "disutility of working"
in this model is a composite of various factors that affect labor supply choices beyond contemporary
pecuniary benefits. Without taking a stand on these factors, it is not clear that full-time jobs should be
more costly than part-time jobs.
    The left part of Panel B reports estimates relating x to type.58 Individuals who are younger, lower-
educated, married and/or females are more likely to be Type 2 (the less risk averse type). Moreover,
we do find that couples are more likely to be the same type, conditional on observables. The right
columns of Panel B reports the skill distribution. In particular, we find that Type 1 (the more risk
averse type) are more likely to have higher skills. For an easier illustration of the parameters, Panel
C of Table 5 reports the percentage of Type 1 individuals by demographic groups and by state of
residence. Overall, 85% of individuals are Type 1's, but this fraction is much higher in Medicaid
expansion states and states with lower poverty rates, which arises both from the different distribution
of observables across states and from the state-specific shifters in type distribution (Equation 10).
    Table 6 reports firm-side parameters. In general, these parameters are similar across regions,
although the fixed cost of ESHI appears higher in the South. One thing to notice is that the estimated
 's in Panel B, which govern the correlation between Tj and Aj , are positive. That is, higher TFP firms
are also more likely to be more skill-biased, and hence have higher demand for high-skill workers
are 49% and 79%, respectively. Similarly, our estimates imply that among those covered by Medicaid, the willingness to
pay for Medicaid is $851 in terms of consumption equivalent variation, or 21% of the cost of Medicaid, which is close to
but lower than the 22% to 46% range found in Finkelstein et al. (2019a).
   58
      State-specific parameters in the type distribution are included but not reported in this table.


                                                            28
ceteris paribus. As shown in Table 2, individuals with higher risk aversion are also more likely to
have higher skill levels. As a result, in the equilibrium, higher TFP firms are more likely to offer
ESHI, and high-skill workers are more likely to sort into these firms.
    Given our estimated model, for each market m and insurance type k  {ESHI, HIX } we obtain
                    m
the loading factor lk from the baseline equilibrium in the post-ACA era, which is defined as the ratio
between the total premium and the total reimbursement on each (m, k ) market. We use these loading
factors to compute new equilibrium premiums in our counterfactual policy experiments.


7.2    Model Fit
Table 7 and Table 8 report the household-side model fit within the estimation sample. Table 7 shows
that the model fits well the distribution of insurance and work statuses by year, while the fit of earnings
is not as good. Table 8 shows that the model fit of the insurance status regressions in Target 1a is
reasonably good. Table 9 report the out-of-sample model validation. In particular, we show that the
model can reasonably replicate the patterns in the lowest-poverty-rate states in the post ACA era, both
overall and in Medicaid expansion (MEP) states. Given that the hold-out sample is systematically
different from the estimation sample, this validation exercise lends us some confidence of the model
in conducting counterfactual policy experiment. Finally, Table 10 shows the firm-side model fit at the
national level by year. The region-year-specific fits are reported in Table A2 in Online Appendix F.
The overall fit is good, but the model over-predicts the fraction of high-wage employees and that of
full-time employees.

                       Table 7. Within-Sample Fit: Status and Earnings Moments
                                   Status (%)                          ln(Earnings)
                             Data              Model              Data             Model
             Year       2012 2015          2012 2015          2012 2015         2012 2015
             ESHI       66.30 67.06        67.91 67.49        8.14 8.13         8.44 8.44
             Medicaid    6.41 10.03         5.46   9.39       6.94 6.88         6.80 6.70
             Uninsured 22.11 15.20         21.94 15.37        7.25 7.26         7.56 7.79
             Part time   6.58    6.53      6.81    6.70       6.66 6.58         6.30 6.29
             Full time  71.08 72.18        73.20 73.42        8.05 8.04         8.41 8.41




                                                    29
                              Table 8.Within-Sample Fit: Status Regressions
                   Uninsured          Medicaid            ESHI           Nonemployed       Full time
Medi. Expand    Expand     No     Expand      No    Expand       No     Expand   No     Expand     No
                                                  Data
ACA             -0.067 -0.058 0.051         0.002    0.011      0.038 -0.014 -0.025     0.015    0.022
ACA*lowEdu      -0.061 0.023       0.066 -0.024 -0.004 -0.007 -0.001 0.035              0.015    -0.022
ACA*highEdu      0.073   0.006 -0.064 0.013 -0.015 -0.012 0.018                 0.010   -0.003   -0.003
ACA*single      -0.101 -0.013 0.063 -0.010 0.019                0.003 -0.025 -0.028     0.018    0.017
ACA*childless    0.005 -0.016 -0.013 0.021 -0.002 -0.013 -0.004 0.026                   0.001    -0.023
                                                 Model
ACA             -0.026 -0.087 0.026         0.008 -0.034 0.036           0.001  0.015   -0.002   -0.024
ACA*lowEdu      -0.131 -0.022 0.127 -0.047 -0.019 0.045                  0.014 -0.014   -0.008   0.001
ACA*highEdu      0.097   0.015 -0.080 0.012          0.012      0.002    0.001 -0.008   -0.001   0.013
ACA*single      -0.145 0.024       0.105    0.010    0.016 -0.036 0.006 -0.002          -0.001   0.002
ACA*childless   -0.025 0.027       0.000    0.005    0.039 -0.024 -0.017 -0.014         0.013    0.025




                     Table 9. Holdout Sample Fit (Lowest Poverty States 2015)
                     %                  Data                    Model
                                  All    MEP States       All    MEP. States
                     ESHI        74.44     72.72         72.58       72.21
                     Medicaid     8.92     10.19          8.32       10.09
                     Uninsured 10.18       10.51         10.57       10.19
                     Part time    6.80      6.69          7.29        7.38
                     Full time   76.81     76.55         74.33       73.25




                             Table 10: Model Fits: Firm-Side Moments
                                                       Data            Model
                 Year                              2012 2015        2012 2015
                 Size                              22.08 22.26     21.29 21.20
                 ESHI %                            56.59 51.37     56.80 50.88
                 Fr(HighWage Workers) %            23.57 27.55     33.77 35.79
                 Fr(FullTime Workers) %            74.02 73.29     80.12 80.26
                 Size*ESHI                         18.66 17.83     18.51 16.67
                 ESHI*Fr(HighWage Workers) % 17.61 17.81           22.56 22.19
                 ESHI*Fr(FullTime Workers) %       47.62 41.44     49.10 44.71




                                               30
8        Counterfactual Experiments
Our estimation results suggest that high-skill workers are more likely to sort into firms offering ESHI,
which are more likely to be endowed with skill-biased technologies; and that households who choose
to be non-employed and/or earn wages low enough to be eligible for Medicaid are more likely to be at
the lower end of the skill distribution. Under the current health insurance system, these two types of
households are largely "segregated" from the risk pool on HIX.59 Various policies have been proposed
to enlarge/improve the risk pool on HIX (currently covering 7.5% of the working-age population),
mostly aimed at encouraging the uninsured (14.4% of the population), especially the healthy ones, to
participate in HIX.
    A natural alternative, as hinted at by the simple model in Section 3, is to look beyond the 21.9%
HIX+uninsured population and to desegregate the risk pools between ESHI and HIX. This type of
thought experiment can be properly conducted in our framework, which explicitly accounts for the
connection between various components of the health insurance system and their connection with
the labor market. Moreover, under the status quo, the pool on ESHI is of lower risk than that on
HIX (Table 1). Pooling the risk across the two markets may decrease the HIX premium, but at the
cost of increasing the ESHI premium and hence disturbing the labor market. The welfare implication
is therefore theoretically ambiguous, depending on how households and firms would respond in the
equilibrium. This in turn depends on the distribution of household and firm heterogeneity, and our
estimated model has provided us with this knowledge.
    However, a thought experiment would have no practical value if it is infeasible to implement.
In the following, we first show that ESHI-HIX risk pooling can be implemented by a simple cross-
subsidization policy. The policy taxes ESHI insures and transfers the tax revenue to subsidize HIX
insurers, which involves no structural change to the current health insurance system. Then, we exam-
ine the interaction between such cross-subsidization policies with Medicaid expansion policies.60


8.1      Cross-Subsidization between ESHI and HIX
The desegregation between ESHI and HIX does not require literally pooling the two markets; instead,
it can be achieved via cross subsidization between the two markets. To see this, we first explain
the ESHI-HIX risk pooling equilibrium, and then introduce the exact cross-subsidization scheme that
implements such an equilibrium.
    59
    See Footnote 2 for policy details.
    60
    Relative to regular health insurance programs, Medicaid has an additional role of providing social benefits to the
disadvantaged population. We therefore leave it out of the risk pooling. Instead, we examine the interaction between
Medicaid eligibility rules with ESHI-HIX risk pooling.




                                                         31
8.1.1     Risk-Pooling Equilibrium
      m
Let r
    ~b  be the new base premium on HIX, which implies age-adjusted premiums

                                                rm (x) =  (~m
                                                           rb , age)                                                 (14)

as in the baseline; let the premium on ESHI be

                                                      q m = r
                                                            ~bm
                                                                ,                                                    (15)

where  is a modifiable policy parameter that governs the degree of premium adjustment.61 For a
                                                                                              m
given , we solve for the new equilibrium wages and insurance premiums, such that under r     ~b ( ) ,
                m                         m
which implies r (x; ) (as in (14)) and q () (as in (15)), the break-even condition holds across
ESHI and HIX, i.e., the sum of total expected cost for insurers on ESHI and HIX is equal to the sum
of total premiums on these two markets. Such an equilibrium effectively pools the risks on ESHI and
HIX. Moreover, equilibrium prices and outcomes are governed by the policy parameter .

8.1.2     Implementation: ESHI-HIX Cross Subsidization
                                                                               m
To implement the ESHI-HIX risk pooling equilibrium associated with any given r
                                                                             ~b  (), an easy policy
tool is to cross subsidize between ESHI and HIX. Specifically, for k  {HIX, ESHI } and Market
m, let µm k (x;  ) be the measure of households with characteristics x who opt for k on m in the
                                    m          m
new equilibrium associated with r  ~b (), and Ck (x; ) be the average expected cost among these
                                                                         m
households for the insurer. The ESHI-HIX risk pooling equilibrium with r~b () can be implemented
by imposing taxes  m k ( ) defined by



       (1 -  m
             HIX ( ))      µm           m
                            HIX (x;  ) r (x;  ) dFm (x) =                 µm           m
                                                                           HIX (x;  ) CHIX (x;  ) dFm (x) ,


       (1 -  m
             ESHI ( ))       µm            m
                              ESHI (x;  ) q ( ) dFm (x) =                 µm            m
                                                                           ESHI (x;  ) CESHI (x;  ) dFm (x) .



For k  {HIX, ESHI } ,  m      k ( ) is a positive (negative) tax if the total cost for the insurer on k is
smaller (larger) than the total premium collected on k .62
    After imposing  m k ( ) on insurers on k  {HIX, ESHI } , there is no need for further interven-
tion: HIX and ESHI markets would still operate separately (as they do in the status quo), yet, the
  61
      At this point,  is simply a premium intervening parameter, however, we will give it a specific role when we introduce
cross-ESHI-HIX subsidy.
   62
      This policy can also be interpreted as a risk adjustment policy. Risk adjustment policies have been central policy
components in many health insurance markets, including Medicare Advantage, Medicare Part D, as well as HIX, see, for
example, Handel et al. (2015) for their analysis of risk adjustment within HIX. As far as we know, we are the first to
consider risk adjustment transfers between ESHI and HIX.



                                                           32
equilibrium premiums on HIX and ESHI would be rm (x; ) and q m (), i.e., the desired risk-pooling
equilibrium premiums. By construction, the total subsidy allocated to insurers on the riskier market
is offset by the total tax collected from insurers on the healthier market.

The Degree of Adjustment  : The policy parameter  serves to adjust the degree of cross-subsidization
between ESHI and HIX: a higher  implies a larger subsidization flowing from ESHI to HIX. As a
starting point, we consider a  that is just enough to offset the difference between ESHI and HIX in
their actuarially fair values and quality of care, which is denoted as 0 and calibrated at 1.4.63 The
equilibrium achieved under 0 is one that simply pools the risk across ESHI and HIX, without fur-
ther adjustment. Then, we experiment with a series of 's with increasing degrees of subsidization
toward HIX, capped at 20 . Among these experiments, we find qualitatively consistent results; quan-
titatively, the welfare impact increases at first but levels off around 1.50 . To save space, we report
policy impacts under 0 and under 1.50 .

8.1.3      Policy Impacts

We examine the effect of ESHI-HIX cross subsidization imposed on the baseline economy, i.e., the
equilibrium under the state-specific policies as implemented in 2015. Panel A of Table 11 shows
percentage changes in equilibrium prices, averaged across states. Premiums adjust much more for
HIX than for ESHI, e.g., with  = 1.50 , HIX premium decreases by 33.6% while ESHI premium
increases only by 2.8%. A main reason is that ESHI is a much larger market than HIX: a one-dollar
transfer from a large market to a small market would have a more noticeable impact on the latter.
Wages decrease for non-ESHI jobs (w0 ) while increase for ESHI jobs (w1 ) , and hence compensat-
ing wage differentials (w0 - w1 ) decrease.64 Notice that it may be expected that (w0 - w1 ) would
decrease: obtaining insurance from one's employer becomes less valuable when HIX premiums de-
crease. However, level changes in w0 and in w1 are less clear ex ante. First, for ESHI jobs, labor
supply would go down as HIX premiums go down, and labor demand would also go down as ESHI
premiums go up. For non-ESHI jobs, labor demand is expected to go up, but labor supply may go up
or down at the presence of the non-employment option. Second, given that higher productivity firms
are more likely to offer ESHI, with increased ESHI premiums, the lower-productivity ESHI firms are
more likely to switch into non-ESHI firms, which would increase the average firm productivity on
both types of jobs.
   63
      Specifically, 0 = ggESHI M EESHI
                          HIX M EHIX
                                       , where ggESHI
                                                 HIX
                                                      = 00..85
                                                            7 is the ratio of generosity or actuarial values of ESHI relative
              M EESHI
to HIX, and M EHIX accounts for differences in the quality of care as proxied by the population level medical spending
on k  {ESHI, HIX } : M Ek is the average medical expenditure if everyone (i.e., without selection) participates in k ,
where the expenditure is predicted by our estimated medical expenditure process on k .
   64
      To save space, we report the % change in wages averaged across the 5 × 2 skill-hour categories and across 28 states,
                          m,new    m,base
          1              wshz   -wshz
i.e.,   5×2×28   s,h,m         m,base
                              wshz
                                            for z = 0 (non-ESHI) and z = 1 (ESHI).



                                                             33
                 Table 11. Cross-Subsidization between ESHI and HIX: Prices, Status and Earnings
                                     = 0                                                      = 1.50
 A.  Prices (%)
 Premium                HIX                         ESHI                       HIX                              ESHI
                        -6.33                       0.59                      -33.61                            2.81
 Wage               Non-ESHI Jobs                 ESHI Jobs                Non-ESHI Jobs                      ESHI Jobs
                        -0.28                       1.98                       -0.30                            4.07
 B.  Status (ppt)
            Uninsured       HIX     ESHI     Nonwork      Fulltime   Uninsured     HIX           ESHI Nonwork        Fulltime
 All          -0.10         0.19    -0.12       0.01        0.07       -0.29       0.74          -0.58  -0.01          0.11
 Low Edu      -0.02         0.17    -0.16       0.05       -0.03       -0.10       0.51          -0.44   0.06         -0.03
 High Edu     -0.17         0.16    -0.09      -0.05        0.18       -0.42       0.75          -0.81  -0.17          0.38
 Single       -0.14         0.16     0.02      -0.02        0.16       -0.38       0.71          -0.37  -0.02          0.13
 Childless    -0.18         0.26    -0.11       0.02        0.06       -0.41       0.86          -0.53   0.02          0.04
 C.  Earnings (%)                            2.15                                                  1.98



    Panel B shows the percentage point (ppt) changes in insurance and work status across all individ-
uals and by demographics. Under both 's, the cross-subsidization policy increases the fraction of
individuals covered by HIX and lowers that covered by ESHI, leading to a very small reduction in the
uninsured rate in all demographic groups. There is also a very small positive effect on employment,
in that the fraction of full-time workers is slightly larger while labor force participation rate is barely
affected. The only exception is the lowest education group, where there appears to be a small work
disincentive effect. Panel C shows that average earnings among those who work increase by about
2% in both cases, which comes from both the increase in wages on average (Panel A) and worker-job
resorting (Panel B), where more workers work full-time (especially the highly-educated) and on non-
ESHI jobs (w0 > w1 because ESHI is valuable).
Result 1: ESHI-HIX cross subsidization has small positive effects on the insured rate, work status,
and average earnings.
    Table 11 hints at two welfare-improving factors: 1) wages increase for ESHI jobs, 2) although
wages decrease slightly for non-ESHI jobs, HIX premiums are reduced significantly. Table 12 shows
the change in households' ex ante welfare, the fraction of winning households and the change in gov-
ernment budgets. For each household, we measure the change in its ex ante welfare by consumption
equivalent variation (CEV), i.e., the expected dollar change in a household's baseline consumption
that would make it equally well off as it would be in the new equilibrium.65 Overall, average house-
hold welfare increases by $189 under the pure risk pooling case ( = 0 ) and by $340 under  = 1.50 .
In both cases, over 70% of households would win. Welfare gains differ across households: house-
   65
      Ex ante welfare is defined as V (x, m, , s)  E max(h,z) {V (x, m, , s, h, z) +   h,z } .   See Online Appendix E for
the derivation of CEV.



                                                         34
        Table 12: Cross-Subsidization between ESHI and HIX: Household Welfare and Gov Spending
                                                                  = 0                       = 1.50
       Welfare                                           CEV ($)     Fr(Winners)    CEV ($)     Fr(Winners)
       Overall                                            189.4          0.71        340.3          0.73
       Low Edu Singles or (Low, Low) Couples               81.4          0.63        125.1          0.61
       High Edu Singles or (High, High) Couples           283.7          0.77        525.4          0.81
       Single                                             194.5          0.69        372.9          0.72
       Childless                                          211.6          0.71        398.0          0.75
       Type 1 Singles or (Type 1, Type 1) Couples         221.3          0.74        395.0          0.77
       Type 2 Singles or (Type 2, Type 2) Couples          43.5          0.52        52.6           0.55
       Savings in Gov. expenditure per hh ($)                       14.5                      40.9
       Savings in HIX subsidies per enrolled hh ($)                229.0                      759.1



holds with high education are more likely to win and to win more, because they are less likely to
qualify for HIX subsidies and hence more likely to benefit from the decrease in HIX premiums, and
because they are more likely to work on ESHI jobs, wages of which are increased (Table 11). Type-1
households, who are more risk averse, are also more likely to win. Government net spending in the
health insurance system decreases by $14 per household (hh) under  = 0 and by $41 per hh under
 = 1.50 .66 The savings come mostly from decreases in HIX premium subsidies since subsidies are
directly linked to HIX premiums.
Result 2: ESHI-HIX cross subsidization benefits most households, increases average household wel-
fare, and lowers government expenditure.


8.2    Interaction between ESHI-HIX Cross Subsidization and Medicaid
Given the connection between the three components of the health insurance system, the effect of
policies on ESHI and HIX markets may vary with Medicaid policies. To see this point, we examine
the impact of ESHI-HIX cross subsidization policies separately for the 15 ACA Medicaid expansion
(MEP) complying states and 13 non-complying states under counterfactual scenarios with and with-
out Medicaid expansion.67 In doing so, we would like to highlight the impacts of ESHI-HIX cross
subsidization on different groups of states given the same hypothetical Medicaid expansion status, and
the impacts of ESHI-HIX cross subsidization on the same group of states under different hypothetical
Medicaid expansion statuses.
    Table 13 shows these effects under  = 0 (the left panel) and  = 1.50 (the right panel). Within
each panel, the first two columns are for the 15 MEP complying states, with the first (second) column
  66
     Government net spending includes expenditures on Medicaid and HIX subsidies net of revenues from insurance
mandate tax penalties (the cross subsidization between ESHI and HIX per se is revenue neutral).
  67
     For MEP complying states, we use their 2012 state-specific Medicaid eligibility rules in the counterfactual non-
expansion scenario. Of all households in the sample, 57.8% live in MEP complying states.


                                                         35
                Table 13: Effects of ESHI-HIX Cross Subsidization by Medicaid Expansion Status
                                                  = 0                              = 1.50
       Group of States               MEP Compliers Non-Compliers MEP Compliers Non-Compliers
       Medicaid Expansion             No     Yes       No      Yes     No       Yes      No     Yes
       Change in Uninsured (ppt) -0.01      -0.03    -0.20    -0.11   -0.18    -0.23    -0.38  -0.30
       CEV ($)                       73.7   169.9    216.1 234.2 170.5         338.0   343.4 451.7
       Fr(winner)                    0.58    0.75     0.64     0.69   0.77     0.72     0.75   0.76
       Savings for Gov. per hh       12.4    11.3     18.8     14.1   44.0     27.9     58.8   51.8



showing the effect of ESHI-HIX cross subsidization without (with) Medicaid expansion.68 The third
and fourth columns show the same statistics for the 13 MEP non-complying states. For each group of
states, the bold-faced Yes/No status is their observed Medicaid expansion status in 2015.
     First, we find that overall, cross-subsidization between ESHI and HIX improves welfare, lowers
the uninsured rate and government expenditures in both groups of states, regardless of whether or not
Medicaid were expanded; and the effect is larger under  = 1.50 . Second, given the same Medicaid
expansion status and the same degree of adjustment , the effect of ESHI-HIX cross subsidization is
larger in MEP non-complying states in terms of declines in uninsured rates, average welfare gains,
fractions of winners and savings in government expenditure.69 Finally, there is some limited interac-
tion between Medicaid expansion and ESHI-HIX cross subsidization. Given  and the same group of
states, welfare gains from the cross subsidization, in terms of both CEV alone and CEV plus govern-
ment savings, tend to be larger when Medicaid is expanded.
Result 3: ESHI-HIX cross subsidization leads to higher welfare gains when it is interacted with
Medicaid expansion.
     It is theoretically ambiguous whether ESHI-HIX cross subsidization would be more effective with
or without Medicaid expansion for the same state. On the one hand, with Medicaid expansion, fewer
people would be uninsured, which leaves less scope for improvement from a decrease in HIX premi-
ums. On the other hand, as Medicaid absorbs a disproportionally unhealthy population, the risk pool
on HIX is relatively healthier with Medicaid expansion, which means cross subsidization would be
less distorting for ESHI premiums.70 Our finding suggests that the second force is stronger than the
first.
  68
      For example, to get the results shown in the first column, for each state, we compute the equilibrium if Medicaid were
not expanded and there is no ESHI-HIX cross subsidization (E0), then, we compute the equilibrium if Medicaid were not
expanded but ESHI-HIX cross subsidization were in place (E1), Column 1 shows the difference between E1 and E0.
   69
      The two groups of states differ both in their population composition, state-specific unobservables and state-specific
policies. For a given yes/no Medicaid expansion status, the uninsured rate is higher in MEP non-complying states before
cross subsidization.
   70
      Table 14 in the appendix shows that, with Medicaid expansion, cross-subsidization would lead to smaller changes in
insurance premiums and larger increases in ESHI wages.




                                                            36
9    Conclusion
We have developed and estimated an equilibrium model of the labor market and health insurance
markets, highlighting the interactions across various components of the health insurance system, and
their relationship with the labor market. The model features rich heterogeneity across local markets,
workers, and firms. We estimate the model exploiting policy variation associated with the Affordable
Care Act. The estimated model well matches the data, including patterns in the hold-out sample.
     Via counterfactual policy experiments, we find that ESHI-HIX cross subsidization could lower
the uninsured rate, improve household welfare and lower government expenditure. Moreover, the
policy leads to higher welfare gains when it is interacted with Medicaid expansion. These findings
have illustrated the value of a framework like ours, which enables one to explore alternative risk-
pool structures and to study policies that regulate different parts of the health insurance system in a
complementary manner. As such, this paper has made a modest step toward the goal of answering
globally optimal social insurance design questions as pointed out by Chetty and Finkelstein (2013).
     This paper has several important limitations. For example, without considering the funding regime
(e.g., the tax system) underlying the health insurance system and the general equilibrium effect on
health care costs, it is beyond the scope of this paper to properly study the effect of more drastic health
insurance reforms, such as "Medicare for All." We have also left several challenging extensions for
future work. One extension is to embed dynamics into our framework, including household savings
and potential direct effects of health insurance on one's health and hence future productivity. Another
is to consider health insurance regulations in the presence of other sources of inefficiency besides the
adverse selection in health insurance choices, such as search friction on the labor market (e.g., Dey
and Flinn (2005)) and non-competitive insurance markets (e.g., Tebaldi (2017)).

References
Aizawa, N. (2019). Labor market sorting and health insurance system design. Quantitative Economics,
  10(4):1401­1451.
Aizawa, N. and Fang, H. (2020). Equilibrium labor market search and health insurance reform. Forthcoming,
  Journal of Political Economy.
Azevedo, E. M. and Gottlieb, D. (2017). Perfect competition in markets with adverse selection. Econometrica,
  85(1):67­105.
Baicker, K., Finkelstein, A., Song, J., and Taubman, S. (2014). The impact of medicaid on labor market activity
  and program participation: Evidence from the oregon health insurance experiment. American Economic
  Review, 104(5):322­28.
Blundell, R., Britton, J., Dias, M. C., and French, E. (2017). The impact of health on labour supply near
  retirement. Working Paper, University of College London.
Blundell, R., Costa Dias, M., Meghir, C., and Shaw, J. (2016). Female labor supply, human capital, and welfare
  reform. Econometrica, 84(5):1705­1753.
Chan, M. K. (2013). A dynamic model of welfare reform. Econometrica, 81(3):941­1001.


                                                      37
Chetty, R. and Finkelstein, A. (2013). Social insurance: Connecting theory to data. In Alan J. Auerbach,
  Raj Chetty, M. F. and Saez, E., editors, handbook of public economics, vol. 5, volume 5 of Handbook of
  Public Economics, pages 111 ­ 193. Elsevier.
Currie, J. and Madrian, B. C. (1999). Health, health insurance and the labor market. In Ashenfelter, O. C. and
  Card, D., editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 3, Part C, pages 3309­3416. Elsevier.
De Nardi, M., French, E., and Jones, J. B. (2010). Why do the elderly save? the role of medical expenses.
  Journal of Political Economy, 118(1):39­75.
De Nardi, M., French, E., and Jones, J. B. (2016). Medicaid insurance in old age. American Economic Review,
  106(11):3480­3520.
Dey, M. S. and Flinn, C. J. (2005). An equilibrium model of health insurance provision and wage determination.
  Econometrica, 73(2):571­627.
Eeckhout, J. and Kircher, P. (2018). Assortative matching with large firms. Econometrica, 86(1):85­132.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Levin, J. (2010). Beyond testing: Empirical models of insurance markets. Annual
  Review of Economics, 2(1):311­336.
Einav, L., Finkelstein, A., and Tebaldi, P. (2019). Market design in regulated health insurance markets: Risk
  adjustment vs. subsidies. Working Paper, Stanford University.
Fang, H. and Shephard, A. J. (2019). Household labor search, spousal insurance, and health care reform.
  Working Paper 26350, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Finkelstein, A., Hendren, N., and Luttmer, E. F. P. (2019a). The value of medicaid: Interpreting results from
  the oregon health insurance experiment. Journal of Political Economy, 127(6):2836­2874.
Finkelstein, A., Hendren, N., and Shepard, M. (2019b). Subsidizing health insurance for low-income adults:
  Evidence from massachusetts. American Economic Review, 109(4):1530­67.
Finkelstein, A., Taubman, S., Wright, B., Bernstein, M., Gruber, J., Newhouse, J. P., Allen, H., Baicker, K., and
  the Oregon Health Study Group (2012). The oregon health insurance experiment: Evidence from the first
  year. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3):1057 ­ 1106.
Frean, M., Gruber, J., and Sommers, B. D. (2017). Premium subsidies, the mandate, and medicaid expansion:
  Coverage effects of the affordable care act. Journal of Health Economics, 53:72 ­ 86.
French, E., Jones, J., and von Gaudecker, H.-M. (2018). The effect of the affordable care act on the labor
  supply, savings, and social security of older americans. Working Paper, University of College London.
French, E. and Jones, J. B. (2011). The effects of health insurance and self-insurance on retirement behavior.
  Econometrica, 79(3):693­732.
French, E. and Taber, C. (2011). Identification of models of the labor market. In Ashenfelter, O. C. and Card,
  D., editors, Handbook of Labor Economics, volume 4, Part A, pages 537­617. Elsevier.
Garicano, L., Lelarge, C., and Van Reenen, J. (2016). Firm size distortions and the productivity distribution:
  Evidence from france. American Economic Review, 106(11):3439­79.
Garthwaite, C., Graves, J. A., Gross, T., Karaca, Z., Marone, V. R., and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2019). All medicaid
  expansions are not created equal: The geography and targeting of the affordable care act. Working Paper
  26289, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Garthwaite, C., Gross, T., and Notowidigdo, M. J. (2014). Public Health Insurance, Labor Supply, and Em-
  ployment Lock. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(2):653­696.
Gayle, G.-L. and Shephard, A. (2019). Optimal taxation, marriage, home production, and family labor supply.
  Econometrica, 87(1):291­326.



                                                       38
Goodman, L. (2017). The effect of the affordable care act medicaid expansion on migration. Journal of Policy
  Analysis and Management, 36(1):211­238.
Gooptu, A., Moriya, A. S., Simon, K. I., and Sommers, B. D. (2016). Medicaid expansion did not result in
  significant employment changes or job reductions in 2014. Health Affairs, 35(1):111­118.
Gruber, J. (2000). Health insurance and the labor market. volume 1, Part A of Handbook of Health Economics,
  pages 645 ­ 706. Elsevier.
Hackmann, M. B., Kolstad, J. T., and Kowalski, A. E. (2015). Adverse selection and an individual mandate:
  When theory meets practice. American Economic Review, 105(3):1030­66.
Handel, B., Hendel, I., and Whinston, M. D. (2015). Equilibria in health exchanges: Adverse selection versus
  reclassification risk. Econometrica, 83(4):1261­1313.
Heckman, J. J. and Vytlacil, E. J. (2007). Econometric evaluation of social programs, part i: Causal models,
  structural models and econometric policy evaluation. volume 6 of Handbook of Econometrics, pages 4779 ­
  4874. Elsevier.
Kaestner, R., Garrett, B., Chen, J., Gangopadhyaya, A., and Fleming, C. (2017). Effects of aca medicaid
  expansions on health insurance coverage and labor supply. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management,
  36(3):608­642.
Keane, M. and Moffitt, R. (1998). A structural model of multiple welfare program participation and labor
  supply. International Economic Review, 39(3):553­589.
Kolstad, J. T. and Kowalski, A. E. (2012). The impact of health care reform on hospital and preventive care:
  Evidence from massachusetts. Journal of Public Economics, 96 (11-12):909­929.
Kolstad, J. T. and Kowalski, A. E. (2016). Mandate-based health reform and the labor market: Evidence from
  the massachusetts reform. Journal of Health Economics, 47:81 ­ 106.
Kowalski, A. E. (2014). The early impact of the affordable care act, state by state. Brookings Papers on
  Economic Activity, pages 277­333.
Lee, D. and Wolpin, K. I. (2006). Intersectoral labor mobility and the growth of the service sector. Economet-
  rica, 74(1):1­46.
Leung, P. and Mas, A. (2018). Employment effects of the affordable care act medicaid expansions. Industrial
  Relations: A Journal of Economy and Society, 57(2):206­234.
Low, H., Meghir, C., Pistaferri, L., and Voena, A. (2018). Marriage, labor supply and the dynamics of the social
  safety net. Working Paper 24356, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Lurie, I. Z., Sacks, D. W., and Heim, B. (2019). Does the individual mandate affect insurance coverage?
  evidence from tax returns. forthcoming, American Economic Journal: Economic Policy.
Meghir, C., Narita, R., and Robin, J.-M. (2015). Wages and informality in developing countries. American
 Economic Review, 105(4):1509­46.
Nakajima, M. and Tuzemen, D. (2017). Health-care reform or labor market reform? a quantitative analysis of
  the affordable care act. Working Paper, FRB of Philadelphia and Kansas City.
Ozkan, S. (2017). Income differences and health care expenditures over the life cycle. Working Paper, Univer-
  sity of Toronto.
Pascale, J. (2016). Modernizing a major federal government survey: A review of the redesign of the current
  population survey health insurance questions. Journal of Official Statistics, 32(2):461 ­ 486.
Pashchenko, S. and Porapakkarm, P. (2013). Quantitative analysis of health insurance reform: Separating
  regulation from redistribution. Review of Economic Dynamics, 16(3):383 ­ 404.



                                                      39
Pohl, R. V. (2018). Medicaid and the labor supply of single mothers: Implications for health care reform.
  International Economic Review, 59(3):1283­1313.
Rust, J. and Phelan, C. (1997). How social security and medicare affect retirement behavior in a world of
  incomplete markets. Econometrica, 79(3):781­831.
Tebaldi, P. (2017). Estimating equilibrium in health insurance exchanges: Price competition and subsidy design
  under the aca. Working Paper, University of Chicago.


                                                       Appendix

    Functional Forms: We assume that household utility is separable in consumption, leisure and
non-pecuniary preferences for health insurance. Let nx be the adult equivalent measure of household
x, utility function is given by

                                          (C/nx )1- 
              u(C, h, INS; x, ) =                    +                 kI   (IN Sk = 1) - D (h, , x) .
                                            1 -        k=1,3,4

The utility from consumption is assumed to be governed by a CRRA function, with household-type-
specific parameter   . { k } captures household's non-pecuniary preferences for ESHI, Medicaid and
individual insurance coverage. D (·) is the disutility from working, taking the following form
D (h, , x) =

                      l=P,F   I (h = l) (dl + 1l I (kid > 0) + 2l I (unhealthy )) if single
                        2                                                                             ,
                        n=1      l=P,F I (hn = l) (dl + 1l I (kid > 0) + 2l I (unhealthy )) otherwise


where dl is a type-specific disutility of working with status l = P, F. 1l and 2l are the additional
disutility from working in the presence of young children and in bad health, respectively. For a
coupled household, the disutility is summed over each spouse's disutility, with a scale parameter  to
be estimated.71

          Table 14: Price Effects of Cross-ESHI-HIX Subsidization by Medicaid Expansion Status
                 %                             = 0                            = 1.50
       Group of States          MEP Compliers Non-Compliers MEP Compliers Non-Compliers
       Medicaid Expansion        No       Yes     No      Yes       No      Yes      No       Yes
       Non-ESHI Wages (w0 ) -0.58        -0.24   -0.32   -0.50     0.05    -0.21   -0.39     -0.59
       ESHI Wages (w1 )         0.95      1.15   2.94    3.25      0.56    1.06     2.52      6.56
       HIX Premium (r)          -4.33    -4.04   -8.97   -7.80    -32.21 -32.01 -35.46 -34.66
       ESHI Premium (q )        0.42      0.43   0.78    0.69      2.61    2.60     3.05      2.92




  71
     One could use vectors of disutility parameters separately for singles and for couples. We instead use a scale parameter
to save on the total number of parameters.


                                                            40
