                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        COUNTERCYCLICAL CAPITAL BUFFERS:
                              A CAUTIONARY TALE

                                       Christoffer Koch
                                       Gary Richardson
                                       Patrick Van Horn

                                      Working Paper 26710
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26710


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank Geoffrey Gjerdes, Joseph Haubrich, and Gregor Matvos for comments that improved
all aspects of the paper. We thank participants at the NBER Summer Institute, ASSA AEA
Annual Meetings, and the Fed's SCFIRM Conference for comments. We thank the UC Irvine
Program in Corporate Welfare for financial support. We thank Joseph Johnson, Ara Dermajian,
James Wong, and many UC Irvine undergraduates for research assistance. The views expressed
in this paper and website are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. Any errors or omissions are the sole responsibility of the authors.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Christoffer Koch, Gary Richardson, and Patrick Van Horn. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Countercyclical Capital Buffers: A Cautionary Tale
Christoffer Koch, Gary Richardson, and Patrick Van Horn
NBER Working Paper No. 26710
January 2020
JEL No. E02,E42,G01,G2,G21,G3,N1

                                         ABSTRACT

Countercyclical capital buffers (CCyBs) are an old idea recently resurrected. CCyBs compel
banks at the core of financial systems to accumulate capital during expansions so that they are
better able to sustain operations during downturns. To gauge the potential impact of modern
CCyBs, we compare the behavior of large and highly-connected commercial banks during booms
before the Great Depression and Great Recession. Before the former, core banks did not expect
bailouts and were subject to regulations that incentivized capital accumulation during booms.
Before the later, core banks expected bailouts and kept capital levels close to regulatory minima.
Our analysis indicates that the pre-Depression regulatory regime induced money-center banks to
build capital buffers between 3% and 5% of total assets during economic expansions, which is up
to double the maximum modern CCyB. These buffers enabled those banks to continue operations
without government assistance during severe crises. This historical analogy indicates that modern
countercyclical buffers may achieve their immediate goals of protecting core banks during crises
but raises questions about whether they will contribute to overall financial stability.

Christoffer Koch                                Patrick Van Horn
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas                  Department of Economics and Business
2200 North Pearl Street                         Scripps College
Dallas, TX 75201                                1030 Columbia Avenue
Christoffer.Koch@dal.frb.org                    Claremont, CA 91711
                                                pvanhorn@scrippscollege.edu
Gary Richardson
Department of Economics
University of California, Irvine
3155 Social Sciences Plaza
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
and NBER
garyr@uci.edu
The purpose of making bank stock subject to assessment equal to the par value of the stock, in the event
of the bank's failure, was to insure careful and prudent management. The idea worked rather well ...

       Jesse Jones, Chairman of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, in the section of
       his memoirs describing bank regulation before the Great Depression (Jones 1975 p.
       39).

Rep. Stewart McKinney (R-Conn.), waving his arms in exasperation, interrupted to exclaim: "We have
a new kind of bank, it's called TBTF - too big to fail."

       Description in the Los Angeles Times of the moment in a Congressional hearing
       where U.S. Comptroller of the Currency C. T. Conover explained the federal gov-
       ernment bailed out Continental-Illinois because the failure of such a large bank
       threatened the stability of the financial system and that the federal government
       would bail out other large banks in similar circumstances in the future (20 Septem-
       ber 1984, p. H1). McKinney's exclamation popularized the term "too big to fail."


1     Introduction

The financial crisis of 2008 convinced observers that systemically-important commercial banks
held insufficient capital at peaks of economic cycles, particularly cycles accompanied by asset
price booms (Bernanke, 2013; Blinder, 2014; Jorda, Schularick, and Taylor, 2009; Schularick
and Taylor, 2012; Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009). The insufficiency occurred because governments
treated banks at the center of financial systems as too big to fail, reducing their incentive to
hold capital sufficient to survive adverse shocks using only their own resources (Admati and
Hellwig, 2013; Calomiris and Haber, 2014). Solutions to this problem include either (i) altering
banks' incentives by requiring them to bear more of the consequences of their choices, which
would enhance internal and market discipline of decisions concerning capital; or (ii) stricter
regulation, such as requiring systemically-important banks to accumulate capital when the
economy expands so that they could survive crises that occur occasionally when the economy
contracts. A policy tool along these lines is the Federal Reserve's countercyclical capital buffer
(CCyB). The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) recommends that all central
banks adopt similar policies. Dozens have done so.1 The efficacy of CCyBs stems from three
widely held beliefs. First, too-big-to-fail incentives dictate capital choices of systemically-
important commercial banks. Second, changing banks' incentives can induce them to hold
    1 Asof October 2019, 29 nations have adopted CCyBs including the nations with the worlds ten largest
economies. For up-to-date details, see the Bank of International Settlements CCyB information page at
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/ccyb/.


                                                   2
more capital. Third, increasing capital held by banks at the core of the financial system will
mitigate or minimize crises that might periodically occur during contractionary phases of
business cycles. The need for and potential impact of these reforms is the subject of recent
research.

      The theoretical literature emphasizes how expectations of bailouts and limits on liability
alter bankers' behavior towards risk (Chari and Kehoe, 2016; Keister 2016; Kashyap, Tsomocos,
and Vardoulakis, 2014; Farhi and Tirole, 2012).2 Bankers who face less downside risk invest
in more and riskier assets than they would if they were fully liable for the consequences of
their choices (Rochet, 2008, pp. 227-9). Early contributions along these lines include Koehn
and Santomero (1980), Diamond and Dybvig (1983), and Blum (1999). Models of the leverage
cycle, such as Geanakoplos (2010) and Nuno and Thomas (2017), yield similar results. Com-
mercial bank leverage rises during booms and falls during busts, because bankers receive the
upside when risky assets yield high returns, while depositors or the government bear some of
the losses when risky assets yield substantially less than book value. Regulations that induce
banks ­ particularly large institutions at the core of the financial system ­ to accumulate cap-
ital during booms may limit misallocation as the economy expands and protect the financial
system as the economy contracts (Gersbach and Rochet, 2017; Aikman, Haldane, and Nelson
2013). Optimal regulations may be, however, difficult to design. The first-best rule differs
across models (e.g. Chari and Kehoe, 2016 and Keister 2016), and rules regarding capital may
have unintended or pernicious impacts (Ennis and Keister, 2009; Diamond and Rajan 2000).

      The recent empirical literature has made strides in identification strategies as well as
historical scope and breadth. Jimenez, Ongena, Peydro, and Saurina (2017) examine Spain's
dynamic capital requirements from 2000 through 2013. They find increasing capital buffers
by one percent substantially increases bank lending and firm employment during subsequent
contractions. Other scholars have examined leverage patterns for financial institutions in re-
cent decades, typically finding that leverage rises before and falls after financial crises (Aik-
man, Haldane, and Nelson 2013; Nuno and Thomas, 2017; Adrian and Shin, 2010; Brunner-
meier and Pedersen, 2009). Haubrich (2018) observes the same over the last century and a
half in the United States. Several scholars examine banks at the center of the United States
   2 The  theoretical literature stresses a wide range of institutions that give rise to the phenomenon known as
too big to fail. These institutions include bailouts, limited liability, regulatory forbearance, forgiving resolution
procedures, deposit insurance, lenders of last resort, and preferential treatment of large versus small banks.



                                                         3
financial system during the 1920s and 1930s. These studies find that those banks increased
lending but reduced leverage when the economy expanded (Richardson and Van Horn 2018,
2011, 2010; Calomiris and Wilson 2004).

     Despite the breadth of this empirical literature, key insights of the theoretical literature
­ including that too-big-to-fail incentives distort behavior towards risk - have been difficult
to test empirically. The empirical ideal would be to examine a panel of banks operating
in an environment without regulations and policy expectations that distorted incentives and
then to randomly designate some banks as too-big-to-fail, while tracking the behavior of both
groups during economic booms before and after the intervention. Real-world instances that
approximate this ideal are hard to find. Too-big-to-fail policies were often implemented as an
element of wider reforms following financial crises. It is difficult to distinguish the impact
of one reform from others. These reform packages were typically implemented decades ago,
in an era for which data may be scarce and is seldom available in electronic form. While the
perfect policy experiment may not exist, our empirical strategy is to approximate the empirical
ideal as closely as possible.

     We compare the capital choices of banks in United States during the largest booms before
and after the creation of institutions that give rise to the too-big-to-fail phenomenon. These are
the boom from 1921 to 1929, which preceded the Great Depression, and the boom from 2002
to 2007, which preceded the Great Recession. Institutions influencing banks' capital choices
differed across those eras. In the former, stockholders of commercial banks had double and in
some states unlimited liability for losses incurred if their bank failed. Directors and senior ex-
ecutives typically owned substantial stock in the banks that they managed and personally bore
much of the financial cost of failure. Failed banks' senior executives, directors, and stockhold-
ers typically faced civil suits and criminal prosecutions: the larger the bank, the more likely
investigation and indictment. Regulators at the time argued that these rules ensured large
banks would be prudently managed. A key aspect of prudence was accumulating capital
during goods times to serve as buffers during bad times, a behavior now called countercycli-
cal capital buffering That environment differs from the too-big-to-fail environment of recent
decades, which features deposit insurance, limited liability, bank bailouts, and regulatory and
resolution procedures that favor large versus small institutions.

     We create a data set containing balance-sheets of the banks at the core of the United States


                                                4
commercial banking system in both eras and control groups to which they can be compared.
In the historical era (1921 to 1929), the core banks operated in the money-center of Manhattan.
Due to legal restrictions on branch banking, Manhattan's money-center banks operated only
in New York City. Control groups for them include other banks operating in New York City
and state. In the modern period (2002 to 2007), the largest banks operated across the United
States. The modern control group is, therefore, all other banks in the nation. We standardize
balance sheets between the two periods and compare the capital choices of banks over the
business cycle and across the size spectrum.

     We find important differences in the behavior of the systemically-important commercial
banks in the run-ups to the Great Depression and Great Recession. In the run up to the
Great Recession, banks at the core of the financial system kept their capital ratios constant
and near regulatory minimums, both in absolute terms and relative to smaller institutions
unlikely to benefit from too-big-to-fail assistance. In the run up to the Great Depression, core
banks raised capital ratios by three to four percent of assets as the boom progressed, which is
substantially above the maximum CCyB in the modern U.S. framework. Banks intentionally
accumulated these reserves in preparation for the bust that they believed would follow. Their
efforts paid off. Banks at the core of the United States financial system survived the depression
and operated on a business as usual basis at all times.

     The rest of this paper elucidates the evidence and methods underlying our claims. Sec-
tion 2 describes the evolution of institutions that shape commercial banks' capital choices. Sec-
tion 3 describes the data extant for the pre-Great-Depression and pre-Great-Recession periods
and the Herculean task of standardizing these sources to enable us to make meaningful com-
parisons over time and to analyze the data simultaneously. Section 4 describes our statistical
methods and results. Section 5 discusses the implications of our analysis. Historical experi-
ence indicates countercyclical capital buffers will have many of their intended effect, which is
to protect the core of the financial system during financial crises, but aspects of our historical
analogy suggest that countercyclical capital buffers may have unintended consequences.




                                                5
2     Historical Background

Institutions shape banks' choices concerning capital and leverage. In the United States over
the last two centuries, the relevant regulations evolved through periodic, punctuated equilib-
ria. The commercial-bank regulatory regime remained stable for decades, and then changed
substantially, when Congress rewrote national banking laws and state-legislatures followed,
often in response to financial crises, before settling into new decades of stability (Komai and
Richardson, 2014).


2.1    1920s and 1930s

The institutional foundations for the first period that we examine, the Roaring 20s and Great
Depression, formed in response to financial crises in 1893 and 1907 and functioned as a stable
system from the early 1920s through the mid-1930s.3 In this system, banks at the core of
the financial system did not anticipate being bailed out. Instead, if they failed, precedent
indicated that they would be punished, probably more severely than smaller institutions at
the periphery of the financial network. The threat of severe punishment ensured that core
banks acted prudently. A key component of prudence was accumulating capital during good
times in preparation for the bad times that inevitably followed.

      Bank owners and managers faced substantial liability for the fates of their firms. Bank
stocks had double liability. When banks failed, stockholders lost the value of their investment
and an additional amount, up to the par value of their stock, typically $100 per share, that
regulators deemed necessary to cover losses, reimburse liquidators, and repay depositors.
Laws required bank directors to own minimum quantities of stocks, ensuring that all had skin
in the game. Bank officers also typically owned stock in their institutions.

      Senior executives of large banks typically faced civil suits and criminal prosecutions
when their banks failed. These punishments had been the norm since the nineteenth century,
and were frequent during the 1920s. The public and politicians called for them. In the summer
of 1925, for example, after the Carnegie Trust Company failed in Pennsylvania, the governor
    3 This section discusses institutions relevant to state and nationally chartered banks operating in the state
of New York during the 1920s and 30s. When specify when rules differed for state and nationally chartered
institutions or for Fed member and non-member banks. This section does not detail laws and regulations for
state-chartered banks operating in other jurisdictions. For that information, see sources such as Rand McNally
Bankers Directory, White (1983), or Komai and Richardson (2014).

                                                       6
publicly pressured prosecutors to indict and imprison the bank's officers, even before the
completion of the investigation (New York Times, July 14, 1925, p. 22). A decade earlier,
after the failure of New York's Northern Bank, its controlling stockholder, Joseph G. Robin,
was initially declared insane and confined in an asylum and later found guilty of overseeing
accounting irregularities and sentenced to the state's maximum security penitentiary, Sing
Sing (New York Tribune, December 28, 1910, p. 1; New York Times, February 4, 1913, p. 4).

     Senior officers of large banks expected penalties like this if their banks failed. Their
expectations were born out during the Great Depression. While no New York money-center
banks failed during early 1930s, the punishments inflicted on executives, directors, and stock-
holders of big banks are apparent when examining failures just outside the core of the finan-
cial system. Details appear in Table 1. The table indicates all commercial banks in the United
States with deposits above $30 million in June 1929 that liquidated involuntarily, like Lehman
Brothers in 2008, or merged under duress, like Bear Stearns in 2008, between the summer of
1929 and winter of 1933. All of the banks listed in the table that liquidated belonged to bank
holding companies, as did many of those that merged. The table also includes an entry for
Bank of Tennessee (BOT), which was the central node of the Caldwell financial empire. BOT's
deposits fell below the table's $30 million threshold because BOT served as a bankers' bank,
only accepting deposits from commercial banks that used the Caldwell conglomerate as their
correspondent. Total assets in the Caldwell conglomerate, which included a chain of banks
spanning several states, insurance companies, brokerage houses, and related financial corpo-
rations, exceeded total assets held by most of the parent corporations of the banks listed in the
table.

     The table reveals that the failure of large banks typically triggered investigations by
regulators and prosecutors. These investigations resulted in civil suits to recover funds and in
most cases also indictments leading to criminal prosecutions. Assessments were imposed on
the stockholders of all of the liquidated banks and most of those that merged. The CEOs of
most of the banks that liquidated involuntarily declared personal bankruptcy sometime after.
These bankruptcies typically involved the loss of almost all of their assets.4 In several banks,
directors who were not officers were indicted or sued for negligence, fraud, or conspiracy. The
directors won some of these suits, lost others, and sometimes settled. Directors of the National
   4 Before  the bankruptcy reforms of 1938, which created our modern system that allows bankrupts some
protection from creditors, bankruptcy judgements were typically much harsher than today.

                                                  7
Bank of Kentucky, for example, paid $2.5 million to settle all claims against them for liability
in the failure of the institution. The directors of the Atlantic National Bank settled a similar
suit for $350,000. The directors of the First National Bank of Detroit settled the suit against
them for liability in their banks' "technical violations of banking laws" for $3.5 million (Wall
Street Journal, 9 Jan 1936, p. 7). The fates of the senior executives of the largest banks that
failed during the Depression provide instructive examples. Bernard K. Marcus was the chief
executive officer (CEO) of the Bank of United States (BUS) of New York City, which was the
largest commercial bank to liquidate involuntarily during the 1930s. Marcus was convicted of
felony violations of state banking laws and sentenced to three-to-six years in prison. He spent
a year and a half in the general prison population at Sing-Sing, the state's maximum-security
prison, with some of that time at hard labor, before transferring to a medium security facility.
Civil suits consumed his wealth and clawed back funds that he had transferred to his wife. On
parole in 1937, he worked for a pajama manufacturing company. His story was not unique.
BUS's chief financial officer (CFO), Saul Singer, suffered a similar fate. His son also worked as
an executive at the bank, and was indicted along with his father, tried, but acquitted.5

      Prosecutions like this occurred much less often for smaller banks. Searches of newspa-
per databases, library catalogs, legal databases, and the legal literature reveal little evidence of
systematic prosecutions of small bankers.6 The annual report of the Office of the Comptroller
of Currency (OCC) lists all convictions in the United States for violations of national banking
laws. For banks in operation, the OCCs data reveals prosecutions of employees at small and
large banks at roughly similar rates for crimes like embezzlement. For failed banks, however,
the ratios clearly differed. Small banks failed at high rates, but were seldom prosecuted after-
wards. Large banks failed at low rates, and were often pursued by prosecutors in the wake of
failure.

      For large and small banks, rules regarding capitalization were the same. Capital-ratio
requirements did not exist. Instead, banks had to possess minimum levels of capital depending
   5 Information  about Bernard Marcus comes from articles that documented his fate in the New York Times on
23 June 1931 (p. 2); 5 April and 27 May 1932 (p. 4 and 10 respectively); 17 January, 6 March, 15 March, 22 March,
14 June 1933 (pp. 10, 11, 9, 13, and 20 respectively), 19 September 1934 (p. 21); 30 June and 10 September 1937
(pp. 9 and 17 respectively); and 11 October 1939 (p. 27). This set of articles is a small fraction of those in the
popular press around the United States that tracked his fate.
    6 We performed this experiment by randomly selecting 25 banks with total assets under $1,000,000 and search-

ing for information in the same databases that we searched for information for the large failed banks listed in
Table 1. For our sample of smaller banks, we found evidence of assessments, which of course, entailed suits to
collect assessments, but no evidence of suits, investigations, or prosecutions outside of the standard receivership.

                                                         8
upon the population of the town in which a bank operated.7 Above this minimum, capital
levels and ratios were regulated solely by market discipline and bank leaders' fears of what
would happen if their institutions failed.

      Lenders of last resort existed. The plural is appropriate. For banks in the 2nd Federal
Reserve District, which is the focus of our historical analysis, the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York served as the lender of last resort for banks that belonged to the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem.8 Non-member banks - particularly small banks operating outside reserve cities, known
as country banks - relied New York City's money-center banks for liquidity during periods
of pressure (Anderson et al., 2018). The largest banks in New York City, such as Chase and
National City, conducted a large correspondent banking business. These banks held deposits
of country banks, which served as part of the rural institutions' legal reserves, cleared checks
for their country clients, extended lines of credit, and provided an array of other financial ser-
vices. New York's money center banks stood at the top of a reserve pyramid, which stretched
across the United States (Mitchener and Richardson, 2013; Mitchener and Richardson, 2019).

      Commercial banks in distress - both members and non-members - could expect author-
ities to scrutinize their institutions. Regulators could recommend that troubled institutions
seek merger partners, and on some occasions, encourage negotiations, but on no occasion did
they facilitate mergers with financial assistance. Regulators could intervene more forcefully.
When they believed depositors likely to suffer losses, either because the bank experienced asset
losses or heavy withdrawals, regulators tended to act swiftly, closing institutions, commencing
liquidation, and repaying creditors with proceeds from the receivership. Illiquid banks had
the option to suspend payments. Regulators typically seized institutions that could not reopen
   7 The   state of New York required state banks in towns with populations less than 2,000 to have $25,000 in
capital; in towns of 2,000 to 30,000 to have $50,000 in capital; and in towns over 30,000 to have $100,000. Federal
law required national banks operating in towns of population under 3000 to have $25,000; in towns of 3,000 to
6,000 to have $50,000; in towns from 6,000 to 50,000 to have $100,000; and in towns above 50,000 to have $200,000
(OCC Annual Report, 1900 through 1932).
     8 Laws permitted the Reserve Bank to discount only eligible paper, which consisted of standardized, short-

term loans issued for industrial, commercial, and agricultural purposes. Should the New York Fed lack resources
sufficient to satisfy the demands of its member banks, New York could rediscount eligible assets with other
Reserve Banks. These Reserve Banks could, but did not always, accommodate New York's requests. The Federal
Reserve Board had the authority to compel one Reserve Bank to rediscount for another, but on some occasions
when the Board tried to compel compliance, some Reserve Banks refused to acquiesce. The Federal Reserve Board
could also authorize Reserve Banks to accept as collateral for discount loans assets originated by non-member
banks, but for most of the period under examination, the Board discouraged Reserve Banks from discounting
assets originated by non-member banks. This policy deterred Fed member banks, particularly the money-center
institutions in New York and Chicago, from passing Fed liquidity through to their country clients. These bankers'
banks had to use their own resources to serve their clients' liquidity needs.


                                                        9
within a few days. The preponderance of bank liquidations involved losses to depositors.

      Bailouts of banks did not exist and were not anticipated. In the summer of 1931, New
York's money-center banks asked Governor Harrison of the New York Fed if his reserve bank
or the federal government would help cover losses on loans to Germany, which New York
banks had participated in at the request of politicians in Washington, DC. Governor Harrison
indicated that neither the Fed nor Treasury would help. New York banks had to deal with the
losses on their own (Richardson and Van Horn, 2018). At that time, neither state nor federal
governments helped troubled banks cover their losses. Neither helped banks in distress raise
new capital prior to the end of 1933, when Congress authorized the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation's recapitalization program. Deposit insurance also did not exist. Congress cre-
ated the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in 1933 and revised its structure to
create the FDIC's modern form in 1935, after which most banks in New York State joined the
organization. Legal liquidation procedures did not distinguish between institutions of differ-
ent sizes in any formal way. Regulators had little leeway when shutting down commercial
banks, since liquidation occurred under court supervision. Courts took over after depositors
filed complaints that banks failed to pay them as required by law or after regulators filed pa-
perwork on depositors' behalf. This system lasted until the Banking Act of 1935 assigned the
FDIC the role of liquidator of failed commercial banks, taking the process out of the hands of
the court. The heightened scrutiny of large banks discussed in Table 1 occurred outside of the
bank resolution process, when federal, state, county, and local prosecutors allocated resources
to investigate and prosecute leaders of failed banks.


2.2   Core Outperforms Periphery During 1930s

The regulatory regime clearly influenced capital choices of the nineteen banks at core of the
U.S. financial system. These banks held 99% of the interbank deposits in New York City and
40% of the interbank balances in the United States. The set included Chase National (today
J.P. Morgan Chase) and National City (today Citibank), which were the largest commercial
banks in the nation and among the largest in the world. During the Roaring 20s, both kept
dividends flat as profits boomed. Retaining earnings raised capital levels in absolute terms
and as a share of assets. This prudent approach enabled Chase to write off losses in 1932
larger than its capital had been in 1927 while continuing to paying dividends (Richardson and

                                              10
Van Horn, 2018).

     The relative performance of the core and periphery of the U.S. financial system are illu-
minated in Table 2. During the contraction of the 1930s, no core banks failed. All remained in
full operation until the New York Fed hit its gold constraint in March 1933 and President Roo-
sevelt declared the national banking holiday. Four core banks merged into other core banks
between June 1929 and December 1932. Two merged in the summer of 1929, before the stock
market crashed and the economic contraction accelerated. The others merged in late 1931 and
early 1932. These mergers continued a process of consolidation at the core that began in the
1920s (Richardson and Van Horn, 2009 and 2018). Nationwide, nearly 21% of all banks liqui-
dated with losses to creditors. Another 20% of banks merged. One-eighth of those mergers
involved banks in duress. Owners of these banks received little or no compensation for their
shares. In many cases, they paid assessments to cover the banks losses, although lower assess-
ments than they would have paid if their institution was liquidated under court supervision
(Richardson 2008). Outcomes for banks at the core of the U.S. banking system were, in other
words, much better than those for banks outside of the core.

     That conclusion is true even for banks operating within New York City itself. Outcomes
for non-core banks in New York City resembled the average outcome for banks nationwide.
One-fifth of non-core Fed members liquidated, and one-quarter merged. Four of those ten
consolidations involved banks in duress. One-fifth of non-member banks also failed, and
another fifth merged. One-third of those consolidations involved banks in distress (Rand
McNally Bankers Directory, 1929 and 1932).

     The difference between core and peripheral banks appears starker when measured in
terms of deposit levels and flows. In June 1929, core banks in New York held 17% of all
deposits in the United States. During the initial banking panics in the fall of 1930 and spring
of 1931, deposits flowed out of banks in the hinterland and into banks in New York (Mitchener
and Richardson, 2019). The flight to quality eventually ebbed. By December 1932, deposits at
the core had declined by 8%. By then, however, deposits in the rest of the United States had
declined nearly 27%. The proportion of national deposits held in the core hard risen to more
than 21% (Board of Governors, 1943).




                                              11
2.3    1930s to 2000s: Evolution of Too-Big-To-Fail

The institutions underlying bank regulation changed substantially from the 1930s to the 1990s.
The institutional foundations for the second period that we analyze, the boom of the early
twenty-first century and Great Recession which followed, formed in response to the Great
Depression of the 1930s, the Savings and Loan Crisis of the 1970s and 80s, and the international
movement towards deregulation and competition during the 1980s and 90s.9 During the 1930s,
Congress created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporate (FDIC) with its role as resolver of
failed banks, expanded lending authority of the Federal Reserve System, empowered federal
agencies to inject capital into distressed banks, eliminated double liability for commercial-
bank stock, reduced directors' liability in case of banks failures, and changed a wide array
of regulations for commercial banks and bank holding companies. Few of these technical
reforms directly impacted New York's state-chartered commercial banks, since these reforms
imposed on commercial banks and their competitors (e.g. building and loans and mutual
savings banks) rules which were already in place in New York (Anderson, Richardson, Yang,
2017). A key exception is Title 1 of the Banking Act of 1935, which created the permanent,
modern FDIC, and affected all commercial banks in New York. Another exception comes
from Title 2 of the Banking Act of 1935, which limited the Fed's open-market operations to a
single trading desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which triggered the formation
of the Fed's primary-dealers network consisting of the largest commercial banks in New York
City (Garbade, 2012). These reforms reinforced the money-market prominence of New York's
largest commercial banks and led them to be treated as too big to fail. Federal legislation of
the 1930s did impose additional reforms on Fed member banks and bank holding companies
in New York, such as rules requiring commercial banks to divest securities affiliates. These
reforms, however, were largely undone by subsequent reform legislation in the 1980s and
1990s, and therefore, had limited or no impact on New York banks in the periods which we
study. Studies that compare bank regulations before the Great Depression and Great Recession
find striking similarities along many dimensions for banks in New York State, except for the
aforementioned changes underlying too-big-to-fail incentives (Komai and Richardson 2014).

      In the 1970s and 1980s, the differential impact of these policies on large versus small
   9 Komai  and Richardson (2014) provide a concise history of financial legislation in the twentieth century.
Descriptions of many of the major acts can be found at www.federalreservehistory.org.



                                                     12
banks became apparent. When small banks became distressed, the FDIC typically closed the
institution and paid off insured depositors. The banks' stockholders and uninsured depositors
(i.e. those holding funds above the insurance threshold) suffered losses. When large banks be-
came distressed, the FDIC typically resolved their affairs by arranging for a healthy institution
to purchase the troubled bank and assume all of its liabilities, including uninsured deposits.
When very large and interconnected banks suffered distress, such as Franklin in 1974, Penn
Square in 1982, and Continental Illinois in 1984, the FDIC along with the Fed (and at times
other regulators) bailed out the institution, providing loans at below-market rates and other
assistance to enable these institutions to reorganize and remain in operation. The differential
treatment of small, large, and extremely large and connected banks engenders incentives of a
type commonly called too big to fail (Feldman and Stern, 2004).

      Regulatory reform continued in the decades that followed. In 1982, the Garn-St. Germain
Depository Institutions Act expanded the FDIC's powers to aid troubled banks and to delay
closing failing institutions, which allowed those firms to gamble for recovery, typically leading
to larger losses. In reaction, the FDIC Improvement Act of 1991 (FDICIA) required the FDIC to
take prompt corrective action, close institutions before they became book-value insolvent, and
use the least costly method of resolution. FDICIA also weakened restrictions on bank branch-
ing. In 1994, the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking Act authorized interstate branch banking. In
1999, The Financial Services Modernization Act (commonly called Gramm-Leach-Bliley) ex-
panded the integration of financial services, by authorizing the creation of financial holding
companies, which could own subsidiaries involved in different financial activities, including
commercial banking, investment banking, and insurance underwriting and sales.

      Beginning in 1978, Congress passed a series of acts that required banks to fulfill capital-
ratio requirements.10 Like commercial banks in all countries adhering to the guidelines of the
Basel Committee on Capital Supervision, U.S. regulators required commercial banks to keep
  10 The  Financial Institutions Regulatory and Interest Rate Control Act of 1978 created the Federal Financial
Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC). This organization was tasked with establishing uniform standards
across U.S. regulatory agencies such as the Fed, OCC, and FDIC. It standardized capital ratios required for
U.S. commercial banks. In 1988, the US adopted policies established by the Basel Committee on Bank Su-
pervision known as Basel 1. In 2004, the Basel Committee released its initial recommendations for Basel II,
which updated procedures for calculating capital requirements for the largest commercial banks. After sev-
eral rounds of revisions, US regulators implemented Basel II in 2008. The Basel Committees initial recommen-
dations for Basel III came out in 2010 with implementation schedule for 2013-5, although amendments and
revisions have pushed implementation to the 2016-8 time frame. For details about current regulations, see
http://www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/basel/.



                                                      13
their ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets above a threshold, at which they would be deemed
adequately capitalized. Banks falling below that threshold faced additional oversight, correc-
tive action, and regulatory intervention that could include the seizure and liquidation of the
institution (a subsequent section of this essay describes these ratios, weights, and calculations
in greater detail).

     During the twenty-first century, banks' owners and managers faced substantially less
liability if their institutions failed than their predecessors had in the past. By the late 1990s,
commercial banks were limited liability corporations. Stockholders had no liability for institu-
tions' losses above the price they paid for their stock. Owners, directors, and managers seldom
faced prosecution following the failure of their institution. The nation's largest commercial
banks received preferential treatment when distressed. Regulators and central bankers had the
ability and authority to bail-out banks and the motivation and mindset to treat systemically-
important institutions specially. Their tools include the ability to (a) inject capital into financial
institutions, (b) loan funds to any institution in unlimited quantities collateralized by assets of
any type, (c) pay depositors (whether insured or not) in failing banks, and (d) resolve failing
institutions in different ways.

     Aggregate evidence suggests the evolution of these institutions influenced banks' capital
choice over the last century. Figures 1 and 2 illustrate this point. Figure 1 plots capital ratios
of Fed-member commercial banks operating in financial centers during the boom before the
Great Depression. One line plots the aggregate capital ratio in New York City, which reflects
the leverage choices of the banks in Manhattan, which included the largest commercial banks
in the United States (and the world) at that time. The other lines represent aggregate capital
ratio in Chicago and all other financial centers. The ratios evolved in sync until 1926, when
the asset-market boom of the Roaring 20s accelerated. Then, capital ratios in New York rose
relative to those of other banks, primary due to the deleveraging of Manhattan's money-center
banks including Chase National Bank, the ancestor of today's J.P. Morgan Chase, and National
City, the ancestor of Citibank. The graph makes it clear that money-center banks built capital
buffers more rapidly than other institutions when stock prices soared at the end of America's
gilded age.

     Figure 2 plots capital ratios of commercial banks operating in the United States during
the boom before the Great Recession. For the largest banks, the ratios remain near 8%, the


                                                 14
minimum allowed by law, throughout the boom. The ratios rise only after the financial crisis
following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in the fall of 2008, which is marked by the vertical
dashed line. Capital ratios for mid-tier and community banks followed a similar trajectory,
rising during the recovery from the recession of 2001 but plateauing or falling as the expansion
continued in 2006 and 2007. Capital ratios for all banks rose after the financial crisis and
continued to rise after Dodd-Frank regulatory reforms in 2010.

     Figures 1 and 2 foreshadow the fact that we will establish below. Institutions at financial
systems' core behave differently when they and the individuals who own and operate them
bear much (or most) of the risk of their failure than when they bear little (or no) risk. The
figures also illustrate many of the difficulties of systematically comparing the behavior of
banks separated by eight decades. The nature of banks and their balance sheets, including key
outcome variables, differ for many reasons. In the past, for example, the typical measure of
leverage was the book capital ratio. Today, the typical measure is a risk-weighted capital ratio.
Measures of interconnectedness also differ, largely due to differences in the nature of financial
networks. Then, interbank transactions typically took place through correspondent networks.
Today, interbank transactions typically take place through repo and fed funds markets. In the
past, banks kept most of their activities on their own balance sheets. The largest banks did have
affiliates and operate within holding companies, but most of their risk remained on the bank's
balance sheets, while in the modern day, banks and their holding companies frequently shift
leverage and risk off their balance sheets. The structure of banking has changed substantially
over time. In the past, most banks operated within a single city. Branch networks were
uncommon and often illegal. It made sense to aggregate banking data by city. Today, leading
banks have branching networks spanning several states. It is difficult to aggregate data by
location, and common to aggregate by size. Similar complications arise when comparing
business cycles and macroeconomic data across eras. The efforts required to create meaningful
comparisons between banks in the 1920s and 2000s is the subject of the next section.



3    Data and Dating Business Cycles

This section describes data sources and information necessary for understanding our analysis.
The discussion proceeds from historical sources, to modern sources, to methods of merging the


                                               15
former and the latter. The discussion concludes with a description of data on macroeconomic
aggregates and our methods for consistently dating the troughs and peaks of the economic
expansions immediately preceding the Great Recession and the Great Depression. The key
issues are identifying systemically important financial institutions in the past and present,
creating a quasi-panel of data that spans the two time-periods that we analyze, and convincing
readers that our methods overcome the obstacles to making reasonable statistical comparisons
between the past and the present.



3.1   Historical Banks

In the 1920s and 30s, New York's banks played a key role in the national financial system and
were representative of the range of institutions operating throughout the United States at that
time. Before the Great Depression, New York possessed roughly 375 state-chartered banks and
400 nationally-chartered banks. The number varied from year to year with frequent entries,
exits, and mergers, particularly among smaller institutions. These banks included the full
spectrum of institutions that operated at that time in the United States, ranging from small
country banks serving local clientele in rural communities; to larger institutions financing
industry and trade; to money-center banks operating in Manhattan, serving as correspondents
for thousands of banks in the U.S. and hundreds overseas, and operating networks of foreign
branches. In 1930, New York banks held about 30% percent of all bank assets in the United
States, 30% of all deposits, and 45% of interbank deposits.

      We limit our historical sample to New York State for several reasons. A coherent com-
parison to the present requires limiting the historical sample to a single Federal Reserve Dis-
trict and, if possible, a single state. In the 1920s, Federal Reserve banks were able to pur-
sue independent monetary and credit policies (Richardson and Troost, 2009). Laws prohibit-
ing branching required commercial banks to operate in particular locations. None operated
across state lines. Markets for goods, labor, and services were less integrated than they are
today. Banks in different Reserve Districts, therefore, experienced business cycles with dif-
ferent peaks, troughs, and amplitudes as well as different policies. Financial institutions and
regulations also varied across states. Supervision was stricter in some states and looser in
others.



                                              16
      Of all states, New York has the most appealing characteristics for our purposes. It was
the only state whose banks represented the full spectrum of institutions in operation, from
massive money center banks to tiny institutions operating in rural locations. Many banks
operating in New York in the 1920s remain in operation today. This includes several of the
largest banks in the world, then and now, such as Citibank (National City Bank of New York
in the 1920s) and J.P. Morgan Chase (Chase National Bank in the 1920s). Substantial data exists
about banks operating in the state, and sufficient data exists to date the peaks and troughs of
economic cycles that those banks were exposed too. The New York Fed pursued polices most
similar to modern ones (Chandler, 1971). No other state possesses all of these characteristics.
New York has an additional advantage. Relative to other states, limited regulatory reforms
took place in New York during the 1930s and subsequent decades. These advantages allow us
to make reasonable statistical comparisons between banks in New York during the 1920s and
banks throughout the United States today.

      For the 1920s and 1930s, data on banks comes from the Office of the Comptroller of Cur-
rency (OCC) and New York's state Superintendent of Banks. The former published balance
sheets once each year for all nationally-chartered banks, based on the September call prior to
1925 and the December call thereafter. The latter published bank-level data for all calls (typi-
cally four) each year during the period of our study except for the years 1933 and 1934, when
the state legislature suspended the collection and publication of that information. For both
national and state banks, we also draw data about interbank networks from Rand McNally
Bankers Directory.



3.2   Modern Bank Data Sources

The modern era differs from our historical period in several ways. Today, the Federal Open
Market Committee sets monetary policy for the entire nation, in response to national economic
cycles. Markets for goods, labor, and services are nationally integrated. Large commercial
banks operation nationwide, possessing branches in, accepting deposits from, and making
loans to firms and individuals in many and for the largest banks most states. When we
examine the behavior of modern systemically-important financial institutions, therefore, the
appropriate comparison group is all commercial banks operating in the United States,



                                              17
      Data for modern banks comes from the Federal Reserve, Federal Deposit Insurance Cor-
poration (FDIC), and Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC).11 The princi-
pal information that we analyze appears on FFIEC reporting forms 031 (Consolidated Reports
of Condition and Income for a Bank with Domestic and Foreign Offices) and 041 (Consoli-
dated Reports of Condition and Income for a Bank with Domestic Offices Only). From these
forms, we measure banks' size, leverage, interconnectedness, and other characteristics. Size is
nominal total assets (call code rcfd2170). Leverage is the inverse of the tier 1 capital ratio (call
code rcfd7206). Interconnectedness is measured in two ways. The first is total deposits due
to commercial banks and other depository institutions located in the United States (rconb551
plus rconb552). The second is the sum of banks' interbank deposit liabilities (rconb551 plus
rconb552), loans to depository institutions (rconb531), balances due from depository institu-
tions in the United States (rcon0082), federal funds borrowed and lent, and funds received
and disbursed under repurchase and reverse repurchase agreements (rconb993, rcfdb995,
rconb987, and rcfdb989). We refer to this sum as gross interconnectedness. We restrict our
analysis to commercial banks (rssd9331=1, call8786=1 or 2, rssd9048=250, rssd9424=1,2,6, or 7)
and those physically located in the contiguous United States (rssd9210<57).



3.3   Measuring Systemic Importance, Capital Ratios, and Leverage

We measure banks' systemic importance using measures that commonly appear in the liter-
ature and that often are used by regulatory agencies: size and interconnectedness. Size is
measured by banks' total assets. Interconnectedness is measured in several ways. Some mea-
sures can be constructed for both the historical and modern periods. These include deposits
due to other banks, deposits due from other banks, and the sum of deposits due to and from.
In our historical panel, we can also measure the percentage of all banks in the United States
that possessed a correspondent account with each bank our data set. For our modern pe-
riod, we can measure gross interconnectedness, which is the sum of all short-term (primarily
interbank) borrowing and lending on a commercial banks' balance sheet. Key measures of
  11 FFIEC  forms and instructions can be found at its web site, http://www.ffiec.gov/. Federal Re-
serve information on commercial banks, including call report codes and item descriptions, can be found
at the Micro Data Reference Manual, http://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/mdrm/.          Reporting forms
may be found at http://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/reportforms/. Links to agency data appears at
http://www.federalreserve.gov/apps/mdrm/series/list/reportform. The FDIC's publicly available data can be
found at https://www.fdic.gov/bank/statistical/.


                                                   18
interconnectedness evolved over time. The evolution occurred due to changes in the structure
of the financial system, particularly New York's money markets. In the earlier era, correspon-
dent relationships facilitated by deposits of funds were the dominant interbank link. These
relationships materialize in the due to and due from categories of banks' balance sheets. In the
modern era, funds typically flow between financial institutions via the Fed funds market and
repurchase agreements. To capture these changes, we vary our measure of interconnectedness
over time.

     Table 3 provides a summary of systemic importance for our historical panel on 31 Decem-
ber 1928. It indicates the 20 largest banks as measured by total assets plus three banks outside
that group that are among the top 20 most interconnected banks as measured by deposits
due to. The column %DT indicates percent of liabilities due to other banks, or 100(due to
banks/assets). %R indicates percent of respondents that listed the New York bank in question
as a correspondent in a stratified random sample drawn from the January 1929 Rand McNally
Bankers' Directory. Our stratified random sample consisted of two pages chosen randomly
from each state's section in the Directory. From these pages, we recorded the correspondents
listed for each commercial bank, and then we calculated the fraction of all banks in our sample
that listed each bank in our New York data set as correspondent. The last column indicates
the row number of each bank's modern successor in Table 4. Table 4 provides a snapshot of
our modern panel on 31 December 2007. It indicates the 20 largest banks as measured by
total assets plus five banks outside that group that are among the top 20 as measured by gross
interconnectedness. The column %DT indicates percent of liabilities due to other banks, or
100x(due to/assets). The columns GI and %GI indicate gross interconnectedness and gross
interconnectedness as a fraction of total assets respectively.

     Capital ratios and their inverse, leverage, can be measured in both periods. For the his-
torical period, we typically measure the capital ratio as ratio of owners' equity (paid-in capital
plus surplus plus other retained earnings) over total assets. This was the form of the capital
ratio most frequently discussed by regulators or in books like Ferdinand L. Garcia's 1935 book
How to Analyze a Bank Statement. Modern regulation of commercial banks' capital relies
on measuring the ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets. The Basel Capital Accords separate
assets into four categories. The first, considered risk-free and perfectly liquid, includes cash
and home-country national debt. It receives a weight of 0%. The second category receives a


                                                19
weight of 20%. It includes assets deemed safe and liquid, such as securities with the highest
rating, AAA. The third category receives a weight of 50%. It consists of secured and relatively
safe assets such as municipal debt and mortgage loans. The last category receives a weight of
100%. This includes most other loans and assets without ratings or deemed unrateable. We
create analogs to this measure for banks in the Roaring 20s by risk-weighing assets at historical
commercial banks using criteria equivalent to the Basel criteria.12



3.4    Mergers and Call Report Dating

Merging the data into panels requires decisions about how to treat call-report dates and bank
mergers. Call reports for the commercial banks occurred roughly quarterly during our his-
torical and modern periods, although some reporting intervals were longer and others were
shorter. We observe data from all calls for all banks in the modern era and observe all calls
for state-chartered banks in the historical era. For nationally-chartered banks in the historical
era, we observe all calls in banks in New York City and only a single call each year for most
national banks upstate. When we initially analyze our data panel, we treat the call-reports
for modern and historical state-chartered banks as quarterly, or in other words, assume the
intervals between the call reports were of equal length. This is the assumption most often
employed in the literature. You could think of this assumption as one in which we analyze
the data in call-report time. When we pool historical state and national bank data from the
historical era, we include state-bank data at all dates and include national-bank data into the
estimates only for the dates on which it is available. We check all of our results by rerunning
them in calendar time, where we allow the spacing between calls to vary, and also in business
cycle time, where time represents the fraction of the expansion (from peak to trough) which
   12 Complications  arise from the insufficient granularity of the historical balance sheets. For less granular bal-
ance sheets, we make assumptions about the appropriate risk weights of the equivalent. State bank balance
sheets, for example, aggregate all bonds into a single category, "securities." This category includes U.S. govern-
ment bonds, whose risk weight is zero; securitized assets, whose risk weight is 20%; and municipal and corporate
bonds, whose risk weight is 50% in the modern data. To these composition categories, we assign a weighted av-
erage of modern risk weights, based upon the share of each type of asset in the composition category as reported
for all banks in the United States by the Comptroller of Currency in 1929. For items considered assets in the past,
but not classified as assets today, we assign the risk weight of 100%. An example is cash items. The principle
component of cash items is drafts in the process of collection. Today and in the past, the Federal Reserve counts
these items neither as assets nor liabilities of the bank until they clear or until the passage of days sufficient to
enable them to clear in normal circumstances. Yet, state authorizes did consider them an asset in the 1920s and
30s. Since cash items are both risky and illiquid particularly during financial crises, we assign them a risk-weight
of 100% (Richardson, 2007).


                                                         20
has passed.

      All of the largest and most interconnected banks from the 1920s have modern descen-
dants. The last column of Table 3 indicates these by listing the row number of the modern
successor in Table 4. For example, Chase National is now the core of JPMorgan Chase, which
absorbed another 13 of the largest historical banks in New York. National City Bank is now
the core of Citibank, which absorbed 3 other banks in our list. American Exchange Irving
Trust Company (historically 5th largest) now belongs to Bank of New York Mellon (16). Some
of largest modern banks have ancestors in our data set. This is true for those ranked 1, 3, 7,
16, 19, and 21. Most of the other largest banks in the United States evolved from institutions
in other regions of the U.S.. Wells Fargo and Bank of America, for example, originated in
California. Wachovia (now part of Wells Fargo) came from North Carolina.

      While many of the smaller banks in our historical data set have modern descendants
(and vice versa), high rates of failure and entry for small banks over the last century mean
that many do not. The small banks still serve as an appropriate control group. In our histori-
cal sample, institutions outside the top 25 operated in the same environment, under the same
constraints, and supervised by the same regulators as their larger and better connected coun-
terparts. All of the banks operated in the state of New York with their operations and branches
restricted to a single municipality. In our modern population, the thousands of smaller institu-
tions operate throughout the United States, in all markets in which the largest banks operate,
supervised at the national level by the same agencies (Federal Reserve, Federal Deposit In-
surance Corporation, and Comptroller of Currency) and supervised at the local level by state
regulators. The largest banks operate nearly nationwide. JP Morgan Chase, Wells Fargo, and
Bank of America operate thousands of branches spread across most states. Citibank operates
roughly 800 branches in 15 states.



3.5   Dating Business Cycle Peaks and Troughs

To compare capital choices over business expansions, we need to date business cycle peaks
and troughs consistently over time. Dating is complicated by four factors. First, the business
cycles length and properties differed in the interwar and modern eras (Romer, 1994). Second,
Stock (1987) has argued that the NBER's standard business cycle dating, pioneered by Burns


                                              21
and Mitchell (1947), distorts the economic time scale, particularly in the interwar era. Third,
during the 1920s, we examine data from banks in New York. That state experienced a longer
and stronger expansion than most of the rest of the nation, in part because of asset and
consumption booms in Manhattan, America's financial and fashion capital. Fourth, a limited
number of data series exist for New York during the 1920s.

     To overcome these problems, we collect all time series that could be used to date the busi-
ness cycle in New York in the 1920s and compare the dates that we derive to their equivalents
for the modern era. Table 5 summarizes the results. Column (1) indicates dates of the na-
tional business cycle from the NBER. Column (2) dates the business cycle using the short-term
commercial paper rate, which Stock (1987) found to be the best metric for the economic time
scale from 1869 through 1975. The short-term rate that Stock used was the commercial-paper
rate prevailing in New York City (Board of Governors 1943, Table 120, p. 450). Columns (3)
through (6) indicate dates for data series on economic activity in New York State. Column
(3) reports dates from the Federal Reserve's consumption index for the Second District, essen-
tially the state of New York. Column (4) reports dates from the Dow Jones Industrial Average,
based upon prices of stocks sold on the New York Stock Exchange. Column (5) reports dates
based upon the volume of payments processed by financial institutions in the Second Federal
Reserve District, primarily New York City. Column (6) reports dates based on the deviation
from trend of factory employment in New York State. The length and amplitude of the cycle in
New York in the 1920s exceeds the expansion from November 2001 to December 2007, which
lasted 73 months. Macroeconomic data for the modern era come from standard sources. Busi-
ness cycle peaks and troughs are from the NBER. GNP and other data about the cycle come
from the Federal Reserve's Economic Data System (FRED).



4   Methods and Results

This section describes our statistical methods and results. We begin by summarizing patterns
in the data. Then, we analyze how capital choices changed over the business cycle for SIFIs
and smaller banks. Since the length of these expansions differed, we compare banks' choices
in business-cycle time, where the length of the expansion is normalized to the unit interval and
our time variable indicates the fraction of expansion which has passed. This transformation


                                              22
allows us to account for idiosyncrasies in the frequency and timing of bank-balance sheet
reporting. Extensions of our method demonstrate the robustness of our result.



4.1   A First Look at the Data

Table 6 illuminates patterns in the data. Before the Great Depression and Recession, capital
ratios for small banks exceeded those for large banks, particularly the largest institutions with
the most interbank connections at the center of the financial system, the SIFIs. On average
during the Roaring 20s, capital ratios of banks in the smallest decile declined slightly, while
ratios of banks in the largest decile rose substantially, with the ratios of the top-ten banks
rising the most. In contrast, from 2002 to 2007, capital ratios of the largest ten banks changed
little over the business cycle. They began the boom near the regulatory minimum, ended the
boom near the regulatory minimum, and stayed close to the regulatory constraint at every
point between. In contrast, capital ratios of smaller banks rose slightly.

      The contrast appears starkest when calculating the difference in the differences of capital
ratios over these expansions. During the Roaring 20s, the capital ratio of the largest commercial
banks increased by 2.6 percentage points, while the capital ratio of the smallest commercial
banks declined by 0.3 percent. While these ratios had differed substantially at the beginning of
the boom, they converged as the economy expanded. During the Roaring 2000s, the opposite
occurred. The capital ratio of large commercial banks changed little, while the capital ratio
of the small commercial banks increased by 0.7 percentage points. The difference in these
differences is 3.3 percentage points. This difference in differences underlies our estimation
strategy. Small banks serve as benchmark against which we assess the behavior of systemically
important institutions.

      While our analysis has the spirit of a difference in difference estimation, history has not
given us a data set and historical experiment to which we can apply a statistical difference in
difference estimator. Instead, we rely on the logic of treatment and control, clearly state the
assumptions that we must make when generating a result, and perform extensive robustness
checks to determine that our result arises due to patterns in the underlying data and not
assumptions that we make when generating our estimates. Key issues that we must address
are how to date the boom and bust in New York State during the 1920s and 30s; how to


                                               23
identify the largest and most connected banks, which are those whose behavior should have
been influenced by the advent of too-big-to-fail; how to illuminate patterns from trough to
peak of the business cycle; and how to standardize historical and modern business cycle time
so that we can use statistical tests to compare the behavior of banks across different eras.



4.2     Analysis

To investigate how capital choices differed between SIFIs and other commercial banks, we
consider equations of form (1).


                            Cit = i + µt +  Xit + (I(SIFIi )(cyclet )) +           it                          (1)


Cit is the capital ratio for bank i at call report t, where i  [1, . . . , I ] and t  [1, . . . , T ]. I is the
total number of banks in each sample. T is the total number of call reports under examination.
i is a bank fixed effect. µt is a call report (i.e. time) fixed effect. Xi t is a vector of variables that
vary by bank and call report. These variables indicate the fraction of banks' assets invested in
cash, bonds, or loans.  is the vector of coefficients for these control variables, which indicate
the different composition and risk of banks' portfolios. I(SIFIi ) is an indicator variable that
indicates whether a bank belongs to the group of systemically important financial institutions.
The variable cyclet  [0, 1] indicates call date t's position in the business cycle. If the call
occurred during the month at the trough of the cycle, cycle equals 0. If the call occurred
during the month at the peak of the cycle, cycle equals 1. If the call occurred between trough
and peak, cycle equals the fraction of months of the economic expansion that passed prior the
call. For example, if an expansion spanned 12 months from a trough in January to the peak
                                                             1                          1
in the next January, the variable cycle would equal          3   for calls in April,    2   for calls in July, and
3
4   for calls in October.  is the coefficient indicating how capital levels of SIFIs changed over
the cycle relative to capital levels of other financial institutions.         it   is an error term clustered
by bank. We estimate equation (1) using the within transformation which yields equation (2).


                            C¨it = i + µt +  X¨it + (I(SIFIi )(cyclet )) + ¨it                                 (2)

                                  ¨ = zit - 1
       where each variable above, z         T z /T.
                                               it



                                                      24
     Table 7 reports results of regressions on historical data in the first three columns. Column
(1) regressions the deviation in a banks' current from average capital ratio, C¨it on a dummy

for systemically-important banks, I(SIFIi ), and the product of that indicator and a variable
indicating when the call occurred during the economic expansion, I(SIFIi )(cyclet ). The co-
efficient on that interaction term, 4.11, indicates the average increase in the capital ratio of
systemically important banks relative to smaller banks during the boom of the Roaring 20s.
In this regression, the measure of capital is the book equity ratio, which was the standard
measure of commercial-bank leverage in use at that time. The business cycle is defined by
the short-term interest rate in New York State, which Stock (1987) indicates is the best mea-
sure of the business cycle during the interwar period. The dummy for systemically important
commercial bank indicates the largest 10 banks operating in New York in 1929. Column (2)
reports a regression identical except for the inclusion of time fixed effects. The coefficient on
the interaction of interest, 3.51, remains statistically significant at the 99% level. It is a 0.6
less than the coefficient on the preceding regression. This is representative of including time
fixed effects in all the regressions that we run. Column (3) reports a regression using the same
variables but which also includes variables indicating the share of each banks' portfolio held
in liquid assets (cash, reserves at the Fed, etcetera), less liquid but typically safe assets (bonds),
and illiquid by higher returning assets (loans). These variables reflect changes in the riskiness
of the assets in which a bank invests. Along with fixed effects for each bank, these variables
provide a parsimonious specification that captures the influence of banks' characteristics (both
observed and unobserved) on decisions about leverage and capital. The standard errors for
this regression are clustered at the bank level and estimated via the Hubert-White method
to control for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. The key coefficient from this regression,
3.76, is slightly higher than the coefficient on the equivalent regression without controls for the
structure of banks' portfolios. This increase reflects the fact that as large banks raised capital
ratios as the economy expanded, they also shifted out of loans and into safer assets, such as
cash, interbank balances, and government bonds (Richardson and Van Horn, 2018; Mitchener
and Richardson, 2019). As the economy roared during the 1920s, in other words, the banks at
the center of the United States financial system reduced the riskiness of both the liability and
asset sides of their balance sheets.

     Table 7 reports results of regressions on modern data in the last three columns. These


                                                 25
regressions define the business cycle using NBER dates. These are the most commonly used
modern dates, and the length of the modern NBER cycle corresponds closely with the length
of the historical interest-rate cycle. The capital ratio is defined by book equity, which is the
measure used in our historical regressions. SIFIs are defined as the 5 largest banks. This
narrow modern grouping reflects the growing concentration of the financial system. Other
than these differences in definition of variables, the regressions in columns four to six are
identical to the regressions in columns one to three. Column (4) includes an indicator for
SIFI and its interaction with our variable for the business cycle expansion. Column (5) adds
time fixed effects. Column (6) adds controls for the composition of banks' portfolios. These
regressions indicate that capital ratios of modern banks changed little over the business cycle.
In regressions with controls (columns 5 and 6), the null hypothesis that during the economic
expansion, capital levels of systemically-important banks did not change relative to capital
ratios of smaller banks cannot be rejected.


4.3   Robustness

The coefficients presented in Table 7 depend upon the assumptions underlying the analysis.
Figure 3 examines how those assumptions effect our estimates on historical data. Panel 3(a)
plots coefficients on interaction terms indicating how systemically-important institutions ad-
justed capital levels from 12 regressions equivalent to Table 7, Column 3. The regressions vary
on the measure of systemically-important institutions and the definition of the business cycle.
The black dots indicate coefficients on regressions in which SIFIs are defined as the ten largest
banks in 1929 (as indicated in Table 3), while the length of the economic expansion varies
(as indicated in Table 5). The cycles are listed from left (shortest) to right (longest) in order
of their length. The dots are solid, indicating that all are statistically significant at the 95%
level. The triangles indicate coefficients on regression in which the SIFIs are defined as banks
at the core of the United States commercial system, as indicated by high levels of deposits
due to other banks and large numbers of respondent banks (as indicated in Table 4). Five of
the triangles are solid, indicating that they are statistically significant at the 95% level. One is
hollow, indicating that it was not statistically significant.

      Panel 3(a) illustrates several important points. One is that our conclusion does not differ
if you define systemically important banks as the largest or most connected institutions. These

                                                 26
identities of these groups overlapped to a large degree. The largest banks were generally the
most connected, and vice versa. The set of `connected' banks in this figure is larger than the set
of `biggest' banks, which accounts for the slight difference in average estimate. This is because
the larger and more connected the bank, the more they increased their capital ratio as the
economy expanded. Two is that the plausible measures of the economic expansion's starting
and ending dates yield similar conclusions. This result is reassuring because lack of data
creates uncertainty about the starting and ending dates of the economic expansion in New
York in the 1920s. The result arises because big banks increased capital ratios most rapidly
from 1927 to 1929, when equity markets and industrial activity reached unprecedented levels,
and that span of time is included in all plausible measures of the economic expansion.

     Panel 3(b) asks whether our results depend upon our measure of equity. It does this by
comparing coefficients from regressions like those in Table 7, Column 3 with coefficients from
identical regressions where capital ratios have been computed according to modern methods.
In 3(b), the black dots have been estimated using the historic capital ratio (and thus, are
identical to the black dots in 3(a)). The gray dots have been estimated for the risk-weighted
tier 1 leverage ratios of these historical banks. Five of the coefficients for these new regressions
are statistically significant and statistically different than their non-risk weighted analogs. All
these coefficients are larger than their non-risk weighted analogs. They are larger, because
banks at the core of the financial system in the 1920s shifted into safer assets (particularly
government bonds, cash, and cash equivalents) as the boom progressed. This shift toward
safety results in an increase in their risk-weighted capital ratio.

     Panel 3(c) also plots coefficients indicating how systemically-important institutions ad-
justed capital levels during the economic expansion of the 1920s based upon Table 7, Column
3. Each vertical strip pertains to a definition of the financial core. The definitions are the five
largest banks by total assets, the ten largest banks, and the twenty largest banks. The dots and
lines in each column indicate point estimates for the different definitions of business cycles.
The magnitudes of the cycles can be inferred, since they vary in the same order as 3(a). Dots
represent coefficients significant at the 95% level. Lines represent insignificant coefficients.
The panel demonstrates that our conclusions are robust to different definitions of the financial
core. The magnitude of the estimate drops when the core groups of banks expands, because
banks ranked 11 to 20 in total assets raised capital levels less during the boom than banks with


                                                27
size ranked 1 to 10, but our statistical result still holds.

     Panel 3(d) asks if our results could be driven by some unobserved shock that differen-
tially impacted banks at the core and periphery of the financial system. The figure plots coef-
ficients for five groups of six regressions. The group identities are indicated on the horizontal
axis. Each group consists of regressions for each business cycle. The cycles can be inferred in
most cases, since their magnitudes typically vary in the same order as Panel 3(a). The dots and
lines in each column indicate point estimates for the different definitions of business cycles.
Dots represent coefficients significant at the 95% level. Lines represent insignificant coeffi-
cients. SIFIs are defined as the ten largest banks in each group. The first group consists of all
banks in New York State. This is the same group (and same values) represented by the black
dots in Panel 3(a). The second group consists of Fed member banks. Relative to nonmembers,
regulations required Fed members to invest in safer assets, to hold more (and more liquid)
reserves, and to undergo more rigorous examinations. In return, Fed members received direct
access to the discount window.

     Fed members were also on average larger, better capitalized, and operated in larger
municipalities. The core banks in Fed-member group were identical to the core banks for New
York as a whole (since all banks in the core for the state as a whole belonged to the Federal
Reserve). The comparison group, however, shrinks and becomes more similar to the core. The
result remains the same. With the exception of an outlier, regressions for different business
cycles yield coefficients that differ significantly from zero but not from the corresponding
coefficient in the regression on the entire sample.

     The third group consists only of state-chartered banks. These banks obviously operated
under uniform rules and a signal regulator, reducing the danger that our inferences might be
driven by unobserved shocks that differed between the core and comparison groups. The core
in this group consists of the largest state members listed in Table 3. It overlaps in part with
the core group in the previous regressions but contains several banks the previous regressions
comparison group (and which the regressions in Panel 3(c) reveal increased capital less than
the larger, national banks which we exclude from this regression). Given this, the slight decline
in coefficients for regressions on most business cycles is not surprising.

     The fourth group consists of banks operating only inside New York City. The core group
for this regression is identical to the core group for the regression including all banks. The

                                                  28
comparison group is substantially smaller, however, since it excludes most of the banks in
the state. The decline in sample size explains the increase in standard errors. Surprisingly,
coefficients for half of the regressions remain significant at the 95% level. The magnitudes of
all the coefficients are lower than in the full sample. This reflects the fact that in this sample,
a substantial share of the comparison group consists large, connected banks listed in Table 3
which did cross the threshold for inclusion in our core group of top-ten largest banks. The
top-ten banks did increase capital ratios quicker than banks in the eleven-to-thirty range and
the rest of New York City, but the difference was not as dramatic as with smaller banks in the
rest of the state.

      The last group consists of banks outside of New York City. The "core" top-ten group in
this regression consists of banks in the reserve cities of Albany and Buffalo. Only one of these,
Manufacturers and Traders-Peoples Trust Company of Buffalo, appears in Table 3. All these
banks served as intermediate nodes in the financial network. They provided correspondent
services to country-bank clients who found it easier to deal with them than with banks farther
away in New York. Banks in these intermediate nodes did increase capital ratios relative to
smaller and rural banks during the boom of the 1920s, but the difference in behavior between
rural banks and them was much smaller than the difference between rural banks and banks
in the money center of Manhattan.

      Figure 4 illustrate a series of robustness checks for modern banks. All panels present co-
efficients on the interaction term of interest from versions of the regression in Table 7, Column
6. All panels present coefficients from regressions for all six business cycle definitions and for
sets of regressions in which the core banks are defined as either those with more than $100
billion in assets or more than $250 billion.

      Panel 4(a) plots coefficients for regressions using four different definitions of the capital
ratio: the common equity ratio, the tier 1 leverage ratio, the tier 1 risk-based ratio, and the
total risk-based ratio. For most of these coefficients, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that
the coefficients equal zero. In the few cases where the coefficient is rejected, the coefficient is
negative, reflecting the fact that large banks' capital ratios remained roughly constant during
the boom of the 2000s, while ratios of some small banks rose, particularly using the tier
leverage ratio. So, in some specifications, large and small (or core and peripheral) banks'
capital ratios appear to diverge. Overall, 4(a) demonstrates that our results do not depend


                                                29
upon how we measure capital.

      Panels 4(b), 4(c), and 4(d) reach the same conclusion for other assumptions underlying
our analysis. Panel 4(b) divides the set of regressions examined in 4(a) by business-cycle defi-
nition. For most regressions, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the key coefficient equals
zero. There is no systematic difference between the estimates for the different definitions of the
cycle. This pattern indicates that our conclusion does not depend upon the definition of the
business cycle. Panel 4(c) examines a larger set of regressions, which includes all regressions
examined in 4(a) and 4(b) and also regressions on banks where the core is defined as all banks
with more than $50 billion in assets. 4(b) divides the regressions by definition of banks at the
core of the financial system. For most regressions, we cannot reject the null hypothesis that the
key coefficient equal zero. This pattern indicates that our conclusions due not depend upon
the way in which we define the core group. Panel 4(d) examines two related set of regressions.
The first includes all the regressions in Panels 4(c) estimated only for banks what do not be-
long to holding companies. The second includes all of those regressions but estimated only for
banks operating within holding companies. The coefficients for these two sets of regressions
do not differ significantly from each other or from zero. This pattern indicates that our results
are not driven by the nature and behavior of holding companies or the differential incidence
of holding companies between large and small banks.


4.4   Difference-in-Difference Estimates

To clearly compare capital choices of commercial banks in the past and the present, we pool
the sample estimate the following difference-in-difference regression:


                          Ci,t = i + h,b · I(SIFIi ) · I(historic)(cyclet )

                                  +h,s · I(¬SIFIi ) · I(historic)(cyclet )
                                    +h,b · I(SIFIi ) · I(modern)(cyclet )                      (3)

                                  +h,s · I(¬SIFIi ) · I(modern)(cyclet )
                                                             + Xi , t  +   i ,t


      where Ci,t denotes the capital ratio in the historical or modern sample respectively. i
are bank fixed effects, Xi,t are asset-side bank level controls as in (1). cyclet denotes that

                                                 30
business cycle measure that runs continuously through the unit interval from trough (=0) to
peak (=1). I(SIFIi ) is a unit dummy when the bank is systemically important, that is for the
historical period whether it is among the top 10 banks and in the modern period as to whether
it is above the $250bn size cutoff. I(¬SIFIi ) is a unit dummy for the complementary set, i.e.
all smaller, non-systematically important banks. I(historic) and I(modern) are unit dummies
respectively for the pre-Great Depression period and the pre-Great Recession period. We run
this regression for the six different definitions of the business cycle and for the four modern
measures of the capital ratio.

     Equation (3) enables us to directly test how the behavior of systemically-important banks
relative to smaller banks differed before the Great Depression and Recession. The null hypoth-
esis for this test is H0,3 below. Previously, we tested the null hypotheses H0,1 and H0,2 , which
asked respectively if the behavior of pre-Depression large and small banks differed and if the
behavior of pre-Recession large and small banks differed respectively.


                                    H0,1 = (h,b - h,s ) = 0
                                    H0,2 = (m,b - m,s ) = 0
                             H0,3 = (h,b - h,s ) - (m,b - m,s ) = 0


Table 8 summarizes results for the different definitions of business cycle and capital ratio. The
smallest coefficient is 2.6. This indicates that banks at the core of the financial system before
the Great Depression increased their capital ratios by 2.6 percentage points more relative to the
average bank than banks at the core of the financial system did relative to their contemporaries
before the Great Recession. The largest coefficient was 5.1. The average coefficient was 4.0. To
put these estimates in context, the Bank for International Settlements recommends that nations
adopt maximum CCyBs (BCBS, 2010) of 2.5 percentage points.        13   The Fed's maximum CCyB
is 2.5 percentage points. So, modern regulatory CCyBs will offset a substantial portion but not
the entire distortion induced by modern too-big-to-fail incentives, which discourage banks
at the core of financial systems from accumulating the capital buffers which were common
practice in the past.
  13 See  Basel Committee on Bank Supervision (2010) "Basel            III   phase-in   arrangements"
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/basel3/basel3_phase_in_arrangements.pdf.




                                               31
5    Discussion

The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision recommends that central banks adopt policies
generating countercyclical capital buffers for financial institutions at the core of their financial
systems. Numerous nations ­ including those with the worlds' ten largest economies ­ have
done so. To gain insight into the likely impact of these modern CCyBs, we compare the
behavior of banks before the Great Depression and Great Recession. During the Roaring
20s, regulations encouraged banks at the core of the financial system to accumulate capital
sufficient to operate without interruption during the contraction that followed. These historical
CCyBs were as large or larger than the Fed's maximum CCyB today. America's historical
experience with CCyBs suggests that modern CCyB's could offset distortion's due to too-big-
to-fail policies and induce core banks to hold levels of capital closer to those that they would
hold if they faced the consequences of failure. These CCyBs would probably help core banks
weather financial crises without government assistance, as their predecessors did in the past.

     While historical countercyclical capital buffers seem to have been successful, at least at
first glance, our historical analogy raises several red flags. While historical CCyBs helped
the core of the financial system weather financial crisis, they did not prevent financial crises
from afflicting the periphery. Small banking panics struck the hinterland repeatedly during
the 1920s (Jalil 2010). Seven large regional panics erupted during the early 1930s (Mitchener
and Richardson, 2019). Historical CCyBs may also not have reduced the frequency of crises at
the core. In 1929, 1931, 1933, crises afflicted New York's stock markets and commercial banks.
Similar crises occurred about every 20 years in the past (Jalil, 2010). So, while CCyBs might
help to keep core banks in operation during crises, they are certainly not a sufficient condition
to eliminate these events, may not be a necessary condition, and may in some unanticipated
way, be part of the problem. Financial crises recurred regularly in the era when countercyclical
capital buffering played a prominent role in bank regulation.

     Another red flag is that in the 1930s, regulators, bankers, and policymakers became con-
vinced that rules which induced countercyclical capital buffering and the buffers themselves
had pernicious and unintended effects. Their costs outweighed their benefits. So, policymak-
ers eliminated these policies. The most significant changes at the federal level came through
the Banking Act of 1935. The act eliminated stockholders' and directors' liability for failures


                                                32
of banks. The act also assigned to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation the role of liq-
uidator for all insured banks. These changes resulted in resolution procedures that favored
large relative to small banks (Richardson and Yang, 2019).

     The sparse legislative history makes it difficult to precisely describe the rationales un-
derlying these reforms. One concern appears to have been the cost of capital. Regulations
that induced capital buffering raised the cost of capital for large financial institutions. High
capital costs reduced the quantity of capital held by commercial banks, limited banks' ability
to extend loans, prevented them from raising additional capital during the downturn, and
slowed the pace of recovery after financial crises. Inhibition of recapitalization was the most
frequently discussed concern.

     Another concern was the dynamics of deposits in financial networks. Since banks at the
core of the financial system accumulated capital during booms, they were the safest place to
deposit funds during busts. During most financial crises, deposits fled from the periphery
toward the core of the network (Richardson and Van Horn, 2018; Mitchener and Richardson,
2019). This flight to quality reduced credit supplied to businesses and consumers in the hin-
terland, without an offsetting increase in loan supply at the core, because core banks used the
inflow of deposits to raise holdings of cash, bonds, and reserves at the Fed (Mitchener and
Richardson, 2019).

     It would be useful to understand why after the Great Depression, regulators believed
rules that induced countercyclical capital buffering were part of the problem and should be
eliminated, while after the Great Recession, regulators believed the lack of the rules that their
predecessors discontinued was part of the problem and that those rules should be reinstated.
It would also be useful to understand the spectrum of impacts that countercyclical capital
buffers might have in general equilibrium. One model along these lines is Diamond and
Rajan (2000), which describes potential perverse consequences from macroprudential capital
regulation. In their model, capital requirements impact banks' liquidity choices and vice
versa. Increasing capital requirements differentially impacts banks facing different liquidity
constraints. The greater safety induced by countercyclical capital buffers can have adverse
liquidity and distributional consequences. The issues raised in Diamond and Rajan's model
resemble regulators' concerns long ago about the complex consequences of capital regulation.



                                               33
References

Adrian, Tobias and Hyun Song Shin, "Liquidity and Leverage", Journal of Financial Intermedia-
tion, 19(2008), 418-437.

Admati, Anat R. and Martin F. Hellwig (2013), The Bankers' New Clothes: What's Wrong with
Banking and What to Do about It, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Aikman, David, Andrew G Haldane, and Benjamin D. Nelson, "Curbing the Credit Cycle",
Economic Journal, 125(2013), 1072-1109.

Anderson, Haelim, Charles C. Calomiris, Matthew Jaremski, and Gary Richardson, "Liquidity
Risk, Bank Networks, and the Value of Joining the Federal Reserve System", Journal of Money,
Credit, and Banking, 50(2018), 173-201.

Anderson, Haelim, Gary Richardson, and Brian S. Yang "Deposit Insurance and Depositor
Monitoring: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Creation of the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation." NBER Working Paper No. 23828, 2017.

Bernanke, Ben, The Federal Reserve and the Financial Crisis. (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 2013).

Blinder, Alan, After the Music Stopped: The Financial Crisis, the Response, and the Work Ahead.
(London, U.K.: Penguin Press, 2013).

Blum, Jurg, "Do capital adequacy requirements reduce risks in banking?" Journal of Banking
and Finance 23(1999), 755-71.

Board of Governors, Banking and Monetary Statistics. (Washington, DC: Board of Governors of
the Federal Reserve System, 1947).

Brunnermeier, Markus K., and Lasse H. Pedersen "Market Liquidity and Funding Liquidity."
Review of Financial Studies, 22(2009): 2201-38.

Burns, Arthur F. and Wesley C. Mitchell, Measuring Business Cycles. (Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research, 1947).

Calomiris, Charles and Stephen Haber, Fragile by Design. (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press, 2014).

Calomiris, Charles and Berry Wilson, "Bank Capital and Portfolio Management: The 1930s
"Capital Crunch" and the Scramble to Shed Risk", Journal of Business, 77(2004): 421-455.



                                              34
Chandler, Lester V., American Monetary Policy, 1928 to 1941. (New York, NY: Harper and Row,
1971).

Chari, Varadarajan V. and Patrick J. Kehoe, "Bailouts, Time Inconsistency, and Optimal Regu-
lation: A Macroeconomic View." American Economic Review, 106 (2016): 2458-93.

"Some Litigation Incident to the Bank of United States Liquidation." Columbia Law Review,
34(1934): 917-31.

Comptroller of the Currency, Annual Report of the Comptroller of the Currency, (Washington,
D.C., United States Government Printing Office, 1921-1931).

Davis, Thomas Martin, "Banks and Banking: Bank Stock Holding Company as Fraud on Dou-
ble Liability Statute." Michigan Law Review 33, no. 2 (1934): 273-78.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Philip H. Dybvig, `Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity',
Journal of Political Economy 91(1983), 401­419.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Raghuram G. Rajan, "A Theory of Bank Capital" Journal of Finance,
55(2000): 2431-2465.

Ennis, Huberto M. and Todd Keister "Bank runs and institutions: The perils of intervention",
American Economic Review 99(2009), 1588­1607.

Farhi, Emmanuel and Jean Tirole, "Collective Moral Hazard, Maturity Mismatch, and Sys-
temic Bailouts", American Economic Review 102(2012), 60­93.

Garcia, Fernando, How to Analyze a Bank Statement, (Cambridge, MA: Bankers Publishing Com-
pany, 1935).

Garbade, Kenneth D., Birth of a Market: The U.S. Treasury Securities Market from the Great War to
the Great Depression. (Boston, MA: MIT Press, 2012).

Geanakoplos, John, "Solving the Present Crisis and Managing the Leverage Cycle." FRBNY
Economic Policy Review, August 2010.

Gersbach, Hans and Rochet, Jean-Charles, "Capital Regulation and Credit Fluctuations", Jour-
nal of Monetary Economics, 90(2017), 113-124.

Goodhart, Charles A. E., Anil K. Kashyap, Dimitrios P. Tsomocos, and Alexandros P. Var-
doulakis "An integrated framework for analyzing multiple financial regulations", International
Journal of Central Banking, 9(2013), 109­144.




                                               35
Haubrich, Joseph, "How Cyclical Is Bank Capital?" Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, working
paper no 15-04R, 2018.

Jalil, Andrew, "A New History of Banking Panics in the United States, 1825-1929: Construc-
tion and Implications",American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 7(2010): 295-330.

Jiménez, Gabriel, Steven Ongena, Jose-Luis Peydró, and Jesus Saurina, "Macroprudential Pol-
icy, Countercyclical Bank Capital Buffers, and Credit Supply: Evidence from the Spanish Dy-
namic Provisioning Experiments," Journal of Political Economy, 125(2017): 2126-2177.

Jorda,Oscar, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M. Taylor, "When Credit Bites Back," Journal of
Money, Credit, and Banking, 45(2009), 3-28.

Kashyap, Anil, Dimitrios P. Tsomocos, and Alexandros P. Vardoulakis, "How does macropru-
dential regulation change bank credit supply?" NBER Working paper No. 20165, 2014.

Keister, Todd, "Bailouts and Financial Fragility," Review of Economic Studies, 83(2016): 704-736.

Koehn, Michael and Anthony M. Santomero, "Regulation of bank capital and portfolio risk,"
Journal of Finance, 35(1980): 1235-1244.

Komai, Alejandro and Gary Richardson. "A History of Financial Regulation in the USA from
the Beginning Until Today: 1789 to 2011," in Handbook of Financial Data and Risk Information,
M. Brose, M. Flood, D. Krishna, B. Nichols, eds., (Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge
University Press, 2014.

Lee, David D., and David L. Lee. "The Attempt to Impeach Governor Horton," Tennessee His-
torical Quarterly 34, 2 (1975): 188-201.

McFerrin, John B., Caldwell and company: A southern financial empire. (Nashville, Tennessee:
Vanderbilt University Press, 1969).

Mitchener, Kris and Gary Richardson, "Network Contagion and Interbank Amplification dur-
ing the Great Depression," Journal of Political Economy, 127(2019): 465-507.

Mitchener, Kris and Gary Richardson "Skin in the Game? Risk, Leverage, and the Conse-
quences of New Deal Financial Legislation," Explorations in Economic History, 50(2013): 508-525.

New York Times, various dates.

New York Tribune, various dates.

Nuño, Galo, and Carlos Thomas, (2017). "Bank Leverage Cycles," American Economic Journal:
Macroeconomics, 9(2017): 32-72.


                                               36
O'Brien, Anthony Patrick, "The Failure of the Bank of United States: A Defense of Joseph
Lucia: Note." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 24(1992): 374-84.

O'Brien, Anthony Patrick, and Paul B. Trescott, "The Failure of the Bank of United States, 1930:
Note," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 24(1992): 384-99.

Rand Mc Nally, Rand-McNally Bankers' Directory, (Chicago, IL: Rand McNally and Company,
1929, 1932).

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff, This Time is Different, (Princeton University Press,
Princeton, NJ, 2009).

Richardson, Gary, "Quarterly Data on the Categories and Causes of Bank Distress during the
Great Depression," Research in Economic History, 25(2008): 37-115.

Richardson, Gary, "Bank Distress during the Great Depression: The Illiquidity-Insolvency De-
bate Revisited," Explorations in Economic History, 44(2007): 586-607.

Richardson, Gary and William Troost, "Monetary Intervention Mitigated Banking Panics Dur-
ing the Great Depression: Quasi-Experimental Evidence from the Federal Reserve District
Border in Mississippi, 1929 to 1933," Journal of Political Economy, 117(2009): 1031-1073.

Richardson, Gary, and Patrick Van Horn, "Intensified Regulatory Scrutiny and Bank Distress
in New York City During the Great Depression," Journal of Economic History, 69(2009): 446-465.

Richardson, Gary and Patrick Van Horn, "Fetters of Debt, Deposit, or Gold? The International
Propagation of the Banking Crisis of 1931" NBER Working Paper No. w12983, 2011.

Richardson, Gary, and Patrick Van Horn, "In the Eye of a Storm: Manhattan's Money Cen-
ter Banks during the International Financial Crisis of 1931," Explorations in Economic History,
68(2018):71-94.

Richardson, Gary and Brian Yang, "Origins of Too Big to Fail," Mimeo, 2019.

Rochet, Jean-Charles, Why Are There So Many Banking Crises?, (Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2008).

Romer, Christina,"Remeasuring Business Cycles," Journal of Economic History, 54(1994), 573-609.

Schularick, Moritz and Alan M. Taylor, "Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage
Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870-2008," American Economic Review, 102 (2012): 1029-61.




                                              37
Stern, Gary H. and Ron J. Feldman. Too Big to Fail: The Hazards of Bank Bailouts. Brook-
ings Institution Press, 2004. Stock, James, "Measuring Business Cycle Time," Journal of Political
Economy, 95(1987):1240-1261.

Tidwell, Mary Louise Lea, Luke Lea of Tennessee, (Bowling Green, OH: Bowling Green State
University Popular Press, 1993).

Wall Street Journal, various dates.

Wendrow, Edward J. "Corporations: Liability of Stockholders of Bank Stock Holding Company
for Statutory Assessment on Bank Stock." Michigan Law Review 36(1938): 1336-344.




                                               38
Tables and Figures

    Figure 1: Capital Ratios of Fed Member Banks in Financial Centers, 1920 to 1932
                                                    Equity Ratio
        Percent
        35
                 New York                    Smoothed: New York
                 Chicago                     Smoothed: Chicago
                 Reserve Cities              Smoothed: Reserve Cities
        30




        25




        20




        15
         1920          1922         1924            1926           1928      1930          1932




      Figure 2: Capital Ratios of Commercial Banks in United States, 2001 to 2011
                                          Tier 1 Risk-Based Capital Ratio
        Percent
         18                                                                    2008 Q4

         16

         14

         12

         10

          8

          6               Banks <$10bn
                          Banks $10bn-50bn
          4               Banks $50bn-$250bn
                          Banks $250bn+
          2
          2001     2002     2003   2004      2005     2006    2007    2008   2009   2010    2011




                                                       39
                          Figure 3: Capital Accumulation of Core Banks During Economic Expansion of the 1920s, Robustness
                                   (a) Measures of Centrality and Cycle                                 (b) Modern versus Historic Measures of Equity
                      5                                                                             7

                                                                                                    6
                      4
                                                                                                    5
                      3                                                                             4

                      2                                                                             3




     Point Estimate
                                                                                   Point Estimate
                                                                                                    2
                      1
                                                                                                    1

                      0                                                                             0
                          NBER        Payroll Payments   Rate      DJIA   Cons.                         NBER       Payroll Payments      Rate      DJIA   Cons.

                                                Business Cycle                                                               Business Cycle


                                      (c) Size Cutoff for Core Banks                                           (d) Samples Exposed to Similar Shocks




40
                      5                                                                             5


                      4                                                                             4


                      3                                                                             3


                      2                                                                             2




     Point Estimate
                                                                                   Point Estimate




                      1                                                                             1


                      0                                                                             0
                           Top 5                    Top 10                Top 20                         All          Fed        State          In NYC    Out NY

                                                Banks in Core                                                                   Sample
                           Figure 4: Capital Accumulation of Core Banks During Economic Expansion of the 2000s, Robustness
                                          (a) Definition of Equity                                                   (b) Business Cycle Definition
                      4                                                                                 4

                      3                                                                                 3

                      2                                                                                 2

                      1                                                                                 1




     Point Estimate
                                                                                       Point Estimate
                      0                                                                                 0

                      -1                                                                                -1
                            Equity         T1 Leverage          T1 Risk   Total Risk                         Rate   Payments Payroll    DJIA     Cons.   NBER

                                                 Capital Measure                                                               Business Cycle


                                       (c) Size Cutoff for Core Banks                                                  (d) Holding Companies




41
                      4                                                                                 3

                      3                                                                                 2

                      2                                                                                 1
                      1
                                                                                                        0
                      0




     Point Estimate
                                                                                       Point Estimate




                                                                                                        -1
                      -1
                                                                                                        -2


                           $250 bil.                $100 bil.              $50 bil.                          No                                          Yes

                                             Core Banks Larger Than                                                    Is Bank Within Holding Company
                Table 1: Fate of Owners and Executives of Largest Bank Failures During the Great Depression




42
     Notes: Column "civil" indicates legal actions against the owners and executives in civil court, including assessments,
     a, and other suits, s, typically to recoup losses due to executives' or directors' negligence. Column "criminal" indicates
     investigations and indictments, i, undertaken by attorneys general or grand juries in response to the banks' failure
     and any resulting convictions, c, some of which were overturned on appeal. Column "collateral" indicates legal issues
     that impacted individuals related to or acquainted with executives at the failed bank including: f, family caught up
     in suits or has property or funds clawed back or seized through legal processes; b, business partners caught up in
     dragnet; l, surety company that bonded executive officers found liable for their negligence; o, other including bank
     superintendents investigated for negligence in supervision of bank.
     Sources: Information from historical newspapers accessed via Proquest, regulators' reports, and other sources cited
     in text.
Table 2: Performance of Core Versus Periphery During the Great Depression




                                   43
Table 3: Systemically Important Commercial Banks in New York, 31 December 1928




 Notes: %DT indicates percent of liabilities due to other banks, or (100 * due to)/assets.
%R indicates percent of respondents that listed the New York bank in question as a
correspondent in a stratified random sample drawn from the September 1928 Polk's
Bankers' Encyclopedia. For charter, N indicates national. S indicates state. T.C. indicates
Trust Company. Successor indicates modern successor's row number in Table 2.
D.B indicates Deutsche Bank.
Sources: See text.



                                         44
Table 4: Largest Commercial Banks in the United States, 31 December 2007




Source: See text.




                                      45
     Table 5: Dating Business Cycle Expansions




46
     Sources: See text.
     Table 6: Capital Ratios of Commercial Banks




47
     Sources: See text.
     Table 7: Core Banks Capital Ratios During Economic Expansions




48
     Notes: For 1920s, ratio is book equity divided by assets. For 2000s, ratio is tier 1 capital.
     Charters are issued by state governments, S, or national government, N. SD indicates standard deviation.

     Sources: See text.
     Table 8: Capital Ratio Increases in Core Banks, 1920s versus 2000s




49
