                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




EFFICIENCY VERSUS EQUITY IN THE PROVISION OF IN-KIND BENEFITS: EVIDENCE
        FROM COST CONTAINMENT IN THE CALIFORNIA WIC PROGRAM

                                      Katherine Meckel
                                      Maya Rossin-Slater
                                      Lindsey M. Uniat

                                      Working Paper 26718
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26718


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank Kelly Bedard, Julie Cullen, Janet Currie, Hilary Hoynes, and Heather Royer for helpful
comments. We are grateful to Michael Amiri and Clyde Steele for helpful discussions and for
providing data on the WIC vendor market in California. Rossin-Slater is grateful for support from
the National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award No. 1752203. Any opinions, findings,
and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. All errors are our own. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Katherine Meckel, Maya Rossin-Slater, and Lindsey M. Uniat. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Efficiency Versus Equity in the Provision of In-Kind Benefits: Evidence from Cost Containment
in the California WIC Program
Katherine Meckel, Maya Rossin-Slater, and Lindsey M. Uniat
NBER Working Paper No. 26718
January 2020
JEL No. H40,I18,I38

                                         ABSTRACT

In many U.S. public programs, the government contracts with private firms to deliver in-kind
benefits to recipients. These public-private partnerships generate agency problems that could
drive up costs and lower program efficiency, but cost containment regulations may discourage
firm participation and reduce access among eligible households. We examine these trade-offs in
the context of California's Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and
Children (WIC), which provides vouchers to low-income pregnant women and children under
five to obtain free food packages from private vendors, and has complex rules about eligible
products. We use variation from a 2012 cost containment reform, which resulted in a 55 percent
drop in the number of small vendors, and examine how local access to small vendors affects WIC
take-up among pregnant women. We find that within-ZIP-code access to small vendors raises the
likelihood of WIC take-up among first-time mothers, and that this effect is stronger for foreign-
born than U.S.-born women and exists even for mothers who also have access to a larger WIC
vendor. Our findings suggest that small vendors are uniquely effective at lowering barriers to
take-up among subgroups of women with high program learning costs, and that cost containment
reforms, which frequently target these vendors, may have unintended consequences of
inequitably reducing program access.

Katherine Meckel                                Lindsey M. Uniat
Department of Economics                         Department of Economics
Econ 210                                        Yale University
University of California at San Diego           28 Hillhouse Ave edu
9500 Gilman Drive #0508                         New Haven, CT 06511
LaJolla, CA 92093                               lindsey.uniat@yale.edu
and NBER
kmeckel@ucsd.edu

Maya Rossin-Slater
Department of Medicine
Stanford University School of Medicine
615 Crothers Way
Encina Commons, MC 6019
Stanford, CA 94305-6006
and NBER
mrossin@stanford.edu
1    Introduction

An expansive body of research documents the lasting consequences of the early-life envi-
ronment on adult outcomes (Almond et al., 2018; Almond and Currie, 2011; Barker, 1990).
Correspondingly, a recent analysis of 133 public policies finds that programs that target
young children, rather than adults, generate the "largest bang for the buck," as measured by
the Marginal Value of Public Funds (MVPF) (Hendren and Sprung-Keyser, 2019).1 Further,
among such programs, those that provide in-kind transfers (e.g., early childhood health or
educational interventions) tend to deliver higher value than those that provide cash.2
    However, the structure of in-kind benefit provision in the United States creates challenges
for balancing the goals of program efficiency and equity. In many programs, the government
relies on private firms to deliver in-kind benefits,3 which can generate agency problems--
that is, if the incentives of private contractors do not align with the goal of maximizing
welfare among program beneficiaries, firms may engage in wasteful activities that increase
costs without adding value for the benefit recipients. But regulations aimed at curbing costs
may have the unintended consequence of discouraging participation by firms, which could
reduce program access among eligible households. Moreover, such regulations may shift the
composition of participating firms (e.g., small versus large vendors), which may impact the
types of households that participate in the program. For example, compared to large chain
companies, small independent firms may be more likely to offer services that reflect the
specific needs of their customer base (e.g., bilingual staff, see Waldfogel, 2007).
    This paper examines these issues in the context of the Special Supplemental Nutrition
Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), the chief U.S. public program that targets
the health and nutrition of low-income pregnant women and children under age five. The
WIC program distributes its benefits via quantity vouchers, which recipients redeem at
participating stores for specific types and amounts of nutritious products (e.g., 16 ounces of
   1
     The MVPF represents the ratio of each program's benefits to the net government costs. Benefits are
measured by the policy recipients' willingness to pay, while net costs include both program spending and
the long-term effect of the policy on the government's budget. See Hendren and Sprung-Keyser (2019) for
more details.
   2
     In-kind transfers that are used to alter recipient consumption patterns may be welfare-improving if
expanding recipients' budget constraints through unrestricted cash transfers results in loss (e.g., if a mother
does not fully internalize the importance of the health of her child). See Moffitt (1983) and Currie and
Gahvari (2008) for broader discussions about in-kind transfers.
   3
     For instance, Medicaid--the nation's main public health insurance program for low-income families
with children--primarily operates by reimbursing private Medicaid Managed Care plans instead of insuring
beneficiaries directly. The Head Start program provides funding to private for-profit organizations for the
purpose of operating preschools for low-income children in local communities (in addition to providing
funding to local public agencies, non-profit organizations, tribal governments, and school systems). The
National School Lunch Program contracts with food service management companies to prepare and deliver
lunches to poor children in schools.


                                                      1
whole wheat bread). Vendors are often viewed critically by the program's administration due
to their incentives to raise the program's fiscal burden. In particular, since WIC beneficiaries
are completely price-inelastic--WIC vouchers only specify product types and quantities,
but not prices--vendors have an incentive to increase the prices charged for WIC-eligible
products. Existing evidence suggests that such strategic pricing responses to price-inelastic
WIC customers are concentrated among small, independent grocers rather than large grocery
chains (Meckel, 2018; Saitone et al., 2013), making small vendors frequent targets of various
cost containment reforms.
    At the same time, small stores may play an important role in lowering barriers to take-
up for certain types of households. Large chain grocers are less likely to locate in high-
poverty areas (Bitler and Haider, 2011; Alcott et al., 2019), which means that small stores
may raise program awareness and facilitate access for households residing in these areas.
In addition, small grocers may offer an environment in which it is easier to learn WIC's
complex product eligibility rules. In the store, participants must locate eligible products,
which are defined based on size, flavor, ingredients, and other characteristics. Qualitative
data from interviews with WIC participants underscores the difficulties that they experience
when using WIC benefits at large stores that also contain many ineligible items (Grodsky
et al., 2017). Independent ethnic grocers that operate as WIC vendors may further lower
these costs for immigrant participants, who may be less familiar with American brands and
sizing conventions. Surveys indicate that some foreign-born shoppers prefer independent
grocers to larger supermarkets because they have bilingual staff and signage (Ayala et al.,
2005; Sanchez-Flack et al., 2016). An additional benefit of small WIC stores is that they
may provide a less stigmatizing shopping experience than larger retailers that serve mostly
non-WIC customers.4
    To analyze the impacts of vendors and specifically vendor type on program take-up,
we focus on a major cost containment reform in California's WIC program. The reform
occurred after the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the California Department
of Public Health (CDPH) identified over-pricing of WIC foods among small vendors.5 The
two centerpieces of the reform were: (1) a moratorium on all new vendor applications from
April 2012 to June 2014, and (2) a decrease in the reimbursement rate for small vendors
in May 2012. We hand-collected data on the names and exact addresses of all authorized
WIC vendors in California from March 2010 to December 2015, classified them by type, and
found that the number of small vendors targeted by the reform fell from a peak of 1,904
   4
     See Moffitt (1983) and Currie and Gahvari (2008) for discussions about stigma in welfare program
participation and the role of in-kind benefits.
   5
     See: https://californiahealthline.org/news/public-health-department-lifts-vendor-moratorium-for-wic-food-program/
for more details on the issues.


                                                      2
in February 2012 to 851 in December 2015, a 55 percent decrease. Data from the USDA
further shows that average WIC food costs per participant in California fell from a peak of
$63.47 in August 2011 to $42.37 in December 2015 (in 2010$), a 33 percent reduction.
    We merge our novel WIC vendor data set to California birth records data covering the
universe of births over 2010-2015 with information on maternal ZIP code tabulation area
(ZCTA) of residence and WIC benefit take-up during pregnancy. We exploit the reform-
induced variation in the presence of WIC vendors within ZCTAs over time to study how
proximity to different types of vendors affects WIC take-up during pregnancy. Importantly,
while there is a substantial amount of variation in the presence of small WIC vendors due to
the reform, the number of large WIC grocers (e.g., major grocery chains such as Wal-Mart
and Vons) remained relatively stable over the sample time period, and over 95 percent of
mothers in our data have at least one WIC vendor (of any type) in their ZCTA of residence
during pregnancy. Thus, our empirical setting allows us to identify the distinct impacts of
proximity to small stores among mothers that already have access to a larger vendor in their
ZCTA.
    We find that among all mothers in our data, the presence of a small WIC vendor within
a mother's ZCTA is associated with a 0.8 percentage point increase in the likelihood she
receives WIC benefits during her pregnancy (1.6 percent at the sample mean). However,
the small average effect on take-up masks important subgroup heterogeneity. We begin
by distinguishing between first-time mothers, who are newly eligible for WIC, and women
giving birth to higher-order children, who may have participated in the past. Our results
show that among women with first births, the presence of a small WIC vendor in their ZCTA
of residence during pregnancy increases the likelihood of benefit take-up by 1.4 percentage
points (3.1 percent at the sample mean). By contrast, for women giving birth to higher-
parity children, the effect of a small vendor is small and insignificant. The increase in take-up
for first-time mothers exists even among those who also have a large WIC grocer in their
ZCTA, suggesting that small stores play a distinct role in providing access to newly eligible
women.6
    Moreover, we find that foreign-born first-time mothers experience larger participation
gains from having small vendors in their ZCTAs than their U.S.-born counterparts (3.8 per-
cent versus 2.7 percent, respectively). This pattern suggests that small vendors--especially
   6
     We present evidence from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) that is consistent with the notion
that first-time mothers face especially high learning costs when using the WIC program--WIC households
with only one child spend significantly more time grocery shopping than WIC households with multiple
children or other non-WIC-participating low-income households. In addition, interviews with WIC recipients
suggest a learning curve in identifying WIC-eligible products that dissipates with time spent in the program
(Chauvenet et al., 2019).



                                                     3
independent ethnic grocers--may be particularly well-suited for assisting non-native English
speakers with identifying eligible product sizes, ingredient lists, and other product character-
istics. It is also possible that small grocers encourage take-up through increasing awareness
and information within immigrant social networks (Figlio et al., 2015).
    That said, within-ZCTA differences in distance to stores may also be important. We find
that small WIC vendors are on average located in Census tracts that have a 3.3 percentage
point higher poverty rate than large vendors in the same ZCTA, which is a non-trivial
difference relative to the average poverty rate of 12.8 percent across all tracts with small
or large vendors in our data. As a result, the reform--which reduced the number of small
vendors while holding the number of large vendors constant--generated a disproportionate
reduction in WIC access and salience in the poorest areas in California.
    Lastly, we study whether proximity to so-called "A-50" WIC vendors--which are special-
ized small stores that derive 50 percent or more of their revenues from WIC customers and
were indirectly affected by the cost containment reform (see Section 2 for more details)--
influences take-up. We find some evidence that distance to the nearest A-50 vendor reduces
take-up for foreign-born first-time mothers, but not for other subgroups. The fact that the
effect of proximity to a small non-A-50 store is similar to (and, for some subgroups, stronger
than) the effect of proximity to an A-50 vendor suggests that stigma may not be the primary
barrier to program take-up, and that small stores need not serve mostly WIC customers in
order to facilitate program access among high-need groups.
    Our paper makes several contributions to the existing literature. Our analysis is related
to Meckel (2018), who studies the effects of an electronic payment reform in the Texas WIC
program that prevented WIC stores from charging different prices to their WIC and non-WIC
customers. She finds that the reform led to a decline in participation among independent
WIC vendors and reduced WIC take-up among eligible pregnant women. Our study differs
from Meckel (2018) in a few important ways. While Meckel (2018) examines a policy that
indirectly affected WIC vendors' incentive to participate due to a reduction in the payoff
from being in the program (via the prohibition of price discrimination), we instead analyze a
cost containment reform that more directly decreased the number of small vendors through
a moratorium and an explicit reduction in reimbursement rates. By directly targeting small
vendors, California's reform led to a disproportionate decline in access among the relatively
less-advantaged women who rely on these stores to redeem their benefits. Our results suggest
that while cost containment measures in public-private in-kind benefit provision contracts
may increase program efficiency by lowering costs, they may also reduce equity by lowering
access for vulnerable subgroups. Further, our empirical setting allows us to identify the
distinct effects of proximity to small vendors among women that also have access to larger


                                               4
WIC stores. We are therefore able to shed light on the unique role these vendors play
in reducing barriers to take-up for subgroups that face high program learning costs (e.g.,
first-time mothers and immigrants).7
    More broadly, our study relates to a literature that emphasizes the role of transaction
costs in determining the take-up of social programs (Currie, 2006). One strand of this liter-
ature argues that although transaction costs lower overall take-up, they may be desirable if
they increase the targeting of benefits toward the needy by differentially deterring utilization
among individuals for whom the benefit value is low (Kleven and Kopczuk, 2011; Nichols
and Zeckhauser, 1982; Besley and Coate, 1992). Consistent with this idea, recent experi-
mental work finds that lowering informational barriers and time costs decreases targeting in
the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP), as the marginal participants in-
duced to sign up by the treatment receive lower benefit amounts on average (Finkelstein and
Notowodigdo, 2018). In contrast, we provide evidence that a reduction in transaction costs
due to within-ZCTA availability of a small WIC grocer increases targeting in WIC, as poor
immigrant families are differentially induced to take up benefits.8 Our finding of a negative
relationship between transaction costs and targeting echoes the conclusions of recent work
by Deshpande and Li (2017), who show that closures of Social Security Administration field
offices (i.e., an increase in transaction costs) reduce disability benefit take-up differentially
among individuals with higher benefit amounts (i.e., consistent with a decrease in targeting).
    Finally, our findings are relevant to other in-kind transfer programs in which beneficiaries
must learn about unfamiliar goods or services, and the resulting learning costs generate
barriers to take-up. For example, recent evidence suggests that housing voucher program
participants who receive mobility counseling and housing search assistance are more likely to
move from lower income to higher income areas (Collinson et al., 2019). Our results suggest
that counseling interventions in the WIC program may be particularly helpful for first-time
users and those who have recently moved from a different country.
   7
     We also build on a small set of studies on the geographic determinants of WIC take-up, which focus on
proximity to WIC agencies and clinics, where individuals must go to apply for their benefits (Bitler et al.,
2003; Hoynes et al., 2011; Rossin-Slater, 2013). We instead focus on proximity to vendors, which are key
access points because they are the places where participants must redeem their benefits.
   8
     Children of immigrant parents are substantially more likely to live in low-income families than non-
immigrant children. For example, in California, 54 percent of children of immigrant parents live in low-
income families, compared to 36 percent of children of native-born parents. Source: http://www.nccp.org/
profiles/CA_profile_6.html.




                                                     5
2    Background

The WIC program was implemented in 1974 with the goal of improving the health and
nutritional well-being of low-income pregnant women and their young children. Recipients
are issued monthly quantity vouchers that they redeem for a specific set of nutritional foods
at participating private vendors ("WIC stores"). To be eligible, beneficiaries must live in
households with incomes below 185 percent of the poverty line and to be "at nutritional risk,"
although the latter requirement rarely binds.9 Annual expenditure on WIC was $5.4 billion
in 2018, and it served 1.6 million women, 1.7 million infants (approximately 50 percent of
infants nationwide), and 3.5 million children per month.10
    California WIC is the largest state WIC program, serving over one million women and
children in 2018, or 15 percent of participants nationwide. Eligibility verification and voucher
distribution occurs at WIC clinics, which exist in a variety of locations, including public
health departments, medical centers, community centers, schools, and churches. Participants
must return to these clinics every three months to receive a booklet of benefit vouchers that
covers the subsequent three months. Additional services, such as nutritional counseling and
health screenings, are also provided at the three-month clinic appointments.
    Monthly food benefits are assigned based on eligibility category (pregnant woman, post-
partum mother, infant, or child), as well as additional factors (breastfeeding status, dietary
restrictions, availability of refrigeration, etc.). As an example, in California in 2019, a preg-
nant woman could obtain the following food package on a monthly basis: 4.5 gallons milk
(lowfat or nonfat only), 36 ounces of breakfast cereal, 16 ounces of whole grains, 32 ounces
of yogurt, one dozen eggs, 16 ounces of cheese, 144 ounces of juice, 16 or 18 ounces of peanut
butter, and 16 ounces of beans.11
    Product eligibility is restricted based on a complex set of rules involving packaging size,
fat content, flavor, brand, and other attributes.12 For example, cheese must be in a 16 ounce
package and of the following varieties: cheddar, mozzarella, colby, or jack, or a blend of these
varieties. Cheese may not have added ingredients (e.g., jalapen     ~ o) and cannot be: organic,
   9
     WIC clients receive an initial health and diet screening at a WIC clinic to determine nutritional risk. WIC
uses two main categories of nutritional risk: (1) medically-based risks such as a history of poor pregnancy
outcome, underweight status, or iron-deficiency anemia, and (2) diet-based risks such as poor eating habits
that can lead to poor nutritional and health status. Clients are counseled at WIC about these risks and
the outcomes influenced by nutrition education and nutritious foods provided by WIC. See: https://www.
benefits.gov/benefits/benefit-details/2041 for more details.
  10
     Information about WIC program participation and funding is available at https://www.fns.usda.gov/
pd/wic-program.
  11
     Source: http://cms.sbcounty.gov/wic/WICFoods/FoodPackages.aspx.
  12
     California makes available a 19-page guide to these rules. See https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/
CFH/DWICSN/Pages/WICFoods.aspx.



                                                       6
diced, grated, sliced, crumbled, or shredded. For other foods, such as yogurt, eligibility is
further restricted to approved brands. Inside a WIC store, participants must locate the
eligible foods themselves and bring them to the register for checkout, where eligibility is
verified by the cashier.13
    WIC's product eligibility rules are meant to ensure the nutritional value of distributed
foods as well as to contain costs (e.g., by avoiding high-price brands).14 However, these
numerous restrictions may make the process of shopping as a WIC beneficiary onerous and
time-consuming, particularly for new participants. Qualitative research finds that WIC
recipients report a "learning curve" in finding eligible products with respect to one's time
on the program, so that those who have participated for longer can more quickly identify
eligible items (Chauvenet et al., 2019).

Shopping Time by WIC Participation. To provide further evidence of a "learning
curve" for participating in the WIC program, we present descriptive evidence on differences in
time spent grocery shopping between WIC participants and other low-income families using
data from the 2016 American Time Use Survey (ATUS).15 Importantly, for our purposes, the
2016 ATUS includes a module called "Eating and Health" that asks respondents whether they
participate in WIC ("In the last 30 days, did you or any member of your household receive
benefits from the WIC program, that is, the Women, Infants, and Children program?")
as well as their income relative to the poverty level and the number of children in their
household.
    We limit our sample to individuals in households with incomes under 185 percent of
the poverty line (i.e., the cut-off for WIC eligibility) and for whom we observe time spent
shopping in grocery stores. We then calculate average time per grocery shopping trip for the
following subgroups of this sample, applying ATUS survey weights: individuals in house-
holds with zero children, individuals in WIC households with one child, individuals in WIC
households with two or more children, individuals in non-WIC households with one child,
and individuals in non-WIC households with two or more children.16
    If the shopping experience for new WIC households involves a learning curve, then we
should expect to see that WIC households with one child spend more time shopping than
  13
     For some foods, such as cereal, different combinations are possible based on size (i.e., ounces), requiring
participants to perform calculations while shopping.
  14
     From the USDA: "The process [of choosing eligible foods] involves maximizing the nutritional value of
WIC food packages while at the same time managing cost." Source: https://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/
about-wic-wic-glance.
  15
     The ATUS is a nationally representative survey run by the Bureau of Labor Statistics that interviews
individuals aged 15 and over who participate in the Current Population Survey.
  16
     We drop individuals for whom the response to the question about WIC participation is missing/blank
and define "non-WIC" households as those who specifically answered "No" to the WIC question.


                                                       7
WIC households with two or more children, on average. Since there may be other reasons why
households with one child and households with two or more children spend different amounts
of time grocery shopping, we also consider differences in shopping time between low-income
households who report that they do not participate in WIC. Low-income households with
no children, who are mostly ineligible for WIC (indeed, none report participating in our
sample), are another comparison group.
    Figure 1 depicts the average time spent shopping per subgroup. The results are consistent
with a learning curve. WIC households with one child spend much more time shopping
than the other groups: 76.9 minutes on average, compared with 51.0 minutes for WIC
households with two or more children. The other groups all spend approximately 40 minutes
per shopping trip. Notably, the average for low-income non-WIC households by child parity
is quite similar--37.9 minutes for the one-child households and 38.9 for households with two
or more children.
    These results indicate that first-time mothers are likely to benefit from WIC vendors that
are easier to navigate and better at helping participants learn which products are eligible
and which aren't. We explore this conjecture through subgroup analyses in Section 5 below.

2.1    WIC Vendors and Cost Containment in California WIC

In California, WIC-authorized vendors consist of private food retailers of varying sizes and
formats. Supercenters (e.g., Wal-Mart), large grocery chains (e.g., Vons), as well as small
grocery, convenience, and even liquor stores can operate as WIC vendors. When WIC
participants use their benefits, vendors are reimbursed by the WIC program as follows:
During the WIC transaction, the cashier writes down the total value of foods distributed on
an indicated space on the participant's voucher.17 Then, the WIC vendor submits by mail
the vouchers they have received, and California WIC reimburses them via deposits into a
joint checking account.
    Importantly, because WIC participants are provided with fixed quantities of food regard-
less of the shelf prices, they are completely price-inelastic. Therefore, WIC vendors have an
incentive to charge higher prices for WIC-eligible products to increase their profits. In fact,
some WIC vendors--particularly smaller ones--have been found to charge different prices to
WIC and non-WIC customers, although doing so is fraudulent according to WIC program
rules (Government Accountability Office, 1999; Kamara et al., 2012; Saitone et al., 2015).
To avoid illegal price discrimination, other vendors may choose to serve primarily or only
WIC customers, and charge higher prices overall.
  17
    Note that since WIC transactions are not taxed, they are not processed like other transactions through
the cash register.


                                                    8
    To limit such responses, California WIC caps reimbursements using a price ceiling called
the maximum allowable department reimbursement (MADR). The MADR varies across
groups of vendors known as "peer groups". In particular, vendors are first categorized based
on whether or not they derive more than 50 percent of their food revenues from WIC; those
that do are labeled as "A-50" vendors ("Above 50"). Until 2012, non-A-50 vendors were
further categorized into peer groups according to store size (three groups based on the num-
ber of cash registers: 1-2 registers, 3-4 registers, and 5+ registers) and geographic region.
For each WIC product, the MADR was set using a function of the average prices for that
product within each peer group; for A-50 vendors, the MADR was a function of prices in all
other stores. This structure created a strong incentive for small non-A-50 vendors to charge
exorbitantly high prices for WIC goods, as they were reimbursed by the program based on
the average within the small store peer group only. For example, a 2012 New York Times
article reported on a small California retailer charging $7.80 for a package of tortillas, which
was reimbursed entirely by the program (Mieszkowki, 2012).
    To combat this problem, the USDA mandated that the California WIC program issue a
moratorium on all new WIC vendor applications, starting in April 2012. The moratorium
was to be be lifted once California had demonstrated its ability to control costs among its
small vendors. Accordingly, in May 2012, California WIC changed the MADR for small
stores (i.e., those with 1-4 cash registers) to be a function of the competitive statewide
average of prices of goods in large stores with five or more cash registers.18 This reform
resulted in a substantial drop in the reimbursement rate for small non-A-50 vendors. The
A-50 vendors, whose MADR remained a function of the average prices in all other stores,
also experienced a drop in their reimbursement rate, albeit indirectly.19 The moratorium
was lifted in June 2014.
    Figure 2 uses data from the USDA Food & Nutrition Service to plot the trend in Califor-
nia's average WIC food cost per participant over the period March 2010 to December 2015
using 2010$. Over this time period, the cost per participant falls from $47.47 in March 2010
to $42.37 in December 2015. The cost per participant rises over 2010 and 2011, with a large
  18
     Specifically, stores with 1-2 cash registers had an MADR set at 15 percent above the average among
large stores, whereas stores with 3-4 registers had an MADR set at 11 percent above the average among
large stores.
  19
     Further, in October 2013, the WIC program adopted a set of 19 authorization criteria that must be met
to become a WIC-authorized store. These include regulations regarding health permits, adequate inventory
records, minimum stocking requirements, conflicts of interest with the program, and opening hours, among
others. In June 2014, WIC established new vendor peer group categories and subgroups: Category A =
A-50 stores; Category B = full-line grocery stores, divided into 4 subgroups based on the number of cash
registers (1-2, 3-5, 6-9, 10+); Category C = all other stores. Full-line grocery stores must meet minimum
stocking requirements outlined by the WIC program. See California Department of Public Health (2015) for
more details.



                                                    9
spike in August and September of 2011, when the costs are $63.47 and $61.24, respectively.
Note that this fast increase is driven entirely by a rise in total costs rather than a decline in
participants, and appears around the time of heightened participation in WIC among small
non-A-50 vendors (see further discussion in Section 3 below). The costs go back to July
2011 levels in the last three months of 2011, and then drop again in 2012, at the time of
the reform. Costs per participant have steadily fluctuated around the low $40s in the time
period since the reform.
    Thus, it appears that the cost containment reform in California's WIC program achieved
its first-order goal of lowering average food costs. In the remainder of this paper, we explore
a potential unintended consequence of the reform. In particular, we examine whether the
cost containment reform generated a reduction in access to benefits among the WIC-eligible
population and whether some subgroups were disproportionately impacted.


3        Data

We use two main data sets in our analysis: (1) administrative data on the universe of
WIC vendors from March 2010 to December 2015 from the California WIC program, and
(2) restricted-use California birth records data from the California Department of Public
Health.

Data on WIC vendors. The California WIC program maintains up-to-date lists of all
authorized vendors, with information on the store names and addresses. These lists are
periodically posted on the program's website.20 We used an Internet archive tool called
Wayback Machine (http://archive.org/web/) to access previous versions of the website,
and as a result obtained unique lists of vendors from the following months: February 2012,
June 2012, October 2012, November 2012, June 2013, April 2014, and June 2014.21 We also
use the list for February 2013, which we had downloaded when it was originally published.
Additionally, we received lists for the months of March 2010 and January 2011, as well
as weekly lists starting in November 2014 directly from two individuals who had saved
them when they were originally published: Michael Amiri, chief executive at Nutricion
    20
     See: https://www.cdph.ca.gov/Programs/CFH/DWICSN/Pages/ResearchandData/WICVendorInfo.
aspx.
  21
     The structure of the WIC program website has changed over time. To access the lists of vendors before
2015, we must use the following url address in the Wayback Machine : http://www.cdph.ca.gov/programs/
wicworks/Pages/default.aspx. We also attempted to obtain these data directly from the California WIC
program office, but were told that although they maintain current lists of authorized vendors, they do not
retain past ones as they are continually written over (personal communication with Susan Sabatier, Chief of
the Data Analysis, Research and Evaluation Section in WIC, 12/5/2017).



                                                    10
Fundamental, Inc., a chain of A-50 stores in California, and Clyde Steele, the Chief of the
Vendor Management Branch in the California WIC program over 2009-2013.
    While information on vendor names and addresses is publicly available, federal law pro-
hibits the release of peer group information.22 We therefore used a variety of methods to
categorize the WIC vendors into three groups: large stores that likely have 5 or more cash
registers, small non-A-50 stores with fewer than 5 registers, and A-50 stores. We first identi-
fied all national and regional chain stores (e.g., Albertson's, Safeway, Vons, Wal-Mart, etc.)
and coded them as being "large". To classify the remaining stores, we relied on the store
name and individual web searches. In particular, A-50 stores commonly have the words
"Mother," "Baby," or "Nutrition" in their names, making them distinguishable from other
small stores. Additionally, we relied on store websites as well as Yelp reviews and photos to
obtain information on the likely number of cash registers. Finally, we consulted with Michael
Amiri and Clyde Steele with regard to our classifications. Appendix B provides more details
on this process.
    Figure 3a plots trends in the numbers of these three types of vendors from March 2010
to December 2015. The figure shows an increase in the number of small non-A-50 vendors in
the first period of the data until a maximum of 1,904 in February 2012, followed by a marked
decline to 851 in December 2015. The number of A-50 vendors drops as well, from 679 in
February 2012 to 447 in December 2015. By contrast, the number of large vendors is fairly
steady, ranging between 2,685 and 2,965 over the time period examined. These patterns are
consistent with the fact that the MADR reform affected small non-A-50 vendors directly,
A-50 stores indirectly, and large stores not at all.
    Appendix Figure A.1 examines the geographic distribution of small non-A-50 vendor
density across California ZCTAs in February 2012 versus December 2015. For each ZCTA
in each month, we calculate the ratio of the total number of small vendors over the total
population age 5 and under from 2010 Census data (× 1,000).23 The maps show an overall
decline in small vendor density in California, with particularly substantial declines in ZCTAs
located in the middle of the state.
    We collapse the vendor data to a ZCTA×month panel using all of the available months of
data, and then interpolate between months to obtain non-missing vendor information for each
month between March 2010 and December 2015. For our main analysis, we use indicators
for any small non-A-50 vendor and any A-50 vendor as the key explanatory variables.24 We
  22
     These regulations are located in: 7 C.F.R. §246.26(e).
  23
     We trim the ratio at the 99th percentile to discard outliers in small ZCTAs.
  24
     The interpolation implies that whenever a ZCTA switches from a positive number to zero vendors
between non-consecutive lists, we assume that the switch happens only in the month of the next list. For
example, if there is one small vendor in February 2012 and zero small vendors in June 2012, then we effectively



                                                      11
do not include an indicator for any large vendor in our main regression models because there
is very little variation in the presence of a large vendor within ZCTAs over our analysis time
frame.25
    Finally, to shed light on the locations of small versus large WIC stores within ZCTAs,
we match stores to their Census tracts and merge in data on the share of households living
below the poverty line in each tract from the 2010 Census (Census Bureau, 2010).26 If small
WIC vendors are located in poorer neighborhoods within ZCTAs than large WIC vendors,
then the reform may lead to an increase in distance to the nearest WIC store for households
living in these areas. Indeed, we find that the average small vendor is located in a Census
tract in which the poverty rate is 3.4 percentage points higher than the poverty rate of
tracts with large stores in the same ZCTA. This difference is large when compared to the
12.8 percent average poverty rate among tracts with either small or large vendors. Thus,
the reduction in small vendors following the cost containment reform leads to a decrease in
the presence of WIC stores in high-poverty Census tracts in California--over our analysis
time frame, the average poverty rate of Census tracts with at least one vendor falls by 0.9
percentage points. This means that, although most women have a large WIC vendor in their
ZCTA even after the reform, there may still be an increase in access costs among women in
the poorest neighborhoods.

California births data. The births data come from administrative records held by the
California Department of Public Health. The data contain detailed information about the
newborn child and the parents.27 Importantly, these data have information about WIC
assume that the small vendor only disappears in June 2012 and not earlier. Analogously, if a ZCTA switches
from zero vendors to at least one vendor between non-consecutive lists, then we assume that the vendor
appears in the first skipped month. So, if there are no small vendors in March 2010 and one small vendor
in January 2011, we assume that there is one small vendor starting in April 2010. To assess the impact of
these assumptions, we examine the sensitivity of our results to only using data with non-interpolated data,
finding very similar estimates.
   25
      Models that include an indicator for any large vendor as an explanatory variable yield very similar
results.
   26
      Specifically, we use the store addresses and geocode them using three different strategies. We first
geocode addresses using ArcGIS software. For the addresses that remain unmatched to map locations at
the street level or more precisely, we then use Opencage geocoding software. For addresses that still remain
unmatched, we then use the Census geocoder. For more information on these statistical packages, please
see: https://www.arcgis.com/index.html, https://opencagedata.com/api, and https://geocoding.
geo.census.gov/. Finally, we use Census tract boundary shapefiles from the 2010 Census to match each
successfully geocoded store to its Census tract. The Census tract shapefile can be found here: https:
//www.census.gov/geographies/mapping-files/time-series/geo/tiger-line-file.2010.html. Our
method results in an 86% match rate between unique WIC store addresses and Census tracts in California.
   27
      The data come from two sources: medical data about the child, pregnancy, and delivery are recorded
by the hospital of delivery, while information about maternal behaviors are self-reported by the mother in a
questionnaire that she completes while in the hospital.



                                                    12
benefit receipt during pregnancy, which is our key outcome variable.28
    The data also contain rich demographic information about the mothers, including age,
education level, race/ethnicity, and nativity.29 Importantly, the data contain the mother's
(self-reported) ZIP code of residence, which allow us to match mothers to information about
WIC vendor presence during their pregnancy.30
    We calculate the estimated month and year of conception for each birth using information
on the birth month and year and gestation length, and limit the data to singleton births with
conceptions between March 2010 and March 2015. We then create indicators for whether
mothers have access to each of the three types of vendors described above in their ZCTA
in months 0 through 9 post-conception. We do not use the actual length of the pregnancy
to assign WIC vendor presence as gestation length may be endogenous to WIC receipt (for
more discussion on the relationship between WIC and gestation length, see, e.g.: Bitler and
Currie, 2005; Joyce et al., 2005; Rossin-Slater, 2013).
    Table 1 shows variable means in the births data for our entire sample (column 1), and
separately by mothers who do and do not have at least one small non-A-50 WIC vendor in
their ZCTA of residence during the expected pregnancy period. Across most characteristics,
mothers who have at least one small non-A-50 vendor during pregnancy are less advantaged
than those who do not--they are less educated, are more likely to be non-Hispanic black,
Hispanic, and foreign-born, have worse birth outcomes, and are more likely to be covered
by Medi-Cal. They are also substantially more likely to take up WIC than mothers who do
not have a small non-A-50 vendor in their ZCTA. The difference in WIC take-up is likely
due to a combination of several causes, including vendor presence as well as the differential
composition of mothers across the two groups of ZCTAs, pointing to the importance of using
a research design that leverages vendor variation within rather than across ZCTAs.
    Figures 3b, 3c, and 3d plot the share of mothers with at least one WIC store of each type
(large, small non-A-50, and A-50, respectively) in their ZCTA of residence during months 0
to 9 post-conception over our analysis time period. Consistent with the minimal change in
the number of large WIC vendors in Figure 3a, the share of mothers with a large vendor in
their ZCTA is quite high and relatively stable, at 92 to 93.5 percent. However, the share of
  28
     These data also contain information about other maternal prenatal behaviors (e.g., smoking, weight
gain, prenatal care visits), birth outcomes (child sex, birth order, plurality, birth weight in grams, gestation
length in weeks, an indicator for any abnormal conditions of the newborn, and an indicator for whether
the child has died by the time the birth certificate is filed), and characteristics of labor and delivery (e.g.,
Caesarean section delivery, any complications). Since the focus of this paper is on WIC take-up, we do not
use these additional outcomes in our main analysis.
  29
     We also have more limited information about the fathers. To proxy for father involvement at the time
of childbirth, we create an indicator for whether the father information is missing from the birth certificate.
  30
     We use a ZIP code to ZCTA crosswalk available at: https://www.udsmapper.org/zcta-crosswalk.
cfm.


                                                      13
mothers with at least one small non-A-50 vendor in their ZCTA drops from a maximum of
67 percent among mothers who conceived in May 2010 to a minimum of 48 percent among
mothers who conceived in January 2015. The share of mothers with at least one A-50 vendor
in their ZCTA also drops over the analysis time frame, from about 55 percent to about 45
percent. We explore whether this reduction in small non-A-50 and A-50 vendors (during a
time of high and stable access to large vendors) influences WIC take-up in the subsequent
analysis.


4    Empirical Design

As shown in Figure 3a, the cost containment reform appears to have led to a large reduction
in the number of small non-A-50 vendors in California (and a somewhat smaller reduction in
the number of A-50 vendors). As a consequence, mothers living in ZCTAs with at least one
small vendor before the reform went into effect are substantially more likely to have had a
decline in access to a small vendor than mothers in ZCTAs without a small vendor. Since the
decline in vendors is arguably driven by supply-side rather than demand-side factors (i.e.,
the reduction in the MADR and a moratorium on new vendor applications as opposed to
changes in preferences of the WIC-eligible population), we exploit within-ZCTA changes in
vendor presence as a natural experiment to identify the effects of different types of vendors
on WIC take-up.
    Specifically, we estimate models of the form:

          Yizym = 0 + 1 AnySzym + 2 AnyA50zym + xizym  + z + y + m + izym                                 (1)

for each mother i residing in ZCTA z with conception year y and month m. Yizym is an
outcome of interest, such as an indicator for WIC receipt during pregnancy. AnySzym and
AnyA50zym are indicators for any small non-A-50 and any A-50 vendor in the mother's ZCTA
of residence during months 0 to 9 post-conception, respectively.31 The vector xizym includes
the following controls: maternal age group dummies (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+, missing),
maternal education dummies (less than high school, high school, some college, college or
more, missing), maternal race/ethnicity dummies (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black,
Hispanic, other race, missing), indicator for mother being foreign-born, indicator for the
father's information being missing from the birth certificate, and parity dummies (1st, 2nd,
  31
     We have also estimated regressions using the ratios of the two types of vendors over the total population
age 5 and under as the explanatory variables. It appears that any significant effects of WIC vendor presence
are driven by the extensive margin (i.e., moving from zero to at least one vendor), and we therefore focus
on those specifications here.



                                                     14
3rd child or higher). We also include ZCTA fixed effects, z , as well as fixed effects for the
conception year and month, y and m . izym is the error term, and we cluster standard
errors at the maternal ZCTA of residence level. We are interested in the estimates of 1 and
2 , which respectively correspond to the impacts of having at least one small non-A-50 and
at least one A-50 vendor on the outcome.
    We also present results from models that add in placebo indicators for the presence of
any vendors in the 9 months after the estimated month of delivery (i.e., post-pregnancy).
Significant coefficients on the placebo variables would suggest that there may be trends in
WIC vendor presence that confound the results.
    Additionally, we estimate event-study models, in which we focus on a sample of births
that are conceived in a two-year window surrounding the month of the last small WIC
vendor closure in each ZCTA that experiences one. We include indicators for conceptions
in three-month periods starting from 10-12 months before the closure and ending with 9-11
months after the closure; conceptions 7-9 months before the closure (i.e., for whom most of
the pregnancy was exposed to a small WIC vendor) serve as the omitted category.

Identifying assumption. Causal identification of the effects of WIC vendor presence
relies on the assumption that within-ZCTA changes in vendor composition are uncorrelated
with other time-varying determinants of WIC take-up. We would face a violation of this
assumption if, for example, ZCTAs where small vendors exited following the cost containment
reform were also experiencing differential trends in demographic or economic variables that
separately impacted demand for WIC. As discussed above, to assess this possibility, we
test whether there are any significant coefficients on placebo indicators for WIC vendor
presence post-pregnancy (see Section 5) and examine trends in WIC take-up for conceptions
in months surrounding a WIC vendor closure. We also evaluate the plausibility of the
identifying assumption in two other ways.
    First, Appendix Table A.1 presents estimates from a regression based on the WIC vendor
data for ZCTAs that ever have at least one vendor (of any type) over our time period of
analysis. For each ZCTA, we calculate the difference between the any vendor indicator of
each type in February 2012 (i.e., right before the reforms went into effect) and December
2015, the last month in our data. Thus, a negative number corresponds to a decline in WIC
vendor presence, while a positive number corresponds to an increase. We then regress these
differences on ZCTA demographic and economic characteristics from the 2010 Census and
2011 American Communities Survey (ACS), which we parametrize as indicator variables for
values above or below the sample medians. The table shows that there is little correlation
between available ZCTA characteristics and changes in vendor composition. In fact, when


                                             15
one considers column (3), which shows results for within-ZCTA changes in small vendor
presence, there are no statistically significant associations with any of the characteristics
that we consider.
    Second, in Table 2, we examine the correlation between maternal characteristics in the
births data and our WIC vendor variables in models with fixed effects for ZCTA, concep-
tion year, and conception month. In particular, we estimate versions of equation (1) using
different maternal variables as outcomes and omitting the control variables in xizym . Out of
the 18 coefficients reported in this table, only one is statistically significant at the 5% level.
Moreover, when one considers the middle row with coefficients on the AnySzym indicator--
which accounts for most of the variation in WIC vendor presence--we see no significant or
economically meaningful relationships with the maternal characteristics.
    In sum, we find little evidence of confounding variation, implying that within-ZCTA
changes in WIC vendor presence can be used to identify causal impacts of WIC vendors on
our outcomes of interest.


5    Results

Table 3 presents results from estimating model (1), with an indicator for WIC take-up during
pregnancy as the dependent variable. In column (1), we show that among all mothers of
singleton births in our analysis sample, the presence of a small non-A-50 WIC vendor in the
mother's ZCTA of residence during pregnancy increases the likelihood of WIC benefit receipt
by 0.8 percentage points, or 1.6 percent when evaluated at the sample mean. In columns (2)
and (3), we split the sample into mothers of first-born and higher-parity children, respectively,
and show that the effect on WIC take-up is entirely concentrated among first-time mothers.
For these mothers, we find that within-ZCTA access to a small non-A-50 vendor increases
WIC take-up by 1.4 percentage points, or 3 percent at the sample mean. In columns (4) and
(5), we further separate first-time mothers into those who are born in the United States and
those who are born in other countries. While we see a significant effect for both groups, the
estimated increase in WIC take-up is larger both in absolute and relative terms for mothers
who are foreign-born. These results are consistent with the idea that small WIC vendors
reduce barriers to take-up for women who are least familiar with the program (i.e., first-time
mothers) and who may face particularly high learning costs (i.e., foreign-born mothers).
    Table 3 also demonstrates that there is no significant effect of within-ZCTA availability
of an A-50 vendor on WIC take-up among any of the subgroups. This pattern of findings
suggests that stigma--which A-50 stores are designed to reduce by catering primarily to WIC



                                               16
customers--may not be a key barrier to program take-up.32 That said, there is less within-
ZCTA variation in A-50 vendor presence than in small non-A-50 vendor presence, which
may limit our ability to detect significant effects of A-50 presence. In Appendix Table A.2,
we address this issue by calculating the distance between the mother's ZCTA of residence
and the nearest ZCTA with at least one WIC vendor of each type. For the whole sample of
first-time mothers and for foreign-born first-time mothers, we find that an additional mile in
distance to the nearest small non-A-50 vendor reduces the likelihood of WIC take-up by 0.03
and 0.04 percentage points, respectively. Further, it appears that distance to the nearest
A-50 vendor matters for first-time foreign mothers as well--an additional mile in distance
to an A-50 vendor reduces the probability of WIC receipt by 0.05 percentage points.
    Table 4 presents results from regressions that also include placebo indicators for the
presence of A-50 and small non-A-50 stores in the nine months post-pregnancy. None of the
placebo coefficients is statistically significant, while the coefficients for the main effects of
vendor presence during pregnancy are similar to those reported in Table 3.
    Figure 4 shows the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from event-study regressions
for all first-time mothers in panel (a) and foreign-born first-time mothers in panel (b). These
analyses use a sample of births conceived in the one year before and after the last small WIC
vendor closure in each ZCTA. We find no significant differences in WIC benefit receipt
between mothers who conceived in various 3-month periods before the small vendor closure,
suggesting that the timing of exposure to the vendor during or before pregnancy does not
materially predict WIC take-up. However, relative to mothers who conceive 7-9 months
before the last small vendor closure, mothers who conceive after the last small vendor closure
are significantly less likely to take-up WIC.
    To assess the influence of measurement error from interpolating WIC vendor data on our
estimates, Appendix Table A.3 presents results for a sample of mothers for whom months 0
through 9 post-conception overlap with at least one month from which we have WIC vendor
data. The estimates for all first-time mothers and for foreign-born first-time mothers are very
similar to those presented in Table 3, suggesting that measurement error from interpolation
is not a major concern.
    Lastly, Table 5 presents results from estimating model (1) on a sample of mothers who
have at least one large WIC vendor in their ZCTA of residence during pregnancy. We continue
to see positive effects of within-ZCTA availability of small non-A-50 vendors on WIC take-up
in this sample, driven by first-time and immigrant mothers. This result suggests that small
  32
    It is also possible that mothers may prefer small, non-WIC-specialized stores over the A-50 ones as the
former group offers a wider range of products, enabling them to do their WIC- and non-WIC shopping in
one place.



                                                    17
vendors may be uniquely effective at reducing learning costs above and beyond other (larger)
nearby stores. Further, given that small vendors tend to be located in poorer areas than
large vendors in the same ZCTA, small vendors may be differentially salient and convenient
for the least advantaged women in California.


6   Conclusion

The WIC program is a pillar of the U.S. social safety net that targets the health and well-
being of millions of poor pregnant women and young children. While a large literature
examines the impacts of WIC on infant and child health and development (Currie, 2003;
Bitler and Currie, 2005; Joyce et al., 2005; Lee and Mackey-Bilaver, 2007; Figlio et al.,
2009; Foster et al., 2010; Hoynes et al., 2011; Marshall et al., 2013; Rossin-Slater, 2013;
Edmunds et al., 2014; Currie and Rajani, 2015; Metallinos-Katsaras et al., 2015; Sonchak,
2016; Gregory et al., 2016; Jackson and Mayne, 2016; Fingar et al., 2017; Chorniy et al.,
2018) much less is known about the costs and benefits associated with how the program is
administered. While the complex rules about eligible products may encourage beneficiaries
to make healthier food choices, they may also serve as a barrier to subgroups with high
learning costs. At the same time, while small vendors may disproportionately drive up
program costs, they may also facilitate program access for these vulnerable subgroups who
would have otherwise opted out from using the program.
    We study these issues in the context of a cost containment reform in California, which
targeted small vendors, and resulted in a substantial reduction in the number of such vendors
serving WIC customers. We collect data on WIC vendors and link them to California birth
records data. We leverage variation in the presence of different types of WIC vendors over
time within a mother's ZCTA to examine how proximity to WIC vendors affects benefit take-
up. Our results show that the presence of a small non-WIC-specialized vendor in the mother's
ZCTA during pregnancy increases the rate of WIC benefit receipt by 0.8 percentage points
(1.5 percent). The effect on take-up is driven by first-time mothers, and is larger for foreign-
born than for U.S.-born mothers, suggesting that small vendors may be particularly effective
at increasing access for WIC participants with high learning costs. We find that proximity
to small specialized WIC vendors for foreign-born first-time mothers has a similarly-sized
effects, which suggests that stigma, which these stores are specifically designed to curb, is
not a key barrier to take-up.
    The effect of small vendors on take-up exists even for women live near a large WIC grocer,
suggesting that the observed effect is not driven entirely by changes in vendor proximity, but
rather that small vendors play a distinct role in driving WIC take-up. However, we also


                                              18
present evidence that smaller WIC stores are located in higher poverty Census tracts within
ZCTAs than larger vendors. Given that the participation effects are concentrated among
first-time users of the program, it may be that convenience costs are particularly important
for this subgroup or that having a vendor within one's Census tract increases program salience
and awareness. An alternative mechanism is that small stores are particularly effective in
lowering the costs of learning how to differentiate between eligible and ineligible products for
first-time participants, due to the smaller range of products they offer as well as the higher
likelihood that they have bilingual staff. To this point, we present evidence from time-use
data that first-time WIC participants spend far more time grocery shopping than individuals
who are more likely to have previously used the program, as well as low-income ineligible
households.
    Our results have implications for understanding the trade-offs associated with cost con-
tainment and program efficiency and equity in settings where public benefits are delivered
by private firms. While our estimates suggest that California's cost containment reform
may have differentially reduced program access among particularly vulnerable populations,
including first-time and immigrant mothers, it is important to consider how the additional
funds available due to cost containment are used. If, for example, they are used for outreach
and educational interventions, then they may lead to increased program access (e.g., see
Aizer, 2007 for evidence on the effects of such interventions in the case of Medicaid). These
questions are particularly important in light of the evidence that WIC benefit receipt is asso-
ciated with improved infant health (Bitler and Currie, 2005; Figlio et al., 2009; Rossin-Slater,
2013; Currie and Rajani, 2015; Sonchak, 2016; Fingar et al., 2017) and the growing literature
on the lasting consequences of early life conditions (Almond et al., 2018; Almond and Currie,
2011; Barker, 1990). Increasing efficiency and equity in WIC would enable the program to
play a bigger role in reducing disparities in early-life health and subsequent long-term and
intergenerational health and human capital trajectories in the United States.

References
Aizer, A. (2007). Public health insurance, program take-up, and child health. The Review
  of Economics and Statistics, 89 (3), 400­415.
Alcott, H., Diamand, R., Dube, J.-P., Handbury, J., Rahkovsky, I. and Schnell,
 M. (2019). Food deserts and the causes of nutritional inequality. The Quarterly Journal
 of Economics, forthcoming.
Almond, D. and Currie, J. (2011). Human capital development before age five. In
 O. Ashenfleter and D. Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, vol. 4, Elsevier, pp.
 1315­1486.


                                              19
--, -- and Duque, V. (2018). Childhood circumstances and adult outcomes: Act ii. Journal
  of Economic Literature, 56 (4), 1360­1446.
Ayala, G. X., Mueller, K., Lopez-Madurga, E., Campbell, N. R. and Elder,
 J. P. (2005). Restaurant and food shopping selections among latino women in southern
 california. Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 105 (1), 38 ­ 45.
Barker, D. J. (1990). The fetal and infant origins of adult disease. BMJ: British Medical
 Journal, 301 (6761), 1111.
Besley, T. and Coate, S. (1992). Understanding Welfare Stigma: Taxpayer Resentment
 and Statistical Discrimination. Journal of Public Economics, 48 (2), 165­83.
Bitler, M. P. and Currie, J. (2005). Does wic work? the effects of wic on pregnancy
  and birth outcomes. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 24 (1), 73­91.
--, -- and Scholz, J. K. (2003). Wic eligibility and participation. Journal of Human
  resources, pp. 1139­1179.
-- and Haider, S. J. (2011). An economic view of food deserts in the united states. Journal
  of Policy Analysis and Management, 30 (1), 153­176.
California Department of Public Health (2015). California wic vendor rules change
 overview. Presentation Slides. Downloaded from the California Department of Public
 Health website on September 2, 2015.
Census Bureau (2010). Poverty status in the past 12 months (s1701), 2010 decennial
 census. http://factfinder.census.gov, accessed on 1/10/2020.
Chauvenet, C., Marco, M. D., Barnes, C. and Ammerman, A. S. (2019). Wic
 recipients in the retail environment: A qualitative study assessing customer experience
 and satisfaction. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics, 119 (3), 416 ­ 424.e2.
Chorniy, A. V., Currie, J. and Sonchak, L. (2018). Does Prenatal WIC Participation
 Improve Child Outcomes? Working Paper 24691, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Collinson, R., Ellen, I. G. and Ludwig, J. (2019). Reforming housing assistance. The
 ANNALS of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 686 (1), 250­285.
Currie, J. (2003). U.s. food and nutrition programs. In R. A. Moffitt (ed.), Means-tested
 transfer programs in the U.S., The University of Chicago Press.
-- (2006). The take-up of social benefits. In A. Auerbach, D. Card and J. Quigley (eds.),
  Poverty, the Distribution of Income, and Public Policy, New York: Russell Sage, pp.
  80­148.
-- and Gahvari, F. (2008). Transfers in cash and in-kind: Theory meets the data. Journal
  of Economic Literature, 46 (2), 333­83.
-- and Rajani, I. (2015). Within-mother estimates of the effects of wic on birth outcomes
  in new york city. Economic inquiry, 53 (4), 1691­1701.
Deshpande, M. and Li, Y. (2017). Who is screened out? application costs and the targeting
 of disability programs. Tech. rep., National Bureau of Economic Research.

                                            20
Edmunds, L. S., Sekhobo, J. P., Dennison, B. A., Chiasson, M. A., Stratton,
 H. H. and Davison, K. K. (2014). Association of prenatal participation in a public
 health nutrition program with healthy infant weight gain. American journal of public
 health, 104 (S1), S35­S42.
Figlio, D., Hamersma, S. and Roth, J. (2009). Does prenatal wic participation improve
  birth outcomes? new evidence from florida. Journal of Public Economics, 93 (1), 235­245.
Figlio, D. N., Hamersma, S. and Roth, J. (2015). Information shocks and the take-up
  of social programs. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 34 (4), 781­804.
Fingar, K. R., Lob, S. H., Dove, M. S., Gradziel, P. and Curtis, M. P. (2017). Re-
  assessing the association between wic and birth outcomes using a fetuses-at-risk approach.
  Maternal and child health journal, 21 (4), 825­835.
Finkelstein, A. and Notowodigdo, M. J. (2018). Take-up and Targeting: Experimental
  Evidence from SNAP. Working Paper 24652, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Foster, E. M., Jiang, M. and Gibson-Davis, C. M. (2010). The effect of the wic
 program on the health of newborns. Health services research, 45 (4), 1083­1104.
Government Accountability Office (1999). Efforts To Control Fraud and Abuse in
 the WIC Program Can Be Strengthened. Report to Congressional Committee GAO-RCED-
 99D224GAO.
Gregory, E. F., Gross, S. M., Nguyen, T. Q., Butz, A. M. and Johnson, S. B.
 (2016). Wic participation and breastfeeding at 3 months postpartum. Maternal and child
 health journal, 20 (8), 1735­1744.
Grodsky, D., Violante, A., Barrows, A. and Gosliner, W. (2017). Using Behavioral
 Science to Improve the WIC Experience: Lessons from the field from San Jose, California.
 Report, ideas42.
Hendren, N. and Sprung-Keyser, B. D. (2019). A Unified Welfare Analysis of Govern-
 ment Policies. Working Paper 26144, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hoynes, H., Page, M. and Stevens, A. H. (2011). Can targeted transfers improve
 birth outcomes?: Evidence from the introduction of the wic program. Journal of Public
 Economics, 95 (7), 813­827.
Jackson, M. I. and Mayne, P. (2016). Child access to the nutritional safety net during
  and after the great recession: The case of wic. Social Science & Medicine, 170, 197­207.
Joyce, T., Gibson, D. and Colman, S. (2005). The changing association between pre-
  natal participation in wic and birth outcomes in new york city. Journal of Policy Analysis
  and Management, 24 (4), 661­685.
Kamara, S. G., Castellanos-Brown, K. and Mantovani, R. (2012). Improper Pay-
 ments to WIC Vendors: 2005-2008. Tech. rep., U.S. Department of Agriculture, Food and
 Nutrition Service, Office of Research and Analysis, Alexandria, VA, project Officer: Karen
 Castellanos-Brown.
Kleven, H. J. and Kopczuk, W. (2011). Transfer Program Complexity and the Take-Up
 of Social Benefits. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 3 (1), 54­90.

                                            21
Lee, B. J. and Mackey-Bilaver, L. (2007). Effects of wic and food stamp program
  participation on child outcomes. Children and Youth Services Review, 29 (4), 501­517.
Marshall, C., Gavin, L., Bish, C., Winter, A., Williams, L., Wesley, M. and
 Zhang, L. (2013). Wic participation and breastfeeding among white and black mothers:
 data from mississippi. Maternal and child health journal, 17 (10), 1784­1792.
Meckel, K. (2018). Is the cure worse than the disease? unintended consequences of fraud
 reduction in transfer programs, UCSD, unpublished manuscript.
Metallinos-Katsaras, E., Brown, L. and Colchamiro, R. (2015). Maternal wic par-
 ticipation improves breastfeeding rates: a statewide analysis of wic participants. Maternal
 and child health journal, 19 (1), 136­143.
Mieszkowki, K. (2012). Gouged by some small groceries, food program cracks down.
 The New York Times, April 21, 2012. Available at: http://www.nytimes.com/2012/04/
 22/us/wic-caps-california-reimbursements-after-stores-raise-food-prices.
 html?pagewanted=all&_r=0. Last accessed: January 22, 2015.
Moffitt, R. (1983). An economic model of welfare stigma. The American Economic Re-
 view, 73 (5), 1023­1035.
Nichols, A. L. and Zeckhauser, R. J. (1982). Targeting Transfers through Restrictions
  on Recipients. American Economic Review, 72 (2), 372­77.
Rossin-Slater, M. (2013). WIC in your neighborhood: New evidence on the impacts of
 geographic access to clinics. Journal of Public Economics, 102 (0), 51 ­ 69.
Saitone, T., Sexton, R. and Volpe, R. (2013). A WICked Problem? Cost Containment
  in the Women, Infants and Children Program. Working paper, seminar, Washington State
  University.
--, -- and -- (2015). A wicked problem? cost containment in the women, infants and
  children program. Applied Economic Perspectives and Policy, 37 (3), 378­402.
Sanchez-Flack, J. C., Baquero, B., Linnan, L. A., Gittelsohn, J., Pickrel,
  J. L. and Ayala, G. X. (2016). What influences latino grocery shopping behavior?
  perspectives on the small food store environment from managers and employees in san
  diego, california. Ecology of Food and Nutrition, 55 (2), 163­181.
Sonchak, L. (2016). The impact of wic on birth outcomes: New evidence from south
  carolina. Maternal and child health journal, 20 (7), 1518­1525.
Waldfogel, J. (2007). The Tyranny of the Market: Why You Can't Always Get What You
 Want. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.




                                            22
 Figure 1: Average Number of Minutes Spent Grocery Shopping, Low-Income Households



                    100
                    80
          Minutes
                    60
                    40
                    20



                                    n




                                                     IC




                                                                        IC




                                                                                           IC




                                                                                                                   IC
                                  re




                                                  W




                                                                      W




                                                                                         W




                                                                                                                 W
                                 ld




                                                 ,




                                                                   n,




                                                                                       o
                              hi




                                                                                                               o
                                              ld




                                                                                    ,N




                                                                                                             N
                              C




                                                                   re
                                             hi




                                                                                                          n,
                                                                 ld
                          o




                                         tC




                                                                                  ld
                          N




                                                                                                          re
                                                               hi




                                                                                hi
                                        1s




                                                           C




                                                                                                        ld
                                                                               C




                                                                                                     hi
                                                          2+




                                                                                t
                                                                             1s




                                                                                                 C
                                                                                                2+

Notes: This figure plots the average number of minutes spent grocery shopping by subgroup based on data
from the 2016 American Time Use Survey. The sample is restricted to households with income under 185%
of the Federal Poverty Line and non-missing WIC participation information. Red bars represent 95%
confidence intervals.




                                                                    23
   Figure 2: California WIC Food Costs Per Participant: March 2010 - December 2015
                                                   65
          WIC Cost Per Participant, 2010 dollars
                                                   60
                                                   55
                                                   50
                                                   45
                                                   40




                                                    2010m1   2011m1   2012m1    2013m1   2014m1   2015m1




Notes: This figure shows the trend in real food costs per California WIC participant in $2010 dollars, using
data from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) Food and Nutrition Service.




                                                                               24
Figure 3: Trends in Number of WIC Vendors and Share of Mothers with a Different Types
of Vendors in their ZCTA: March 2010 - December 2015


                                                  (a) Number of WIC Vendors                                (b) Share of Mothers with Large WIC Vendor in ZCTA
                      3000




                                                                                                                                                        .935
                                                                                                               Share of Mothers with Large Vendor in ZCTA
    1500 2000 2500
  Number Vendors




                                                                                                                                          .93
                      1000




                                                                                                                         .925
                      500




                                    2010m3        2011m3    2012m3      2013m3      2014m3   2015m3   2016m3
                                                                     Year-Month                                                        .92
                                                                  Large             Small
                                                                                                                                                 2010m1        2011m1   2012m1       2013m1   2014m1   2015m1
                                                                  A-50                                                                                                     Conception month



(c) Share of Mothers with Small WIC Vendor in ZCTA (d) Share of Mothers with A-50 WIC Vendor in ZCTA
                                                                                                                                                       .54
                                            .65
   Share of Mothers with Small Vendor in ZCTA




                                                                                                               Share of Mothers with A-50 Vendor in ZCTA
                                                                                                                                              .52
                                 .6




                                                                                                                                       .5
                     .55




                                                                                                                            .48
          .5




                                                                                                                   .46
                          .45




                                                                                                                                       .44




                                    2010m1         2011m1     2012m1       2013m1       2014m1    2015m1                                         2010m1        2011m1   2012m1       2013m1   2014m1   2015m1
                                                                 Conception month                                                                                          Conception month




Notes: Sub-figure (a) shows the trends in the total number of WIC vendors over March 2010 - December
2015, separately by type: large stores with 5 or more cash registers, small non-A-50 stores, and A-50 stores.
The data come from California WIC program administrative records on all authorized WIC vendors that
in the following months: 03/2010, 01/2011, 02/2012, 06/2012, 10/2012, 11/2012, 06/2013, 04/2014,
06/2014, 11/2014, 12/2014, and every month in 2015. Sub-figures (b)-(d) show the share of mothers with
at least one WIC store of the each type in their ZCTA of residence during pregnancy.




                                                                                                      25
Figure 4: Event-Study Analysis Based on Timing of Small WIC Vendor Closure Relative to
Conception, Firstborn Sample

                                             (a) All Mothers, Firstborns

                             Conception 10-12 months
                                   before small close
                               Conception 7-9 months
                                   before small close
                               Conception 4-6 months
                                   before small close
                               Conception 1-3 months
                                   before small close
                               Conception 0-2 months
                                    after small close
                               Conception 3-5 months
                                    after small close
                               Conception 6-8 months
                                    after small close
                              Conception 9-11 months
                                     after small close

                                                         -.06         -.04          -.02       0   .02
                                                         40044 Births, 139 ZCTAs




                                     (b) Foreign-Born Mothers, Firstborns

                             Conception 10-12 months
                                   before small close
                               Conception 7-9 months
                                   before small close
                               Conception 4-6 months
                                   before small close
                               Conception 1-3 months
                                   before small close
                               Conception 0-2 months
                                    after small close
                               Conception 3-5 months
                                    after small close
                               Conception 6-8 months
                                    after small close
                              Conception 9-11 months
                                     after small close

                                                         -.1                 -.05          0        .05
                                                         13335 Births, 128 ZCTAs




Notes: These figures show the coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from event-study regressions that
use a sample of births that are conceived in the one year before or after the last small WIC vendor closure
in a ZCTA (i.e., births conceived in the two-year window surrounding the month when the ZCTA moves
from 1 to 0 small vendors). We report the estimates on indicators for conceptions in three-month periods
starting from 10-12 months before the closure and ending with 9-11 months after the closure. Conceptions
7-9 months before the closure (i.e., for whom most of the pregnancy was exposed to a small WIC vendor)
serve as the omitted category.




                                                                    26
Table 1: Births Data Variable Means by Any Small Vendor During Pregnancy, Firstborns

                                             All              Small vendor               No small vendor
Mother's age                                26.70                25.35                        28.43

Mother < high school                        0.122                  0.171                       0.0587

Mother high school                          0.236                  0.284                       0.176

Mother some college                         0.262                  0.276                       0.244

Mother college +                            0.340                  0.232                       0.478

Mother white                                0.322                  0.233                       0.435

Mother black                               0.0558                 0.0681                       0.0402

Mother Hispanic                             0.423                  0.545                       0.267

Mother foreign-born                         0.326                  0.324                       0.328

Father's info missing                      0.0732                 0.0913                       0.0502

Birth weight (g)                           3288.3                 3278.3                       3301.0

Low birth weight (<2500g)                  0.0537                 0.0560                       0.0508

Gestation (weeks)                           39.49                  39.46                       39.54

Premature (<37 weeks)                      0.0659                 0.0699                       0.0608

Received WIC benefits                       0.467                  0.602                       0.294
Observations                               923399                 517422                      405977
Notes: This table shows means of births data variables, using California birth records data for all singleton
births with non-missing information on gestation length and maternal zip code of residence, and with esti-
mated conceptions between March 2010 and March 2015. Column (2) shows means for mothers who have at
least one small vendor in their ZCTA of residence during months 0 through 9 post-conception. Column (3)
shows means for mothers who have no small vendors in their ZCTA of residence during months 0 through 9
post-conception.




                                                     27
                                       Table 2: Correlation Between Maternal Characteristics and Vendor Presence


                            (1)              (2)                    (3)                (4)            (5)             (6)                  (7)                    (8)               (9)
                        Mother's age   Mother HS or less   Mother some college +   Mother white   Mother black   Mother hispanic   Mother foreign born   Father's info missing   Firstborn

     Any Small Vendor     -0.00662          0.00271              -0.00136           -0.000168        0.00111         0.00308            -0.00154               0.000673          -0.000732
     During Pregnancy     [0.0210]         [0.00219]             [0.00252]          [0.00198]      [0.000930]       [0.00235]           [0.00282]             [0.000961]         [0.00174]

     Any A50 Vendor       -0.0314         0.00611                -0.00354           -0.000520      -0.000149         0.00350            -0.000868             -0.000168          -0.00223
     During Pregnancy     [0.0369]        [0.00265]              [0.00271]          [0.00207]      [0.00124]        [0.00273]           [0.00283]             [0.00118]          [0.00325]

     Mean, dept. var.      28.81            0.428                 0.534               0.285          0.0553          0.487               0.389                  0.0612            0.393
     Observations         2325911          2346723               2346723             2346723        2346723         2346723             2346723                2346723           2346723




28
     Notes: Each column presents coefficients from separate regressions, using California birth records data for all singleton births with non-missing
     information on gestation length and maternal zip code of residence, and with estimated conceptions between March 2010 and March 2015. We use
     the following variables as outcomes: (1) Maternal age (in years), (2) Indicator for maternal education being high school or less, (3) Indicator for
     maternal education being some college or more, (4) indicator for mother being non-Hispanic white, (5) indicator for mother being non-Hispanic black,
     (6) indicator for mother being Hispanic, (7) indicator for mother being foreign-born, (8) indicator for the father's information missing from the birth
     certificate. All regressions include conception year, conception month, and maternal ZCTA of residence fixed effects. Standard errors clustered on the
     ZCTA level.
     Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
              Table 3: Effect of Vendors on WIC Take-Up, by Participant Type

                                             Mother Received WIC During Pregnancy
                                                                               Mothers of Firstborns
                                  (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)               (5)
                                  All         1st-Born       2+ Parity       U.S.-Born       Foreign-Born
Any Small Vendor               0.0081         0.0143          0.00416        0.0128            0.0173
During Pregnancy                [0.0026]       [0.0032]      [0.00276]        [0.0034]          [0.0051]
Any A50 Vendor                   0.0038         0.0033        0.00411          0.0017            0.0079
During Pregnancy                [0.0040]       [0.0046]      [0.00418]        [0.0055]          [0.0068]
Mean, dept. var.                 0.522          0.467          0.558           0.471             0.458
Observations                   2,346,723       923,399       1,423,324        622,655           300,744
Pct. Change, at Mean             1.55%          3.06%          0.7%            2.72%             3.78%
Notes: Each column presents coefficients from separate regressions, using California birth records data for
all singleton births with non-missing information on gestation length and maternal zip code of residence, and
with estimated conceptions between March 2010 and March 2015. The dependent variable is an indicator
for the mother receiving WIC benefits during pregnancy, while the key explanatory variables are indicators
for any small and any A-50 vendors in the mother's ZCTA of residence during pregnancy. Columns (1)-
(3) show results for all singleton births, firstborns, and higher-parity births, respectively, while columns
(4) and (5) show results for U.S.-born and foreign-born mothers of firstborns, respectively. All regressions
include the following control variables: maternal age group dummies (<20, 20-24, 25-34, 35+, missing),
maternal education dummies (less than high school, high school, some college, college or more, missing),
maternal race/ethnicity dummies (non-Hispanic white, non-Hispanic black, Hispanic, other race, missing),
indicator for mother being foreign-born, indicator for the father's information being missing from the birth
certificate, parity dummies (1st, 2nd, 3rd or higher), conception year, conception month, and maternal ZCTA
of residence fixed effects. Standard errors clustered on the ZCTA level.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                     29
                  Table 4: Effect of Vendors on WIC Take-Up, Placebo Tests

                                           Mother Received WIC During Pregnancy
                                                                               Mothers of Firstborns
                               (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)                (5)
                               All         1st-Born        2+ Parity        U.S.-Born        Foreign-Born
Any Small Vendor           0.0082          0.0148           0.00389         0.0118             0.0216
During Pregnancy            [0.0027]        [0.0034]       [0.00280]        [0.00355]           [0.0061]
Any A50 Vendor               0.0024         0.00075         0.00366         -0.00129             0.0059
During Pregnancy            [0.0038]        [0.0046]       [0.00391]        [0.00528]           [0.0075]
Any Small Vendor            -0.0001         -0.0011        0.000507          0.00190            -0.0081
Post Pregnancy              [0.0022]        [0.0030]       [0.00245]        [0.00318]           [0.0050]
Any A50 Vendor               0.0026          0.0048        0.000844          0.00561             0.0042
Post Pregnancy              [0.0035]        [0.0038]       [0.00383]        [0.00432]           [0.0066]
Mean, dept. var.             0.522           0.467           0.558            0.471              0.458
Observations               2,346,723        923,399        1,423,324         622,655            300,744
Notes: Each column presents coefficients from separate regressions, using California birth records data for
all singleton births with non-missing information on gestation length and maternal zip code of residence, and
with estimated conceptions between March 2010 and March 2015. The dependent variable is an indicator
for the mother receiving WIC benefits during pregnancy. Columns (1)-(5) show results from a model that
includes indicators for any small and any A-50 vendors in the mother's ZCTA of residence during pregnancy,
as well as placebo indicators for any vendors in the 9 months after the estimated month of delivery (i.e.,
post-pregnancy), using the samples denoted in the table header. See notes under Table 3 for more details
on control variables. Standard errors clustered on the ZCTA level.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                     30
Table 5: Effect of Vendors on WIC Take-Up, Mothers in ZCTAs with Large Vendors Only

                                          Mother Received WIC During Pregnancy
                                                                              Mothers of Firstborns
                               (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)                (5)
                               All         1st-Born        2+ Parity       U.S.-Born        Foreign-Born
Any Small Vendor          0.00830          0.0148           0.00414         0.0129            0.0183
During Pregnancy           [0.00264]       [0.00324]       [0.00286]        [0.00350]         [0.00527]
Any A50 Vendor              0.00306         0.00217         0.00375        -0.000722           0.00982
During Pregnancy           [0.00398]       [0.00457]       [0.00425]       [0.00520]          [0.00690]
Mean, dept. var.             0.528           0.473           0.563            0.477             0.463
Observations                2181460         856260          1325200          575563            280697
Notes: Each column presents coefficients from separate regressions, using California birth records data for
all singleton births with non-missing information on gestation length and maternal zip code of residence,
and with estimated conceptions between March 2010 and March 2015. The sample is further limited to
mothers residing in ZCTAs with at least one large WIC vendor open during their pregnancy. Standard
errors clustered on the ZCTA level. See notes under Table 3 for more details on samples, specifications, and
control variables. Standard errors clustered on the ZCTA level.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                    31
                  Online Appendix -- Not for Publication




A   Additional Results




                                   32
Appendix Figure A.1: Geographic Distribution of Small Vendor Density: 02/2012 and
12/2015

                                                       (a) February 2012




                             Small stores per 1000 pop under 5
                             0
                             0.132 to 0.570
                             0.579 to 1.175
                             1.176 to 2.410
                             2.414 to 28.571
                             No data




                                                      (b) December 2015




                             Small stores per 1000 pop under 5
                             0
                             0.132 to 0.570
                             0.579 to 1.175
                             1.176 to 2.410
                             2.414 to 28.571
                             No data




Notes: These maps show the geographic distribution of small vendor density in February 2012 versus
December 2015. For each ZCTA in each month, we calculate the ratio of the total number of small vendors
                                                   33 data (× 1,000). We trim the ratio at the 99th
over the total population under age 5 from 2010 Census
percentile to discard outliers in small ZCTAs.
Appendix Table A.1: Correlation Between ZCTA Characteristics and Change in Vendor
Presence Over 02/2012-12/2015

                                        (1)                  (2)                (3)                   (4)
                                        All                 Large              Small                 A-50
Low Percent Pop in                    0.0118              0.0192               0.0328              0.00743
Labor Force                         [0.00733]             [0.00735]           [0.0320]             [0.0242]
High Percent Pop in                 -0.00460              -0.00813             0.0303              0.00880
Poverty                             [0.0121]              [0.0133]            [0.0464]             [0.0321]
High Percent Pop                     0.00328               0.0105              0.0263               0.0520
Foreign-born                        [0.00827]             [0.00524]           [0.0428]             [0.0418]
High Percent Pop Not                 0.00479               0.00492           -0.000685             -0.0287
Citizen                              [0.0106]              [0.0111]           [0.0431]             [0.0336]
High Percent Pop Not                -0.00888               -0.0104            -0.0219               0.0234
English-Speaking                    [0.0124]               [0.0121]           [0.0481]             [0.0429]
High Percent                          0.0126                0.0122            -0.0977              -0.0275
Spanish-Speaking                     [0.0181]              [0.0139]           [0.0681]             [0.0468]
High Percent                         0.00424              -0.00301             0.0142              -0.0239
Hispanic                             [0.0166]             [0.0106]            [0.0660]             [0.0449]
Rural                               -0.110                -0.00297            0.00576             0.0877
                                     [0.0305]             [0.0367]            [0.0529]             [0.0234]
Constant                            -0.0228               -0.0205             -0.170              -0.0829
                                     [0.00814]             [0.00793]           [0.0270]            [0.0199]
Dept. var mean                       -0.0456               -0.0135             -0.168              -0.0592
Number ZCTAs                          1183                  1183                1183                1183
Notes: Each column presents coefficients from separate regressions, using WIC vendor data. The units of
observation are ZCTAs that ever have at least one vendor over the time period of analysis. In each column, the
dependent variable is the difference between the any vendor indicator in February 2012 and December 2015,
where a negative number corresponds to a decline in vendor presence, while a positive number corresponds
to an increase. The explanatory variables are dummy variables for ZCTA characteristics from the 2010
Census and 2011 American Communities Survey (ACS) data, where "high" denotes a value that is at or
above the sample median, while "low" denotes a value that is below the sample median. Rural ZCTAs are
defined as those with less than 50% of the population living in urban areas according to the 2010 Census.
The regressions are weighted by the 2010 ZCTA population, with robust standard errors.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01




                                                     34
Appendix Table A.2: The Effects of Distance to the Nearest Vendor on WIC Take-Up,
Firstborn Sample

                                                   Mother Received WIC During Pregnancy
                                             (1)                                      (2)
                                             All                              Foreign-Born Moms
Distance to Small                      -0.000321                                   -0.000362
                                        [0.0000937]                                 [0.000170]
Distance to A50                          -0.000144                                 -0.000510
                                         [0.000129]                                 [0.000251]
Mean, dept. var.                             0.467                                    0.458
Observations                                923399                                   300744
Notes: Each column presents coefficients from separate regressions, using California birth records data for
all firstborn singleton births with non-missing information on gestation length and maternal zip code of
residence, and with estimated conceptions between March 2010 and March 2015. We calculate the distance
between each mother's ZCTA of residence centroid and the centroid of the nearest ZCTA with a WIC vendor
open at any time during the 9 months post-conception (of each type). Columns (1)-(2) report results from
specifications that include the distance in miles to the nearest ZCTA with at least one small and one A-50
vendor, respectively. Columns (2) limits the sample to foreign-born mothers only. See notes under Table 3
for more details on the data and model specifications.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01


Appendix Table A.3: The Effects of Different Types of Vendors on WIC Take-Up: Using
Non-Interpolated WIC Vendor Data Only, Firstborn Sample

                                        Mother Received WIC During Pregnancy
                                      (1)                               (2)
                                      All                       Foreign-Born Moms
Any Small Vendor                  0.00972                              0.0115
During Pregnancy                   [0.00252]                           [0.00418]
Any A50 Vendor                     0.00490                              0.00888
During Pregnancy                  [0.00368]                            [0.00555]
Mean, dept. var.                     0.463                               0.453
Observations                        835109                              271286
Notes: Each column presents coefficients from separate regressions, using California birth records data for
all firstborn singleton births with non-missing information on gestation length and maternal zip code of
residence, and with estimated conceptions between March 2010 and March 2015. We further limit the
sample to mothers for whom months 0 through 9 post-conception overlap with at least one month from
which we have WIC vendor data (i.e., 03/2010, 01/2011, 02/2012, 06/2012, 10/2012, 11/2012, 06/2013,
04/2014, 06/2014, 11/2014, 12/2014, and every month in 2015). This means that we do not rely on any
interpolated WIC vendor data. Column (2) limits the sample to foreign-born mothers only. See notes under
Table 3 for more details on the data and model specifications.
Significance levels: * p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01


                                                     35
B    Classifying WIC Vendors

As we write in Section 3, information on WIC vendor peer groups cannot be released from
the program according to federal law. We took the following steps to classify the vendors
in our data into three groups: large stores that likely have 5 or more cash registers, small
non-A-50 stores with fewer than 5 registers, and A-50 stores.
    First, we identified WIC vendors that are chain stores. We identified all large chain stores
that operate in California (e.g., Wal-Mart, Target, Safeway, Lucky's, Smart & Final). We
also flagged stores that have the same name but operate in multiple locations, and used any
information available online (store websites, Facebook pages, Yelp pages, and Google Maps
images) to determine if they were affiliated as a chain or if they were independent. If there
was no information online suggesting common ownership or affiliation, we assumed they were
independent stores.
    Second, to determine which vendors are A-50 stores, we used any information available
online to gauge whether a store specializes in WIC provisions. There are several known
A-50 chains (e.g., Quickeroo, Prime Time Nutrition). Other stores have websites, Facebook
pages, or Yelp pages, which indicate they primarily cater to WIC participants. For some
stores, we relied on images from Google Maps: if a store had prominently displayed WIC
posters or advertisements of WIC voucher receipt, we classified it as A-50. In some instances
we classified stores as A-50 based on Yelp, Google, or Facebook reviews indicating that
customers go to those stores primarily to redeem their WIC benefits. Lastly, we consulted
with Michael Amiri and Clyde Steele to classify the remaining stores with names suggesting
they specialize in WIC provisions (e.g., including the words "baby," "mother," "nutrition,"
etc.) but for which we could not find any information online as either A-50 vendors or not.
    Third, we identified 28 commissary stores that operate as WIC vendors on military bases.
These stores either have "commissary" in the name or are located on a military base. As it
is unclear how these stores would have been affected by the MADR reform, we do not use
them in our analysis.
    Any vendors which did not fit the above three categories, as well as a few farms and
farmers' markets, were classified as independent stores.
    As our chain versus independent store distinction does not map perfectly to the large
versus small distinction based on the number of cash registers, we next proceeded to classify
the chain and independent stores as either small or large. We classified most chain stores as
large, with a few exceptions: convenience store chains (e.g., EZ Mart, Value+Express, Short
Stop) and small specialty store chains (e.g., 4 Way Meat Market, Doc's Meat Market) were
classified as small stores.


                                              36
    Finally, we conducted Google searches for each independent vendor, and we classified as
large any vendor which had images on its website, Yelp or Facebook page, or Google Maps
indicating at least 5 cash registers. Also, independent stores which appeared to be major
anchor stores in strip malls were classified as large. However, most independent stores were
classified as small.




                                            37
