                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   GLOBAL EFFECTS OF THE BREXIT REFERENDUM:
                       EVIDENCE FROM US CORPORATIONS

                                       Murillo Campello
                                       Gustavo S. Cortes
                                      Fabricio d'Almeida
                                      Gaurav Kankanhalli

                                      Working Paper 26714
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26714


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We are grateful to Warren Bailey, Craig Brown, Danilo Cascaldi-Garcia, Steven Davis, Janet
Gao, Jesus Gorrin, John Graham, Darien Huang, Tim Johnson, Hyunseob Kim, Mauricio Larrain,
Angie Low, Diogo Palhares, Minchul Shin, Felipe Silva, Allan Timmermann, and seminar
participants at the Bank of Portugal, Bristol Workshop on Banking, Cambridge University,
George Washington University, KU Leuven, LUBRAFIN Conference, Manchester Business
School, National Bank of Belgium, Penn State, SFS Cavalcade, Syracuse University, University
of Connecticut, University of Georgia, University of Illinois, University of Kentucky, Warwick
Business School, and Washington University St. Louis for many useful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Murillo Campello, Gustavo S. Cortes, Fabricio d'Almeida, and Gaurav Kankanhalli.
All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Global Effects of the Brexit Referendum: Evidence from US Corporations
Murillo Campello, Gustavo S. Cortes, Fabricio d'Almeida, and Gaurav Kankanhalli
NBER Working Paper No. 26714
January 2020
JEL No. F23,G15,G31

                                        ABSTRACT

We show that the 2016 Brexit Referendum led American corporations to cut jobs and investment
within US borders. Using establishment-level data, we document that these effects were
modulated by the degree of reversibility of capital and labor. American job losses were
particularly pronounced in industries with less skilled and more unionized workers. UK-exposed
firms with less redeployable capital and high input-offshoring dependence cut investment the
most. Data on the near-universe of US establishments also point to measurable, negative effects
on establishment turnover (openings and closings). Our results demonstrate how foreign-born
political uncertainty is transmitted across international borders, shaping domestic capital
formation and labor allocation.

Murillo Campello                               Fabricio d'Almeida
Johnson Graduate School of Management          Krannert School of Management
Cornell University                             Purdue University
114 East Avenue                                220 KCTR
369 Sage Hall                                  West Lafayette, IN 47907
Ithaca, NY 14853-6201                          fdalmeid@purdue.edu
and NBER
campello@cornell.edu                           Gaurav Kankanhalli
                                               Johnson Graduate School of Management
Gustavo S. Cortes                              Cornell University
Warrington College of Business                 301I Sage Hall, 114 East Avenue
University of Florida                          Ithaca, NY 14853
306 Stuzin Hall, PO Box 117168                 gak79@cornell.edu
Gainesville, FL 32611
gustavo.cortes@warrington.ufl.edu
1       Introduction

On June 23, 2016, voters in the United Kingdom elected to leave the European Union. The outcome of the

Brexit referendum was surprising since most opinion polls had the "remain" vote winning by safe margins.

Perhaps most notable was the notion that voters went to polling stations with little understanding about

what casting a ballot for Brexit would entail. Leaving the EU could irrevocably change the status of the UK in

European trade and customs agreements. It could change the status of European workers in the UK and that

of British workers in continental Europe. Brexit would trigger renegotiations of decades-old agreements run-

ning a gamut from legal jurisdiction authority and trade to border restrictions and the fight against terrorism.

    Rising political uncertainty appears to be a global phenomenon. This can be gleaned from the annotated

time series of the policy uncertainty index calculated by Davis (2017); see Figure 1. Even in light of events

such as the Global Financial Crisis and the Iraq War, the Brexit referendum brought about a pronounced

spike in global uncertainty. That referendum was not part of an institutional mandate or predetermined

political cycle (such as the election of new administrations in the US). Instead, it was an ad hoc consultation

of the public's sentiment about an important international agreement, conducted for political leverage by

Prime Minister David Cameron. Formally, Brexit had no immediately binding mandate. It would simply

initiate a process by which the UK would ask the EU to negotiate an exit (trigger EU's Article 50). Once this

process was set in motion (at a date to be later determined), the parties would have years to design new rules

governing their relations. The Brexit vote outcome has arguably triggered a fundamental change to the ways

agents would form expectations about trade, capital, and labor markets going forward.1

    Events like Brexit are seemingly more frequent in a world gone wary of the workings of the global finan-

cial markets, international trade, and migration.2 These are phenomena of much interest, yet of poorly-

understood consequences. This paper sheds novel light into an array of cross-border connections between

political uncertainty and economic activity. It does so gauging the impact of the 2016 Brexit vote on busi-

nesses located outside of the UK­EU geographical boundaries; in particular, firms domiciled in the United

States. The US economy serves as a candidate to study the cross-border effects of Brexit for several reasons.
    1
      This sentiment is made explicit in public remarks by Mark Carney, the Governor of the Bank of England: "Brexit
is a regime shift that has markedly changed the possible outcomes for the UK economy...affecting how agents
(households, businesses and financial markets) react, particularly the extent to which they are affected by uncertainty
during the negotiations and the degree to which they anticipate any outcome and pull forward."
    2
      The surprising election of Donald Trump in the United States (dubbed Trumpit ) is said to be rooted in voter
sentiment that finds close parallels in Brexit (see Becker et al. (2017)). Similar manifestations of that sentiment have
emerged in various forms in France, Italy, Spain, and Brazil, among others, in recent years.




                                                           1
                                                                     Global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index (Davis, 2016)
             325

                                                                                                                                                                            Brexit
             275

                                                                                                                     Global            Eurozone Crises,
                                                                                                                    Financial          US Fiscal Battles
             225                                                                                                      Crisis
                                                                         Iraq                                                                              Immigration
                                                           9/11        Invasion                                                                            Crisis, China
             175                                                                                                                                             Economy
                          Asian & Russian                                                                                                                      Fears
                          Financial Crises

             125



              75



              25
                   1997


                           1998


                                   1999


                                             2000


                                                    2001


                                                              2002


                                                                        2003


                                                                                  2004


                                                                                         2005


                                                                                                2006


                                                                                                           2007


                                                                                                                  2008


                                                                                                                         2009


                                                                                                                                2010


                                                                                                                                        2011


                                                                                                                                                2012


                                                                                                                                                       2013


                                                                                                                                                                2014


                                                                                                                                                                           2015


                                                                                                                                                                                     2016
Figure 1. Global Economic Policy Uncertainty. This figure is a reproduction of Figure 1 in Davis (2017), which com-
putes a GDP-weighted average of monthly Global Economic Policy Uncertainty based on Baker et al. (2016).


First, while EU-ties are at the root of Brexit, and effects observed across European economies may be endoge-

nous to the referendum itself, this is plausibly not true of the US. Second, there exist long-standing, strong

ties between the US and UK economies, making potential outcomes more easily measurable.3 Finally, it is

uniquely informative to look at the world's largest economy to gauge the global impact of a consequential

event like Brexit.

    We begin our study on the potential firm-level externalities of events like Brexit by establishing relevant

microeconomic underpinnings. Within a real-options framework, we first sketch out a negative relation

between uncertainty and fixed capital investment, divestitures, and employment growth, as firms have a

greater incentive to "wait-and-see" before committing to these decisions. The framework predicts stronger

effects for firms with higher capital (labor) adjustment costs on investment (employment). We also model

the impact of uncertainty on "growth options" activities, such as R&D investing. We uniquely show how these

activities are positively affected by aggregate uncertainty. The framework we study provides predictions for

second-moment ("uncertainty") shocks onto corporate decisions independent of changes to first-moment

expectations (e.g., "bad news").

    We derive testable predictions from the framework to examine how "UK-exposed" firms in the US (iden-

tified through market- and textual-search-based measures) conduct decisions regarding investment, di-

vestitures, employment, and R&D spending in the aftermath of the 2016 Brexit vote. Using forward-looking

financial analysts' forecast data, we find that there was no decline in the expected profitability of UK-exposed

firms, but an increase in profit dispersion -- suggesting that Brexit embedded a "second-moment" innova-
    3
    The UK is the 5th top destination of US exports and the 7th top US import partner. BIS data show that the US
banking system has its strongest links with banks from the UK, and vice-versa.



                                                                                                       2
tion. We subsequently use an empirical approach that accounts for Brexit potentially having both first- and

second-moment effects on US firms. Our base difference-in-differences estimates show that in the last two

quarters of 2016 alone, the investment-to-assets rates of UK-exposed firms fell by 0.16 percentage points

more than the investment rates of comparable non-UK-exposed firms. Given that the average quarterly in-

vestment rate in 2015 was 1.1% of assets, this decline represents a drop of 15% in baseline investment spend-

ing. UK-exposed firms also reduced their divestitures by nearly 30% of the average annual rate. Consistent

with our theoretical framework, we also observe an increase in R&D spending by UK-exposed firms following

the Brexit vote. Specifically, those firms increased their R&D-to-asset ratios by 0.2 percentage points more

than non-UK-exposed firms in the second half of 2016, implying an increase of 7% in annual R&D spending.

Looking at employment, our estimations show that labor force growth declined from 3.4% in 2015 to ­1.5%

for UK-exposed firms in 2016. That is, the Brexit vote outcome led to a slowdown in net job creation among

UK-exposed firms in the United States.

    We set out to characterize our findings on US companies' investment and employment decisions fol-

lowing the Brexit vote by identifying whether those decisions affected their US-based operations or their

foreign-based operations using establishment-level employment data. We find that investment cuts and

jobs losses took place within US borders. We further examine the workforce characteristics of the firms in

our sample. Our tests show that workers with lower skills are those most likely to be terminated by firms hit

by UK-borne uncertainty. Brexit also affected UK-exposed firms' establishment turnover decisions, with the

opening and closures of US establishments falling by around 2%.

    We finally delve into an analysis of offshoring activities in our sample firms. This analysis reveals that

investment cuts are undertaken primarily by US firms with a high degree of input (rather than output) off-

shoring activity with the UK. The evidence we present shows that the 2016 Brexit vote had a meaningful,

multifaceted impact on the US labor market.

    Along the lines of our framework, we also find that the investment behavior of UK-exposed firms was

modulated by capital adjustment costs. Specifically, the investment drop caused by the Brexit vote was a

function of the nature of the assets US firms operated -- it was more acute for firms in industries where fixed

capital is highly irreversible (non-redeployable). Labor adjustment costs also seemed to modulate the extent

to which UK-exposed firms hired and fired workers. In particular, exposed firms in industries with higher

unionization rates -- where workforce adjustments are costlier -- registered a significantly lower job growth.




                                                      3
    Looking beyond investment and employment, we examine several auxiliary firm policies and find that

UK-exposed firms also saved more cash and accumulated less inventory (non-cash working capital) in the

aftermath of the Brexit vote. Our estimates imply that following the vote, UK-exposed firms increased their

cash holdings by 12% relative to their baseline level. The results we report are in line with literature on cor-

porate liquidity management suggesting that, in times of heightened volatility, firms with higher market

exposure are likely to increase liquid asset holdings for precautionary reasons (e.g., Acharya et al. (2013)).

    Throughout our analysis, we strive to account for the larger context in which Brexit affected US firms.

For example, one of the immediate effects of the Brexit vote was a 9% depreciation of the British pound rela-

tive to the US dollar. We verify that virtually all firms in our sample report using derivatives to hedge against

foreign exchange (FX) risk. In addition, we design our tests so they are unconfounded by FX fluctuations.4

Nonetheless, we control for possible heterogeneous effects of the pound depreciation on UK-exposed firms

in several ways. Our results are robust to the inclusion of FX exposure metrics, suggesting that the 2016 Brexit

vote entailed an unhedgeable source of economic uncertainty to American corporations, beyond hedgeable

fluctuations in FX markets.

    Our results are also robust to several alternative testing strategies, including alternative firm-level mea-

surements of exposure to UK uncertainty, sampling periods, estimation methodologies, and falsification

checks. For example, DID analyses featuring the exclusion of "Trumpit" or focusing on the election of David

Cameron suggest that the increase in uncertainty brought about by the Brexit vote is the reason behind the

documented behavior of UK-exposed American firms around June 2016. We also find no change in invest-

ment by US firms exposed to major trading partners (such as China, Mexico, Japan, India, and Brazil) that

did not witness significant increases in uncertainty at the same time of the 2016 vote. Our results also con-

tinue to hold when we use non-parametric propensity score matching estimations. Finally, our investigation

also considers whether tightening financing constraints for UK-exposed firms in the wake of the Brexit vote

played a role in explaining the effects we observe. We consider a number of metrics that speak to firms' abil-

ity to raise funding following the Brexit vote (e.g., bond yields and loan spreads) and re-estimate our models

with their inclusion.
    4
     Since both our treatment and control groups comprise firms domiciled in the US, any homogeneous effects of
the pound depreciation on US firms are differenced out in our estimations. Notably, as demonstrated in our offshoring
analysis, most affected firms had input-based relationships with the UK. To the extent that the pound depreciation has
any heterogeneous effects, it would act as a positive shock to importing firms' cash flows, which would be consistent
with such firms disproportionately increasing -- instead of cutting -- their investment and hiring.




                                                          4
    Our study builds upon a growing literature on the effects of political uncertainty. Macroeconomic stud-

ies on uncertainty and real activity include recent contributions by Bloom (2009) and Bloom et al. (2018).

Work on the effect of uncertainty on corporate investment and bank lending include Julio and Yook (2012),

Gulen and Ion (2016), and Berg et al. (2019). Our paper advances the existing literature on several fronts,

but particularly as we focus on the international transmission of uncertainty, rather than on its domestic ef-

fects. The literature is particularly less complete on the international transmission of uncertainty at the firm

level.5 On that dimension, our paper goes beyond aggregate evidence and sheds light on the micro-level

mechanisms that led US firms to cut American jobs and investment in response to a foreign-born politi-

cal event. This, while being prompted to seek innovation. Through our analysis, we uncover the impor-

tance of US firms' input exposures, which drive the bulk of corporate investment cuts following Brexit. Our

establishment-level employment data are further informative about how job destruction and establishment

turnover operated inside US borders in the aftermath of the 2016 UK vote.6 As the British anti-integration

referendum has reportedly inspired similar national-centric movements in several other countries, it is im-

portant that researchers and policy makers are able to gauge its economic implications.




2       Background on the 2016 Brexit Referendum

The 2016 Brexit referendum is said to be rooted in long-standing political and social tensions within Europe,

fueled by nationalistic and populist movements in the UK (see, e.g., Becker et al. (2017)). In the early 2000s,

attempts by the EU to deepen integration among its members sparked British opposition against the over-

sight of a supranational entity. The rise of the UK Independence Party (UKIP) captured this sentiment. As
    5
       Studies on international spillover effects of policy uncertainty have focused on aggregate, time-series evidence
(e.g., Klössner and Sekkel (2014) and Bernal et al. (2016)). Another strand of the literature focuses on the effects of
policy uncertainty on FDI flows (Azzimonti (2016) and Julio and Yook (2016)). Recently, Hassan et al. (2020) study
the international effects of Brexit relying exclusively on firms "conference calls" to gauge firms' exposure to Brexit. In
contrast to Hassan et al. (2020), our textual analysis of mandatory 10-K filings is complemented by a market-based
approach in order to comprehensively gauge a firm's exposure to events in the UK. Notably, we choose not to rely
on conference calls due to extensive evidence in the literature of severe problems with the information content of
such calls. For instance, the voluntary nature of conference call disclosures leads to a wide range of selection issues
that compromises the classification of firms' risk exposures. Among others, it has been documented that managers
selectively refrain from answering questions from participants on the calls (Hollander et al. (2010)), shape the content
of calls based on firm performance (Matsumoto et al. (2011)), as well as venue location, industry focus, and audience
size (Bushee et al. (2011)).
     6
       Our establishment-level data allows us to transparently observe employment within US borders. This is in con-
trast to recent papers that rely on employment data from COMPUSTAT (e.g., Hassan et al. (2020)). Critically, COMPUS-
TAT aggregates data on workers from all foreign affiliates (including those located in the UK), confounding employment
results as a mix of both the international and the domestic effects of Brexit.



                                                            5
                                                        2,000


                                                        1,800


                                                        1,600




                 UK Economic Policy Uncertainty Index
                                                        1,400


                                                        1,200


                                                        1,000


                                                         800


                                                         600


                                                         400


                                                         200


                                                           0
                                                                2010:Q1
                                                                          2010:Q2
                                                                                    2010:Q2
                                                                                              2010:Q3
                                                                                                        2010:Q4
                                                                                                                  2011:Q1
                                                                                                                            2011:Q2
                                                                                                                                      2011:Q3
                                                                                                                                                2011:Q4
                                                                                                                                                          2012:Q1
                                                                                                                                                                    2012:Q2
                                                                                                                                                                              2012:Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                        2012:Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  2013:Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2013:Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2013:Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2013:Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2014:Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2014:Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2014:Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2014:Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2015:Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2015:Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2015:Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2015:Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2016:Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2016:Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2016:Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2016:Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2017:Q1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2017:Q2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2017:Q3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2017:Q4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2018:Q1
Figure 2. UK Economic Policy Uncertainty (2010­2017). The figure shows a 7-day moving average of the Economic
Policy Uncertainty index of Baker et al. (2016) for the UK. The shaded area marks the period of Brexit-related events,
starting with the February 2016 announcement of the date of the referendum.


Britons voted for representatives in the EU parliament, the UKIP achieved the third place in 2004, second in

2009, and first in 2014. This was the first time in modern British history that a party other than the Labour

or Conservative parties took the largest share of a nation-wide election. Facing the rise of the UKIP in 2013,

Prime Minister David Cameron announced a contingent (non-binding) plan: If the Conservative Party were

to win the general elections of May 2015, he would commit to a referendum on Britain's membership in the

EU before 2017. Granted another term on a narrow victory, Cameron fulfilled his electoral promise, and on

June 2015 the House of Commons approved the European Union Referendum Act. Appendix D presents a

timeline of events leading to the UK­EU referendum ("Brexit").

    David Cameron was against the UK's exit from the EU and vowed to resign if Brexit passed. On February

20, 2016, he announced that voting would take place on June 23, 2016. In the months leading up to the ref-

erendum, the polls indicated that the chances of the UK leaving the EU were slim. A few weeks before the

referendum, the "leave" vote led for the first time, only to trail again after the assassination of a "remain" sup-

porter (Labour MP Jo Cox) by a "leave" extremist. On the eve of the referendum, bookmakers' odds showed

chances of more than 90% that the UK would remain in the EU. The vote result prompted Cameron's imme-

diate resignation.

    The political upheaval around the Brexit referendum process was unprecedented. The uncertainty it

generated regarding economic policy in the UK can be gauged from the Baker et al. (2016) EPU index (see

Figure 2). The average quarterly UK EPU index before 2016 was 133 (starting from the beginning of the mod-

ern series in 1997). The index jumped by 410 points in 2016 -- nearly four times the baseline average, or a


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
3.4-standard deviation from the series. Although the June 23 vote resolved the uncertainty about the referen-

dum per se, Brexit's nonbinding mandate and unspecified procedures were still problematic. Under Prime

Minister Theresa May, it became clear that conditions under which the UK would leave the EU regarding

agreements on trade, migration, and financial relations, among others, remained unsettled. Voicing her in-

tention to proceed with the will of the voters, Prime Minister May triggered the formal exit process provided

by Article 50 of the Lisbon Treaty on March 29, 2017.




3       Theoretical Framework

We develop a simple theoretical framework to guide our tests of the impact of uncertainty on various types

of corporate activity. To this end, we characterize increases in uncertainty using the concept of mean-

preserving spread (MPS).7



3.1     Set Up

Consider the investment decision of a firm, i , that operates for three periods, t = 0, 1, and 2. The firm

chooses whether and when to invest in two types of projects: standard-type investments ("capital" or "la-

bor") and growth option-type investments ("R&D"). The menu of potential capital investment projects is

indexed by n , which lies on the interval [0, N ]. The menu of potential R&D projects is indexed by m , on the in-

terval [0, M ]. The firm has an endowment of existing capital investment projects that it had invested in prior

to t = 0. The menu of existing projects is indexed by w , on the interval [0, W ]. There is no time discounting.


3.1.1    Investment Income

                                                                               (n )
If the firm decides to invest in a capital project n , its income at t = 1, 2, vi t > 0, is an IID random variable:

                                                (n )
                                              vi t = vi t = i Vt + i t .                                          (1)

                                                                              (m )
If the firm decides to invest in a R&D project m , its income at t = 1, 2, u i t > 0, is:

                                               (m )
                                              u i t = u i t = i Vt + i t .                                        (2)
    7
    An uncertainty-increasing MPS only requires that a zero-mean, non-degenerate source of randomness has been
added to the distribution of the uncertain outcome. This approach allows us to derive a set of results that hold with
generality, while remaining agnostic about the functional forms governing the distribution and moments of the out-
comes of interest (see also Lee and Shin (2000)).



                                                           7
Finally, the firm's income from disinvesting (selling) an existing project from its capital endowment, w , at
                            (w )
t = 1, 2, is denoted by si t > 0, such that:
                                                     (w )
                                                    si t = si t = i Vt + i t .                                     (3)


    In this setting, Vt > 0 represents the time-varying aggregate demand curve facing the firm and i  (0, 1]

is the firm's sensitivity to demand. i t , i t , and i t are independent, idiosyncratic, mean-zero shocks, with

variances 2
            , 2
                , and 2
                        , respectively. Vt is distributed as Vt  G (Vt , r ), where the mean of Vt is equal to

Vt , the variance is equal to 2 (r ), and r is an index of the mean-preserving spread. Specifically, r > r =

G (·, r ) is a MPS of G (·, r ) and   Vt d G (·, r ) = Vt  r .

    The firm's revenue from each capital investment project it decides to invest in can be characterized as

a MPS with distribution vi t  P (vi t , r ) and mean vi t = i × Vt , with variance i
                                                                                   2
                                                                                     (r ) = i2 × 2 (r ) + 2
                                                                                                            . Like-

wise, each R&D project's revenue can be characterized as a MPS with distribution u i t  Q (u i t , r ) and mean

u i t = i × Vt , with variance 2
                               i ( r ) = i ×  ( r ) +  . Finally, the proceeds from disinvesting each existing
                                          2  2        2


project can be characterized as a MPS with distribution si t  R (si t , r ) and mean si t = i × Vt , with variance

2
i ( r ) = i ×  ( r ) +  .
           2  2        2




3.1.2    Investment Costs

In order to undertake investment project n , the firm must incur a one-time fixed cost of capital, denoted by

Fi K (, n ) = n , and a one-time fixed cost of labor, denoted by Fi L (, n ) = n . The parameters  > 0 and  > 0

capture the degree of irreversibility of input fixed costs, which scale with n . If it chooses to invest in capital

project n , the firm can either invest at t = 0 or t = 1. If it invests in n at t = 0, it incurs the fixed costs n + n

at t = 1, and earns the revenues vi 1 + vi 2 . If it does not invest at t = 0, choosing instead to invest at t = 1, it

incurs the fixed costs n + n at t = 2, earning the revenue vi 2 . The negative effect of uncertainty on capital

investment arises from the joint presence of the option to delay and irreversible fixed costs.

    Growth-option-type projects, m , differ from capital investment-type projects, n , in two key ways. First,

the option to invest in these projects is only available at t = 0. That is, the firm has only one chance to

decide whether to invest. If it declines, these projects cease to become available in the future (t = 1 or 2). To

a first-order approximation, this matches the reality of several types of R&D projects, including the "race to

patent" a certain idea or bring a new technology to the market. Second, investments in growth projects are

partially reversible. If the firm wishes to buy the option to invest in project m , it pays an upfront cost of m .

In addition, it must pay a development cost d t for each period in which the project remains alive. That is,

                                                                 8
in order to earn t = 1 revenue u i 1 , it must pay d 1 ; similarly, in order to earn t = 2 revenue u i 2 , it must pay

d 2 . However, at the end of t = 1, the firm may choose to scale back and recover a fraction, µm , of the initial

investment cost, with µ  (0, 1). In this case, it does not receive any revenue from the project at t = 2; i.e.,

u i 2 = 0. On the other hand, if at the end of t = 1, it wishes to continue the project then it must pay the second

period development cost, d 2 , to receive u i 2 . This, too, matches the reality of certain types of R&D projects

(e.g., pharmaceutical trials), in which decisions are made in stages. Notably, the joint absence of (1) the

option to delay and (2) irreversible, fixed costs generates a positive effect of uncertainty on R&D investment.

    Finally, the firm can choose at time t = 0 or t = 1 to disinvest (sell) any of its existing endowment of

projects, w . If the firm sells a project at time t , it must pay a scrapping cost  w , but receives the cash flow

from disinvestment of si t . Else, for each period t that the project remains alive, the firm earns a known xi t

(for example, rent accruing from a real-estate holding). The process of disinvesting a project is irreversible,

and as with capital investment, this irreversibility induces a negative effect of uncertainty on disinvestment.



3.2     Analysis and Results

In what follows, we present analysis and results corresponding to the firm's standard investment problem

and R&D decision.8


3.2.1   Capital and Labor Investment Decisions

In solving the firm's capital investment problem, we first consider its decision at t = 1. If the firm had initi-

ated any projects at t = 0, it obtains the second period revenue vi 2 per project. Among those projects that

were not undertaken at t = 0, the firm can choose to initiate any of them at t = 1 and earn vi 2 - ( + )n

per project. Else, it can discard any uninvested projects and earn 0. The firm will rationally discard a given

         ~ , when its expected revenue is less than the associated costs of investment and hiring. The firm
project, n

will cease operations at the end of t = 2 and any project that is not undertaken at either t = 0 or t = 1 has a

value of 0 by the end of t = 2. The firm's investment decision at t = 1 will be guided by profit in the second

period that is generated by project n ~ . The profit function, i 2 , can be characterized as:
                               
                               vi 2
                                                                       (Early Investment ),
                     i 2 (n
                          ~ ) = vi 2 - ( + )n ~ if vi 2 > ( + )n~      (Delayed Investment ),                      (4)
                                                 if v  ( + )n
                               0
                                                      i2        ~      (No Investment ).
    8
     In Appendix A, we model the firm's decision to disinvest and derive results on the cross-sectional implications of
the role played by the degree of input irreversibility. Proofs of propositions and lemmas are in Appendix B.


                                                           9
    Next, we consider the firm's decision at t = 0. The optimal total investment level at t = 0 can be expressed

in terms of n  , the breakeven project. The firm will invest in all projects in the range [0, n  ), and not invest in

projects in the range [n  , N ], instead waiting until t = 1 to decide whether to undertake any of those projects.

                                                     ~ at t = 0 is vi 1 + [vi 2 ] - ( + )n
The firm's expected profit from investing in project n                                   ~ . Its expected profit from

                 ~ at t = 0, and choosing instead to wait until t = 1 to decide, is [max (vi 2 - ( + )n
not investing in n                                                                                    ~ , 0)]. The

                        ~ at t = 0 if:
firm invests in project n

                             vi 1 + [vi 2 ]         ( + )n
                                                         ~            +   [max (vi 2 - ( + )n
                                                                                            ~ , 0)] .             (5)
                            Expected Revenue     Cost of Investment           Value of Waiting

The breakeven condition for determining the optimal investment level n  at t = 0 is:

                                vi 1 + [vi 2 ] = ( + )n  + [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0)]                             (6)

In Lemma 1, we prove the existence of the optimal t = 0 investment level, n  .

Lemma 1. The optimal capital investment level n  at t = 0 is given by (6) for sufficiently large N .

    The breakeven condition in (6) implies that the firm invests in all projects at t = 0 up to project n  , for

which the benefits are expected to exceed the costs. The embedded optionality in the firm's investment

decision is key in generating a negative relation between uncertainty and investment. An increase in uncer-

tainty in the distribution of vi t reduces the breakeven project level n  , and correspondingly shrinks the set

of projects the firm invests in at t = 0, namely the interval [0, n  ). We establish this result in Proposition 1.

Proposition 1. Increased uncertainty leads to less investment at t = 0. For r > r , namely when G (·, r ) is
                                                                                        d n
obtained by a mean-preserving spread of G (·, r ), n  (r ) < n  (r ). That is,          dr    < 0.

    Given that the firm invests in n  projects, the variance of its total income is (n  × i (r ))2 . Notice that r >

r implies that variance of the firm's total income increases; i.e., (n  × i (r ))2 > (n  × i (r ))2 . In addition, for
                                         2
i > i , it follows that n  × i (r ) = (n  )2 × i 2 × 2 (r ) + 2
                                                                > (n  )2 × i2 × 2 (r ) + 2
                                                                                           = (n  × i (r ))2  r .

That is, the higher i , the greater the increase of firm i 's income variance for a given increase in uncertainty.


3.2.2   R&D Investment Decisions

Consider the firm's decision at t = 0, when it may opt to invest in the R&D project. The profits from project

~ can be expressed as:
m
                               
                               0
                                                                      (No Investment ),
                     i 2 (m
                          ~ ) = ui 1 - d1 + ui 2 - d2 - m
                                                        ~             (Investment, No Scaling Back),              (7)
                                u - d + µm
                               
                                               ~ -m ~                 (Investment, Later Scaling Back).
                                    i1       1


                                                                10
The firm will invest at t = 0 if:

                               [max min u i 1 - d 1 + u i 2 - d 2 , u i 1 - d 1 + µm
                                                                                   ~ ,0 ]  m
                                                                                           ~.                    (8)


Since the firm may only scale back at t = 1 if [u 2t ] < µm
                                                          ~ + d 2 , it is clear that the firm will invest if:

                                             [max u i 1 - d 1 + µm
                                                                 ~ ,0 ]  m
                                                                         ~.                                      (9)


The breakeven R&D project, m  , is determined by:

                                            [max u i 1 - d 1 + µm  , 0 ] = m  .                                 (10)


In Lemma 2, we prove the existence of the optimal R&D investment level m  .


Lemma 2. The optimal R&D investment level m  at t = 0 is given by (10) for sufficiently large M .


    The breakeven condition (10) implies that the firm invests in all R&D projects up to the point at which

benefits are expected to exceed costs. Since at t = 1 the firm can choose to scale back the project, and if

so, partially recover the upfront cost, the decision to invest in the R&D projects at t = 0 is equivalent to

the decision to buy a call option expiring at t = 1. At the breakeven R&D investment level, m  , the price

of the option equals its value. Increased uncertainty in the distribution of u i t increases the value of this

option, thereby increasing the breakeven project threshold m  , expanding the set of R&D projects the firm

undertakes. This argument is formalized in Proposition 2.


Proposition 2. Increased uncertainty leads to greater R&D investment at t = 0. For r > r , namely when
                                                                                                d m
G (·, r ) is obtained by a mean-preserving spread of G (·, r ), m  (r ) > m  (r ). That is,      dr   > 0.


    Proposition 2 states that an increase in uncertainty increases the set of R&D-type projects that the firm is

willing to undertake, given that the potential upside has increased and the downside is capped by the ability

to scale back and partially recover upfront costs. This is in contrast to capital investment, whose initial costs,

once paid, are largely lost.



3.3     Testable Predictions

Our framework implies that an increase in aggregate uncertainty reduces firm investments in standard-type

projects, and that the effect is modulated by the degree of exposure to uncertainty, i . In the context of the

impact of UK-born uncertainty onto US-based firms, we state our first testable prediction.



                                                           11
Prediction 1. American firms with a higher exposure to UK uncertainty (High UK-Exposure firms) will dis-

proportionately reduce their investment in capital and labor in response to the Brexit vote.


    Our analysis also indicates that an increase in aggregate uncertainty triggers firm investment in R&D-

type projects through a growth-options channel, and the effect is modulated by the degree of exposure to

uncertainty, i . Translating this to our test setting, we state our second testable prediction.


Prediction 2. American firms with a higher exposure to UK uncertainty (High UK-Exposure firms) will dis-

proportionately increase their investment in R&D in response to the Brexit vote.


    The theoretical framework further implies that an increase in aggregate uncertainty reduces firm capital

disinvestment, and the effect is modulated by the degree of firm-level exposure to uncertainty. This trans-

lates into our third testable prediction.


Prediction 3. American firms with a higher exposure to UK uncertainty (High UK-Exposure firms) will dis-

proportionately reduce their disinvestment in fixed capital in response to the Brexit vote.


    Finally, the negative relationship between uncertainty and investment is affected by fixed costs Fi K and

Fi L , which capture the degree of irreversibility of capital and labor, respectively. It implies that higher input

adjustment costs in each factor modulates the effect of uncertainty in investment in that input. This gives

rise to our fourth and fifth testable predictions.


Prediction 4. American firms with a higher exposure to UK uncertainty (High UK-Exposure firms) facing

higher capital adjustment costs will reduce their capital investment more pronouncedly in response to the

Brexit vote.


Prediction 5. American firms with a higher exposure to UK uncertainty (High UK-Exposure firms) facing

higher labor adjustment costs will reduce their hiring more pronouncedly in response to the Brexit vote.


    In the next section, we translate the above predictions into their empirical counterparts, describe our

data, and lay out associated test strategies.




                                                        12
4       Data and Methodology

4.1     Empirical Counterparts

The implementation of our tests calls for identifying empirical counterparts to the constructs of the our

theoretical framework. We first introduce an empirical counterpart to the sensitivity parameter i , which

captures individual firms' responses to changes in aggregate uncertainty. We adopt two approaches. The

first follows the framework very closely, yielding an empirical proxy for i that is derived from the capital

markets. The second is based on expectations of corporate decision-makers regarding uncertainty, taken

from firms' disclosures to market investors.9 After defining empirical counterparts for i , we present mea-

sures of capital and labor irreversibility, corresponding to  and , respectively.


4.1.1    Theoretical Framework-Based Measure of Uncertainty

In the context of our study, the increase in aggregate uncertainty, Vt , comes from the rise in uncertainty as-

sociated with the Brexit vote. Accordingly, we take variances on both sides of Eq. (1) (alternatively, Eq. (2))

to capture the notion of uncertainty in the MPS framework:
                                              V a r (vi t ) = i2 V a r (Vt ) + 2
                                                                                 .                                     (11)

We can employ a regression-like approach to operationalize an empirical counterpart to i . Specifically,

taking square-roots of both sides of (11) we obtain:

                                V o l (vi t )  i V o l (Vt ) +  -      2 × i V o l (Vt ) ×  .                          (12)

Following Bloom (2014), we use stock market volatility as a gauge of aggregate uncertainty and estimate (12)

for each firm i as:10
                           V o l (ri t ) = i + iU K V o l (F T S E 100t ) +  C o n t r o l st + i t .                  (13)

Eq. (13) uses the volatility of equity returns, V o l (ri t ), as a proxy for firm income volatility, V o l (vi t ). It also

uses the volatility of the FTSE100 index as a proxy for uncertainty in the UK -- the relevant source of ag-

gregate uncertainty in our setting. We include control variables, Controlst , consisting of V o l (S P 500) and
    9
       We also consider firm sales to the UK from accounting data sources like COMPUSTAT's Segment Files. However,
careful examination of 10-K forms shows that such data are often incomplete and inconsistently tabulated. Aggravat-
ing this problem, sales that take place in the UK are known to be invoiced in other countries (such as Ireland) for tax
purposes. As such, our main analyses rely on information from other sources. In Section 5.2.2, however, we resort to
an alternative textual-search-based analysis that goes beyond financial statements contained in 10-K forms in iden-
tifying exposure to the UK (cf. Hoberg and Moon (2017)). That approach allows us to identify offshoring activities, as
reported by firms in the text of their disclosures (information often missing from their tabulated financial statements).
    10
       Bloom (2014) shows that stock market volatility exhibits a high degree of commonality with other observed prox-
ies for uncertainty including those derived from bond markets, exchange rates, and GDP forecasts.


                                                              13
V o l F X $/£ into (13) to absorb effects arising through firms' exposure to the domestic US market and ex-

change rate fluctuations between the US dollar and the British pound. For each firm, we take the estimated

value of iU K from the above regression as the empirical counterpart to i in our framework.11


4.1.2    Textual-Search-Based Measure of Uncertainty

As an alternative measure of US firms' exposure to Brexit-induced uncertainty, we develop a textual-search-

based metric that is constructed by parsing firms' 2015 10-K filings. In particular, we look for the number of

entries of keywords related to uncertainty about Brexit ("Brexit", "Great Britain", and "Uncertainty") in firms'

disclosures, classifying firms with a "high" number of entries as High UK-Exposure firms, and those with zero

entries as control firms.12 Notably, the vast majority of firms file their 10-Ks with the SEC between between

March and June of each year. By computing these wordcounts from firms' 10-K disclosures -- before the

actual vote takes place, yet after the referendum is announced -- we build a measure of exposure to the UK

based on what firms consider relevant to communicate to their investors on the eve of the 2016 Brexit vote.

    Textual analysis reveals that most firms cite concerns about Brexit a half dozen times or more in their

10-Ks, or not at all. As such, we arbitrarily set a cut-off for high Brexit cites at more than 5 entries. There

are 807 firms citing Brexit more than 5 times in their 10-Ks. On the other hand, 433 do not cite any Brexit-

related terms in their public filings. While the heuristic cut-off we consider is naturally arbitrary, our results

are robust to many sensible alternative choices.


4.1.3    Capital and Labor Irreversibility Measures

Our predicted uncertainty­investment relationships are modulated by fixed costs Fi K , which capture the

degree of irreversibility of capital. To empirically measure capital irreversibility, we use an index of capital

redeployability proposed by Kim and Kung (2016). That index classifies fixed capital liquidity in terms of sal-

ability of assets in secondary markets. The premise is that when a firm operates assets that are used across

several industries, there are more potential buyers should the firm decide to revert investment decisions by
   11
       The last term in (12) is subsumed by the idiosyncratic volatility term, i t , in (13). We note that the volatility
of equity returns may be an imperfect proxy for the volatility of firm income as returns are driven by news on both
cash flows and discount rates (Campbell and Shiller (1988)). Following Vuolteenaho (2002), we also decompose the
volatility of each firm's returns into cash flow and discount rate components and re-estimate Eq. (13) with the cash
flow component (only) as the dependent variable, obtaining an alternative uncertainty measure, iU               K
                                                                                                              ,C F . The estimates
for iU K and iU     K
                  ,C F have a rank correlation of 0.8, and there is an 86% overlap in the set of firms at the top tercile of both
i and i ,C F . As shown in Table C.5, our inferences are unchanged whether using iU K or iU
  UK         UK                                                                                          K
                                                                                                       ,C F to conduct our tests.
    12
       Entries like "Referendum", "Uncertain", "United Kingdom", "UK", "U.K.", "G.B.", etc. are subsumed by the above
wording.


                                                               14
selling off its assets. The same is not true for a firm that operates highly-specialized assets. Higher values of

the asset redeployability index are associated with a lower degree of capital irreversibility, corresponding to

a lower value of Fi K in our framework.

    Our next task is to find an empirical proxy for the irreversibility of labor, Fi L . We resort to the use of

worker unionization as an empirical proxy for frictions in labor input. We do so as ample research high-

lights the difficulties faced by firms with unionized employees in adjusting their workforce in response to

changes in aggregate conditions (see, among others, Bloom (2009)). In using this strategy, we measure the

percentage of total employees who are unionized at the 4-digit SIC level using data from the BEA. We ex-

pect firms with a greater share of unionized workers to have lower labor flexibility and incur greater costs in

adjusting the size of their workforce.



4.2    Data Sources

We use COMPUSTAT Quarterly to gather basic information on firm investment and financial data. We con-

sider US companies from the first calendar quarter of 2010 through the fourth quarter of 2016. We drop

utility and financial firms, as well as companies whose market value or book assets are lower than $10 mil-

lion. The sample used in our baseline investment tests consists of 41,630 observations (firm-quarters). For

additional analysis on firms' investment in the US, we obtain subsidiary-level investment data from the Bu-

reau van Dijk's Orbis dataset (see Cravino and Levchenko (2016)). We use Orbis's company search tool to

match parent firms in our COMPUSTAT sample to ultimate owner firms in Orbis. By doing so, we obtain

separate information on their US- and UK-based subsidiaries. The Orbis sample we use consists of 6,203

observations (firm-years).

    Firm-level employment data is taken from COMPUSTAT's Annual Fundamentals. We measure employ-

ment growth based on the change in the number of employees of the firm. Our employment sample consists

of 11,345 observations (firm-years). We rely on the Your-economy Time-Series (YTS) database, maintained

by the Business Dynamics Research Consortium at the University of Wisconsin, for information on US-based

employment. The YTS database is compiled from historical business files from Infogroup and are linked lon-

gitudinally to track establishment location, employment, and sales information at the establishment-year

level for public and private firms in the US. We match our sample firms (both parents and their US sub-

sidiaries) to YTS primarily using tickers, and augment this match through manual searches by firm name.

The firms in our sample collectively operated 757,083 unique establishments, and this results in 1,809,301


                                                       15
establishment-year observations over the 2010­2016 period. We aggregate YTS employment growth at the

firm level, giving a final US establishment-level employment growth sample of 11,345 firms-years.

    We use CRSP stock price data and Bloomberg equity index and currency data to compute our theoreti-

cal framework-based measure of firm exposure to the UK (see Eq. (13)). We use monthly data from 2010:M1

through 2014:M12 so that exposure to the UK is measured before any major Brexit-related events. Analyst

forecast data are obtained from I/B/E/S. Data on bond yields are from TRACE and SDC, while syndicated

loan spreads are drawn from WRDS­Reuters DealScan. Macroeconomic variables are taken from the Federal

Reserve Bank of St. Louis' FRED database.



4.3     Test Strategy and Empirical Specification

4.3.1    Identification

We use a standard DID approach to assess the impact of the 2016 Brexit vote on American firms. Following

our framework, in our base analysis, we characterize firms as treated (control) units if they are in the upper

(bottom) tercile of the non-negative range of the iU K distribution.13 Under this market-based approach a

total of 449 unique firms are assigned to the treated category (iU K > 0.68). In contrast, 360 unique firms

are assigned to the control category (iU K < 0.28). We also consider an alternative, text-based measure of

exposure to Brexit. Under this approach, 807 firms are assigned to the treated category (2015 10-K mentions

of Brexit terms > 5). A total of 433 firms in the control category have no mentions of Brexit-related terms in

their 10-Ks.


4.3.2    Timeline

Once firms are identified as exposed and non-exposed, we need to set the time-frame of our DID analysis.

We make this determination by mapping key events of our institutional setting into market-based measures

of perceived uncertainty. In Figure 3, we plot three point-in-time snapshots of the term structure of im-
   13
      For group contrasting, we do not include firms that benefit from uncertainty in the UK in the control group (firms
with iU K < 0) as this could lead to overestimation biases attached to the treatment effects we seek to identify. Never-
theless, in specifications where we use iU K as a continuous treatment variable, we relax this restriction and include
all values of iU K . In unreported tests, we only label those firms with statistically significant positive iU K estimates as
treated firms, and those with iU K statistically indistinguishable from zero as controls. We find that our results hold
across a range of sensible treatment assignment thresholds.




                                                            16
                                                              23




                         FTSE100 ATM Implied Volatility (%)
                                                              21



                                                              19



                                                              17



                                                              15




                                                                 M s

                                                                          s



                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                          s
                                                                 M th

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s

                                                                 M s
                                                                  M k




                                                                 M r




                                                                          s
                                                              13 Yea
                                                              11 nth

                                                                       th



                                                              14 nth

                                                              15 nth

                                                              16 nth

                                                              17 nth

                                                              18 nth

                                                                       th
                                                                       th

                                                                       th

                                                                       th

                                                                       th

                                                                       th

                                                                       th

                                                                       th

                                                              10 nth




                                                                       ar
                                                                      ee
                                                                     on




                                                                    Ye
                                                                    on




                                                                    on
                                                                    on

                                                                    on

                                                                    on

                                                                    on

                                                                    on

                                                                    on

                                                                    on
                                                                    W




                                                                    o




                                                                    o

                                                                    o

                                                                    o

                                                                    o

                                                                    o
                                                                    o




                                                                   1




                                                                  2
                                                              1
                                                                1
                                                               2

                                                               3

                                                               4

                                                               5

                                                               6

                                                               7

                                                               8

                                                               9
                                                                                     Maturity

                                                                   Dec 31, 2014 (Benchmark, Pre-Brexit)
                                                                   Feb 22, 2016 (Day after Brexit vote date announcement)
                                                                   Jun 24, 2016 (Day after Brexit victory)

Figure 3. Term Structure of FTSE100 Implied Volatility. This figure shows the term structure of the FTSE100 Index
at three different dates. The term structure at each date is constructed from average Black-Scholes implied volatilities
derived from quoted prices of at-the-money options on the FTSE100 Index. The values plotted reflect the market's
expectation of the volatility of the FTSE100 index over various maturities considered.


plied volatility for the FTSE100 Index. The dynamics described in this figure help us identify dates in which

uncertainty surrounding the Brexit referendum seems to be incorporated into market expectations.14

    The first (dotted blue) curve in Figure 3 represents the term structure as of December 31, 2014, which

is the last date of our iU K estimation period. We use this curve as a benchmark since expectations at that

time were uncontaminated by Brexit. As is typical for equities during normal economic conditions, the term

structure is upward sloping, indicating the market expects greater volatility at longer horizons. The curve

hovers smoothly around the 15­16% range, suggesting that no abrupt changes are expected by options mar-

ket participants over a maturity horizon of up to two years.

    Responses to official news about the exact referendum date suggest that market participants were quick

to incorporate uncertainty embedded by Brexit in their trading activity -- before the actual outcome of the

vote. In particular, options trading taking place on February 22, 2016 (continuous red curve in Figure 3), the

first trading day following David Cameron's announcement of the Brexit vote date, were priced to reflect a

significant drop in market volatility for the period leading up to the Brexit vote date (on June 23), only to show

a spike in volatility right after the vote. On June 24, 2016 (dashed yellow curve), the first trading day follow-

ing the vote, market uncertainty seemed unusually high. Resolution about the vote outcome, nonetheless,
   14
     The implied volatility term structure serves as a metric of market uncertainty over time as it expresses the range
of movements in the FTSE100 that investors expect over various horizons (see Dumas et al. (1998) and Mixon (2007)).
The values in Figure 3 reflect the market's expectation of the volatility of the FTSE100 over different maturities. For
example, if annualized implied volatility for 2 years is 15%, the market expects that prices will move over the next 2
years within a band -(15 × 2%), +(15 × 2)% with 68% probability (one standard deviation).


                                                                                    17
                                                           2.5
                                                                          Low Beta UK Mean Forecast
                                                             2
                                                                         High Beta UK Mean Forecast
                                                           1.5




                             EPS Forecast (1-Year Ahead)
                                                             1

                                                             .5

                                                             0

                                                            -.5

                                                            -1

                                                           -1.5

                                                            -2

                                                           -2.5
                                                              2015Q1



                                                                       2015Q2



                                                                                   2015Q3



                                                                                              2015Q4



                                                                                                       2016Q1



                                                                                                                2016Q2



                                                                                                                         2016Q3



                                                                                                                                  2016Q4
Figure 4. Analysts' Earnings Per Share Forecasts around Brexit. This figure shows how analyst Earnings Per Share
(EPS) forecasts behaved around Brexit's key dates. Confidence intervals are calculated as ±1.5 standard deviations
from the mean forecast. Each line represents a group of firms sorted by exposure to the UK economy as measured by
iU K . The shaded area marks the beginning of Brexit-related events with the announcement of the date of the UK­EU
referendum by PM David Cameron (2016:Q1). Both series are normalized to take the value of 0 in 2016:Q1.


seems to quell uncertainty forecasts. In particular, the one-year ahead implied volatility immediately after

the vote date is not significantly different from that registered back in December 2014.

    Having examined market uncertainty in the UK based upon implied options volatility, we set out to ver-

ify in our US firm-level data if this period coincided with increased perceived income uncertainty for High

UK-Exposure firms. We do so using data on analysts' forecasts from the I/B/E/S database. Beginning in

2015:Q1, we obtain the 1-year ahead earnings per share (EPS) forecasts for each firm in our sample and

compute the mean and standard deviation of forecasts. We quantify earnings forecast uncertainty for firms

in the high and low iU K groups by constructing ±1.5 standard-deviation intervals around their group mean

forecasts in Figure 4. The figure shows no discernible difference in mean forecasted earnings between high

and low iU K firms, suggesting analysts did not expect UK-exposed firms to do any worse, on average, in

terms of earnings performance following the Brexit vote.15 The fact that mean EPS forecasts stay virtually

the same over the 2-year window for both high and low iU K firms suggests that there is no clear sign of a

"first-moment" (negative) effect of Brexit on US corporate earnings. That same earnings forecasts evidence

points to the Brexit vote having a "second-moment" effect in terms of increased uncertainty regarding UK-

exposed firms' expectations in 2016:Q1­Q2. In particular, EPS forecast dispersion of High UK-Exposure firms

increases significantly in early 2016.
   15
      In formal tests, we confirm that the differences in consensus EPS forecasts between high and low iU K firms are
not statistically significant in the pre-Brexit vote period.




                                                                                               18
    In our empirical tests, we compare two quarters before versus two quarters after the two key Brexit events

we have just identified (February 22 and June 23, 2016). We focus on a relatively short window around the

Brexit vote as Bloom (2009) highlights the sharp yet short-lived nature of the economic effects triggered by

uncertainty.16 We limit our analysis to the end of 2016 due to the start of the Trump administration in January

2017. We show in later robustness checks that results also hold for a window that excludes Trump's election.


4.3.3   Empirical Model

We compare differences in outcomes of interest between treated (High UK-Exposure) and control (Low UK-

Exposure) firms. Differences over the 2016:Q3­Q4 period are taken relative to the same two quarters in the

previous year, 2015:Q3­Q4, in order to minimize the impact of seasonal effects. This is equivalent to esti-

mating the following model:

              Yi ,t =  +  P o s t t × H i g h U K -E x p o s u r ei
                                                                                                                         (14)
                     +  C o n t r o l si ,t -1 +       F i r mi +           I n d u s t r y j × Q ua r t e rt + i ,t .
                                                   i                j   t



The outcomes of interest, Yi ,t , are fixed capital investment, employment growth, R&D expenditures, divesti-

tures, cash holdings, and non-cash working capital. High UK-Exposurei is a dummy variable that equals 1 if

firm i is UK-exposed and zero otherwise. A firm is considered to be UK-exposed according to two measures:

(1) if it belongs to the top tercile of iU K (market-based measure); or (2) if it has a high number of Brexit-

related entries in its 2015 10-K form (textual-search-based measure). Post t equals 1 if the time period is in

the 2016:Q3­Q4 window.

    Controlsi ,t -1 is a vector of macroeconomic and firm-level control variables. Macro controls include the

lagged US dollar/British pound FX rate, the lagged VIX implied volatility index, the lagged mean GDP growth

1-year-ahead forecast from the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's Livingstone Survey, the lagged Con-

sumer Sentiment Index from the University of Michigan, and the lagged Leading Economic Indicator from

the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. Firm-level controls include lagged stock returns, Tobin's Q , cash

flow, logged assets, and sales growth. As an additional control for first-moment effects of Brexit, we add

1-quarter-ahead consensus earnings forecasts to our model. Firmi represents firm-fixed effects, Industry j is
   16
     Figure C.1 in Appendix C shows differences in investment trends between treated and control firms in the window
surrounding the vote. Brexit-induced uncertainty led to a significant, yet temporary, drop in investment for affected
US firms for a period of three quarters, followed by a rebound to near normalcy in the following three quarters. This
"drop-and-rebound" behavior matches the pattern of domestic uncertainty shocks discussed in Bloom (2009).



                                                                19
a dummy for each industry category j of the Hoberg and Phillips (2016) classification (FIC 100),17 and Quar-

ter t are calendar-quarter dummies. Standard errors are double-clustered by firm and calendar quarters.



4.4     Descriptive Statistics

Table 1 presents our sample summary statistics. Firm-level accounting variables are normalized by lagged

total assets. We begin with Panel A presenting the statistics for the universe of COMPUSTAT firms in the

pre-Brexit sample period (2010:Q1­2015:Q4). Using our baseline market-based iU K criterion, Panel B sum-

marizes the data for treated firms as defined by iU K (those in the top tercile of iU K ), while Panel C reports

statistics for control firms as defined by iU K (bottom tercile of iU K ). Panels D and E report summary statis-

tics for treatment and control firms, respectively, as defined by mentions of Brexit-related words in firms'

10-K filings (our text-based approach).


                                               TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE


    The reported statistics show that our sample firms do not display salient discrepancies relative to the

universe of COMPUSTAT firms. Comparisons across subsamples suggest that treated and control firms (as

defined by iU K ) differ across a few characteristics: firms in the treatment group are smaller as measured by

total assets and invest more than control firms. However, firms in the treated group as defined by 10-K men-

tions of Brexit-related words are, if anything, larger than those in the control group, while their investment

appears to be similar. Treatment and control firms share similarities on a number of dimensions across both

assignment schemes we use. They display economically similar R&D expenditures, cash holdings, Tobin's

Q, and employment growth. To ensure that differences in firm characteristics do not drive our results, we

redo all of our tests on propensity-score matched samples in which firm-level characteristics are balanced

before any estimations are conducted. Table C.1 displays summary statistics of the matched samples. Table

C.2 reports the results of our main estimations on these matched samples. To further verify that treated and

control firms are not fundamentally different, we examine the validity of the parallel trends assumption.

Visual evidence for that assumption regarding the investment process is provided in Figure C.1. Tables C.3

and C.4 report formal tests supporting the presence of parallel trends across all outcome variables.
   17
     These industries are formed by grouping firms with textually similar product descriptions in their 10-Ks. Hoberg
and Phillips (2016) show that the resulting industry classification is more granular and captures the locus of product-
market competitors of a given firm better than the standard SIC or NAICS industry schemes.




                                                          20
5        Results

5.1      The Impact of the Brexit Vote on US Firms' Investment, Labor, R&D, and

         Divestitures

Results from our baseline estimations for investment and employment are shown in Table 2. We begin with

a firm-fixed effects estimation in which iU K enters the specification as a linear continuous-treatment vari-

able in column (1), allowing for the entire range of iU K values. The P o s t × iU K interaction coefficient is

negative and highly significant, consistent with Prediction 1. In short, it points to the interpretation that a

higher exposure to the UK is linked to lower investment spending following the 2016 Brexit vote. We move

to our baseline specification in column (2), which considers the non-negative range of iU K partitioned in

terciles. The model includes time-varying industry-fixed effects by way of interacting Hoberg and Phillips

(2016) industries (FIC 100) and calendar-quarter dummy variables. The P o s t × H i g h iU K coefficient is

again negative and statistically significant. Finally, we consider our text-based approach to measure firm-

level exposure to the UK in column (3). The P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s DID coefficient is once again

negative. The investment reductions reported in all of these estimations are not only statistically, but also

economically significant. Given that the pre-Brexit (2015) average investment was 1.1% of firms' assets, the

DID estimate of ­0.165 implies a drop of up to 15% in investment rates. As a first-order approximation, the

dollar magnitude of aggregate investment cuts implied by this estimate is around $2 billion.18 Estimates

under columns (1) through (3) show that following the Brexit vote victory, UK-exposed American firms sig-

nificantly cut their investment vis-à-vis non-UK-exposed counterparts.

                                                  TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE

     The impact of the Brexit vote on corporate employment is also reported in Table 2. Using the specifi-

cations previously adopted, columns from (4) through (6) display negative and significant DID coefficients

for employment growth. The estimated coefficients imply a drop of between 2.6 and 4.9 percentage points.

Given that pre-Brexit (2015) sample average employment growth was 3.4%, our results suggest that the Brexit

vote contributed to a measurable slowdown in net job creation in some segments of the US economy, with

the upper bound estimate pointing to a reduction in employment for UK-exposed firms. This is a notable

finding given the steady growth in employment observed across the US since 2010, particularly during 2016.
     The 449 firms in the top tercile of iU K had average assets of $2.81 billion in 2016:Q2. A decline in their investment-
    18

to-assets ratio of 0.165 percentage points implies a drop in investment of $4.64 million per firm, or $2.08 billion in total.


                                                            21
    Next, we study the effects of the Brexit vote on UK-exposed firms' innovation policies. Columns (1)

through (3) of Table 3 show that, for all specifications of UK-exposure, there is a positive and highly signifi-

cant response of R&D spending to Brexit. This result is consistent with the growth-options channel discussed

in our theoretical framework. The results for R&D are also economically significant, reaching an increase of

0.24 percentage points relative to the pre-Brexit average of 3.2% of assets.


                                            TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE


    Finally, we look into the effects of the Brexit vote on UK-exposed firms' disinvestment (the sales of plant,

property and equipment scaled by lagged total assets). Columns (4) through (6) of Table 3 suggest that Brexit

led to substantial reductions in divestitures for UK-exposed firms. The magnitudes here are notable, with

a decline of up to 0.03 percentage points, representing 33% of the average divestiture rate of the pre-Brexit

period. Confirming the predictions of our framework, Brexit-induced uncertainty led to a reduction in both

capital investment and disinvestment by affected US firms.



5.2     Result Characterization

5.2.1   Tracing Investment and Labor Cuts

Since we are looking at multinational firms, it is important that we identify whether investment and job re-

ductions occur within US borders or stem from cuts in foreign operations. In this section, we first investigate

whether investment cuts observed amongst American firms exposed to the UK affected operations that take

place in the United States. We then look at the location of jobs affected by the Brexit vote. We also study the

types of US jobs and workers affected by the 2016 British vote.


The Location of Investment Cuts

We determine the location of investment cuts using data from Orbis. With these data, we are able to con-

duct our baseline analysis on investment looking squarely at US-based operations of companies domiciled

in the United States. The total number of US-based subsidiaries in our sample is 51,750. For each parent

firm, in each year, we compute their US-based investment by summing fixed capital spending across their

US subsidiaries. We then repeat the analysis of Table 2 using US-based investment as the dependent vari-

able. Results in columns (1) and (2) of Table 4 indicate that UK-exposed American firms cut investment in



                                                      22
their US-located subsidiaries in response to the Brexit vote. The magnitudes of the investment cuts are larger

than those reported in Table 2 (annualized), implying that effects on investment measured at the parent firm

level are driven in large part by investment cuts in their US operations.


                                              TABLE 4 ABOUT HERE


    As a further check, we investigate whether these UK-exposed American firms cut investment in their

UK-based subsidiaries as well. Using Orbis, we identify UK subsidiaries of our US-domiciled firms. We sim-

ilarly calculate the total UK-based investment of each US parent firm by summing spending figures across

UK subsidiaries. We then repeat our baseline analysis with this measure of UK investment as the dependent

variable. Results in columns (3) and (4) of Table 4 suggest that UK-exposed American firms cut investment

in their UK-based subsidiaries even more than they do across their US-based subsidiaries. This result is

sensible and consistent with a strong, direct effect of Brexit-induced uncertainty on UK-based operations.


The Location and Nature of Employment Cuts and Establishment Turnover

We are able to identify the location of employment cuts made by American firms using the YTS database. We

first repeat the analysis of Table 2 using establishment-level employment growth calculated based on YTS

data on the number of employees across all establishments operated by sample firms in the US. Results in

columns (1) and (2) of Table 5 suggest that UK-exposed American firms reduced their employment in the US

following the Brexit vote. The magnitude of the employment cuts reported in columns (1) and (2) of Table

5 are larger than those reported in columns (5) and (6) of Table 2, suggesting that effects on employment

measured at the aggregate US-domiciled firm level are likely to be driven by employment declines in their

US-based operations. Relatedly, real options theory predicts an increase in the option value of "wait and

see" in response to uncertainty. We thus analyze if Brexit affected exposed firms' decisions on opening and

closing establishments in the US, which we define as establishment turnover.19 Columns (3) and (4) display

negative and significant coefficients, suggesting that UK-exposed firms indeed reduce their establishment

turnover and confirms our predictions about firm inaction.


                                              TABLE 5 ABOUT HERE
   19
     Establishment turnover is defined as the sum of establishment openings and closings, divided by the lagged num-
ber of total establishments.




                                                        23
    We delve into the nature of employment cuts by considering whether the reductions in employment

following the Brexit vote were felt primarily among the higher or lower skilled workforce. As a proxy for la-

bor skills, we use the industry-level labor skill index (LSI) proposed by Ghaly et al. (2017). The LSI is based

on data from the Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) compiled by the BLS and the Department of

Labor's O*NET program classification. The O*NET classification allocates occupations into five categories

where scores of 1 (5) correspond to the lowest (highest) skilled occupations, based on the extent of educa-

tion, experience, and training required to perform each occupation. An industry's LSI is computed as the

weighted average O*NET classification across all occupations in that industry, where the weights correspond

to the fraction of workers engaged in each occupation.

    Columns (5) through (8) of Table 5 report results on the effect of the Brexit vote on employment growth

in subsamples of firms partitioned into two groups based on the 2015 (pre-Brexit) LSI. Firms in the Low Skill

subsample are in industries which fall within the lowest tercile of LSI and firms in the High Skill subsample

are in industries which fall within the highest tercile of LSI. The results in columns (5) and (6) show that

UK-exposed American firms in Low Skill industries (including food, chemical, and primary metal manu-

facturing, mining, and clothing retail) cut their employment substantially more (relative to control firms).

Conversely, the estimates in columns (7) and (8) indicate that firms in High Skill industries (computer and

electronic product manufacturing, telecommunications and information services and professional, techni-

cal and scientific services) show no statistically significant effect.


5.2.2   Input versus Output Channels

We next study whether the effect of UK-based uncertainty on US corporate investment was driven by firms

that were importers from the UK or exporters to the UK. We do this using the index of firms' offshoring

activities developed by Hoberg and Moon (2017). This index, derived from firms' 10-K filings, counts men-

tions of words related to the purchase of inputs ("Input") and sale of outputs ("Output") from each country

a firm does business with within a year. For each sample firm, we compute the sum of the Input and Out-

put indices associated with the UK over the 2010­2014 period (similar to our iU K estimation window). We

consider each of the Input and Output indices separately, as well as combined (Total). We define as highly

UK-offshoring-exposed firms those with a value of greater than five on a given offshoring index.20 Control

firms are those with scores of zero on the same index.
   20
    While this threshold is arbitrary and meant to follow our previous approach to textual-search-based measure-
ment of exposure to the UK, our findings are robust to alternative choices.


                                                        24
                                             TABLE 6 ABOUT HERE


    The first two columns of Table 6 report our baseline results on the effects of the Brexit vote on investment

for ease of comparison, while the next three columns report analogous results for treatment schemes based

on offshoring activities to the UK. The estimate in column (3) indicates that US firms with a high degree of

total offshoring activity with the UK significantly cut their investment relative to US firms with no UK off-

shoring. The magnitude of this effect is remarkably similar to those of our base tests. In columns (4) and (5),

we consider Input and Output indices separately. This more detailed analysis is important in revealing that

the aggregate cut in investment that we identified was driven by firms with high Input exposure to the UK. A

closer examination of disclosure data reveals that these firms have more operations in the UK (e.g., manu-

facturing units), utilizing labor, capital, and raw material inputs from the UK. The effect on the investment of

US firms with high Output exposure to the UK is zero. These results suggest that input-based economic links

play a crucial role in the cross-country transmission of uncertainty and its effects on corporate investment

and hiring decisions.


5.2.3   The Effect of Input Irreversibility

We turn to the analysis of adjustment costs in modulating the effect of uncertainty on investment and em-

ployment as a way to more finely characterize our results (cf. Predictions 4 and 5). We begin by looking at

fixed capital adjustment costs. We do so introducing a firm-level proxy for capital investment reversibility;

namely, the Kim and Kung (2016) asset redeployability index. Columns (1) through (3) of Table 7 show re-

sults on the amplification effect of capital adjustment costs. In column (1), we run the DID estimation that

considers firms in the top tercile of iU K as the treatment group. In this first run, we restrict the sample to

firms with high irreversibility, as defined by the bottom tercile of the Kim and Kung index. The DID coeffi-

cient is negative and highly significant. The same exercise is repeated in column (2), but for the subsample

of firms in the top tercile of asset redeployability; that is, firms with plausibly less irreversible investment.

The DID coefficient is insignificant for this group of firms. The estimation under column (3) uses the entire

sample of firms, introducing a dummy variable High Irreversibility that equals one if the firm is in the high

irreversibility group. The coefficient on this variable can be interpreted as a third difference in a differences-

test framework; that is, as a DIDID estimate. The coefficient for the triple interaction in column (3) is nega-

tive and highly significant, implying that cross-group responses are economically and statistically distinct,

in line with Prediction 4.

                                                       25
                                              TABLE 7 ABOUT HERE


    We next turn to the impact of labor adjustment costs, using industry-level unionization rates as a proxy

for such costs. Columns (4) through (6) of Table 7 show that the response of firms in more unionized indus-

tries is significantly different from that of firms in less unionized industries. This analysis suggests that the

effect of uncertainty on US corporate employment following the 2016 Brexit vote was modulated by input ir-

reversibility, as implied by Prediction 5. In all, the results of Table 7 confirm the theoretical prior that capital

and labor adjustment costs significantly affected US firms' responses to Brexit-induced uncertainty.



5.3    Other Firm Policies and Outcomes

We also study how the 2016 Brexit vote affected other firms' policies, especially their liquidity management.

We do so looking at how firms adjusted their cash holdings and non-cash working capital (NWC). The pos-

itive and highly significant coefficients in columns (1) and (2) in Table 8 show that UK-exposed firms in-

creased their cash savings in the face of higher uncertainty induced by the Brexit vote. Negative and highly

significant coefficients in columns (3) and (4) show that firms concomitantly accumulated less inventory

by adjusting their NWC downwards. Although not explicitly modeled in our framework, this behavior is

consistent with the theoretical underpinnings from the liquidity management literature. In particular, pre-

cautionary behavior will lead firms to change the composition of assets on their balance sheets, leading to

the accumulation of the most liquid assets.



                                              TABLE 8 ABOUT HERE



    We further use Table 8 to report results on profit growth. The estimates in columns (5) and (6) are not sta-

tistically significant, suggesting that the Brexit vote did not affect the profitability of UK-exposed American

firms relative to those of non-exposed firms. They support the idea that the investment and employment

drops previously reported are arguably due to a "second-moment" shock to income uncertainty, rather than

a negative "first-moment" shock to firms' cash flows.




                                                        26
6        Robustness

6.1      Foreign Exchange Exposure

The Brexit vote was followed by a depreciation of the British pound (9% relative to the US dollar). To the

extent that our treatment assignment schemes may be correlated with firms' exposures to US dollar/British

pound (henceforth, USD­GBP) fluctuations, our results could reflect UK-exposed firms' heterogeneous re-

sponses to the British pound depreciation (affecting first-moment expectations) rather than to uncertainty

generated by the Brexit vote (second-moment expectations). In what follows, we account for this possibility

by controlling for firms' exposures to FX rate fluctuations in the value of the British pound.

     First, we estimate a dynamic analogue of Eq. (13), firm-by-firm, over our testing period.21 Instead of

regressing the volatility of firm equity returns on the volatilities of US and UK equity index returns and the

volatility of changes in the USD­GBP FX rate, we regress the levels of firms' equity returns on the levels of US

and UK equity index returns and USD­GBP FX rate changes. This specification aims at capturing the first-

moment exposures of firms to movements in the pound. We include as an additional control each firm's
                                                      $/£
end-of-quarter coefficient on F X $/£ , namely iF
                                                ,t
                                                  X
                                                            , which captures the time-varying sensitivity of firm i 's

equity returns to changes in the British pound. Second, we include in our estimations the Alfaro et al. (2018)

firm-level instruments for first- and second-moment shocks to the USD­GBP rate. Our final two controls

are based on firm disclosures of hedging activities. Following Campello et al. (2011), we search for mentions

of keywords that are meant to capture FX hedging activity in 10-K disclosures. We include as additional con-

trols a dummy variable for whether a firm engaged in FX hedging activity in the prior year, and the intensity

of hedging in the prior year as measured by the number of keywords mentioned.


                                             TABLE 9 ABOUT HERE


     Results in Table 9 indicate that our inferences on firm responses to the Brexit vote continue to hold even

in the presence of various controls for their possible heterogeneous exposures to the depreciation of the

British pound. Results in columns (1) and (2), for instance, show estimated DID coefficients of between ­

0.08 and ­0.17, which are virtually identical to those in columns (2) and (3) of Table 2. The results suggest that

the observed investment cuts are unlikely to be confounded by firms reacting to changes in first-moment

expectations arising from the British pound depreciation that followed the Brexit vote.
    21
     Specifically, we perform our estimation using monthly returns data, with 24-month rolling windows, over the
period 2010:M1 through 2016:M12.


                                                            27
6.2    Financing Costs

We next investigate whether any of the effects we observe may be ascribed to UK-exposed firms experienc-

ing higher financing costs as a result of heightened uncertainty induced by the Brexit vote. Prior research has

shown that periods of higher uncertainty are associated with increased credit spreads, which may lead firms

to curtail investment (Gilchrist et al. (2014)). We accommodate for this channel in our analysis by account-

ing for several proxies of firms' ability to raise financing in the debt and equity markets following the Brexit

vote. In particular, we re-estimate the analysis of Table 2 controlling for yields on existing bonds (obtained

from TRACE), yields on new bond issues (from SDC), mark-ups on new syndicated loans (from DealScan),

and for the discount rate news component of returns (from the decomposition of returns news into cash

flow news and discount rate news components as in Vuolteenaho (2002)).


                                            TABLE 10 ABOUT HERE


    Results in Table 10 indicate that our findings continue to obtain when accounting for possible tighten-

ing of firms' financing costs. For instance, results in columns (1) and (2) produce DID coefficients ranging

between ­0.07 and ­0.17, which closely resemble those in columns (2) and (3) of Table 2. Our evidence sug-

gests that observed investment cuts are driven primarily by the real-options channel, and are not subsumed

by firms' financing costs.



6.3    Accounting for Trumpit

One could be concerned about confounding uncertainty effects associated with the election of President

Donald Trump in the United States. We address this issue in two different ways. First, we consider an al-

ternative event window that excludes 2016:Q4 from our treatment evaluation period. This narrower time

window helps mitigate concerns that forward-looking behavior of firms regarding Trump's election in the

US could influence our results (Trump's victory was an unlikely event as of 2016:Q3). Accordingly, we com-

pare the third quarter of 2016 with the same quarter of 2015. As shown in columns (1) and (2) of Table 11,

results are similar to our baseline estimates in Table 2. The patterns we report are consistent with relatively

short-lived, "drop-and-rebound" effects of uncertainty.


                                            TABLE 11 ABOUT HERE




                                                      28
     Second, we look at the recent literature on the effect of Trump's election on US firms. Wagner et al.

(2018) detail a methodology identifying what the authors label as "winners" and "losers" from that election.

We use their method, which is based on 10-day cumulative CAPM-adjusted abnormal stock returns around

the Trump election date, to check for the presence of either of these sets of firms in our sample. Our treat-

ment group based on iU K (10-K mentions) contains 57 (23) "loser" firms. In columns (3) and (4) of Table

11, we replicate our baseline tests on investment omitting firms labeled as "losers" by Wagner et al. (2018);

that is, firms that might invest less because of Trump's election. The estimates show that our inferences are

unaffected by these firms.22



6.4       Falsification Tests

We also address concerns that our test design is set up in a way that may generate results not necessarily tied

to the June 2016 referendum result. In doing so, we re-estimate our tests considering two "treatment peri-

ods" that occurred prior to the 2016 Brexit vote: (1) David Cameron's election as Prime Minister (2015:Q3);

and (2) the US Debt Ceiling Crisis of 2011 (2011:Q2­2011:Q4). The first falsification test mitigates concerns

that firms anticipated the process leading to the Brexit referendum at the time of Cameron's election. The

second addresses concerns that our investment results could be driven by episodes of uncertainty in the US

-- and not the UK -- that affect global firms in general. As shown in columns (5) through (8) of Table 11, the

DID coefficients are statistically insignificant in all such cases.



6.5       Uncertainty in the Global Economy

We conduct a battery of supplementary tests to rule out the possibility that our results on investment cuts in

the US may be driven by coincident, potentially uncertainty-inducing events that take place in economies

other than the UK. To do so, we construct metrics analogous to our baseline UK-exposure measure, iU K ,

by re-estimating Eq. (13) for developed and emerging markets with relevant trade ties to the US: EU, China,

Mexico, Japan, India, and Brazil. In other words, we repeat our tests classifying firms based on a given cri-
                                             Japan
terion -- iE U , iC h i n a , iM e x i c o , i       , iI n d i a , and iB r a z i l -- according to the sensitivity of their equity

returns volatility to the respective region's main equity index return volatility. In this estimation, performed

over the same pre-Brexit sample period of 2010:M1 through 2014:M12, we control for the FTSE100 volatility,
   22
        For completeness, we repeat our analysis also excluding "winner" firms and find no changes in our results.




                                                                  29
the US dollar/British pound exchange rate volatility, and the volatility in the exchange rate of the US dollar

and the currency of each country.


                                            TABLE 12 ABOUT HERE


    Results are reported in Table 12. Column (1) repeats our baseline estimate from Table 2 to ease compar-

isons. In column (2), we find that American firms exposed to EU uncertainty also experienced significant

investment declines. The much smaller iE U estimate is sensible and consistent with the fact that Brexit-

related events induced political uncertainty in the EU as well as the UK. Results in columns (3) through (6)

show that US firms exposed to uncertainty in several other economies experienced no significant change in

their investments in the quarters following the announcement of the Brexit referendum. Our main results

are unlikely to be driven by American firms' exposures to events other than the 2016 Brexit vote in the UK.




7    Concluding Remarks

Political uncertainty appears to be a growing phenomenon, seemingly fueled by populism and a rejection of

institutions associated with international finance, migration, and trade. This dynamic seems to be econom-

ically important, yet our understanding of its consequences is limited. In this paper, we provide firm-level

evidence of transmission of uncertainty generated by the 2016 Brexit referendum onto American corpora-

tions. Our analysis shows how US firms that were exposed to the UK economy changed a myriad of business

policies -- including their investment, disinvestment, hiring, R&D, and savings -- in response to 2016 Brexit

vote. As the British anti-integration referendum has reportedly inspired similar national-centric movements

in other countries, it is important that researchers and policy makers are able to gauge its larger implications.

    Our results show how foreign-born uncertainty is transmitted across borders, shaping domestic capital

formation and labor allocation. Yet, the effects we identify on UK-exposed firms in the US are likely only a few

of the many channels through which economic uncertainty is transmitted across borders. One must bear in

mind that the 2016 Brexit referendum set in motion a complex process that is bound to last for several years

and affect many other countries connected through the global economy. One of the important aspects of our

analysis is shedding light on the fact that politicians and regulators can affect the economy not only through

policies they enact, but also by introducing uncertainty in the process of making decisions. Such uncertainty

has real and financial consequences not only for the country that originates it, but for other countries as well.



                                                       30
References
Acharya, Viral V., Heitor Almeida, and Murillo Campello, 2013, Aggregate risk and the choice between cash
  and lines of credit, Journal of Finance 68, 2059­2116.

Alfaro, Ivan, Nicholas Bloom, and Xiaoji Lin, 2018, The finance uncertainty multiplier, National Bureau of
   Economic Research, Working Paper n. 24571.

Azzimonti, Marina, 2016, Does partisan conflict deter FDI inflows to the US?, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, Working Paper n. 22336.

Baker, Scott R., Nicholas Bloom, and Steven J. Davis, 2016, Measuring economic policy uncertainty, Quarterly
  Journal of Economics 131, 1593­1636.

Becker, Sascha O., Thiemo Fetzer, and Dennis Novy, 2017, Who voted for Brexit? A comprehensive district-
  level analysis, Economic Policy 32, 601­650.

Berg, Tobias, Anthony Saunders, Larissa Schäfer, and Sascha Steffen, 2019, Brexit and the contraction of
  syndicated lending, Working Paper.

Bernal, Oscar, Jean-Yves Gnabo, and Grégory Guilmin, 2016, Economic policy uncertainty and risk spillovers
  in the Eurozone, Journal of International Money and Finance 65, 24­45.

Bloom, Nicholas, 2009, The impact of uncertainty shocks, Econometrica 77, 623­685.

Bloom, Nicholas, 2014, Fluctuations in uncertainty, Journal of Economic Perspectives 28, 153­175.

Bloom, Nicholas, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J. Terry, 2018, Really un-
  certain business cycles, Econometrica 86, 1031­1065.

Bushee, Brian J., Michael J. Jung, and Gregory S. Miller, 2011, Conference presentations and the disclosure
  milieu, Journal of Accounting Research 49, 1163­1192.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, The dividend-price ratio and expectations of future dividends
  and discount factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195­228.

Campello, Murillo, Chen Lin, Yue Ma, and Hong Zou, 2011, The real and financial implications of corporate
  hedging, Journal of Finance 66, 1615­1647.

Cravino, Javier, and Andrei A. Levchenko, 2016, Multinational firms and international business cycle trans-
  mission, Quarterly Journal of Economics 132, 921­962.

Davis, Steven J., 2017, An index of global economic policy uncertainty, Working Paper, University of Chicago
  Booth School of Business.

Dumas, Bernard, Jeff Fleming, and Robert E. Whaley, 1998, Implied volatility functions: Empirical tests, Jour-
  nal of Finance 53, 2059­2106.

Ghaly, Mohamed, Viet Anh Dang, and Konstantinos Stathopoulos, 2017, Cash holdings and labor hetero-
  geneity: The role of skilled labor, Review of Financial Studies 30, 3636­3668.

Gilchrist, Simon, Jae W. Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek, 2014, Uncertainty, financial frictions, and investment dy-
  namics, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper 20038 .




                                                     31
Gulen, Huseyin, and Mihai Ion, 2016, Policy uncertainty and corporate investment, Review of Financial Stud-
  ies 29, 523­564.

Hassan, Tarek Alexander, Stephan Hollander, Laurence van Lent, and Ahmed Tahoun, 2020, The global im-
  pact of Brexit uncertainty, National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper n. 26609 .

Hoberg, Gerard, and S. Katie Moon, 2017, Offshore activities and financial vs operational hedging, Journal
  of Financial Economics 125, 217­244.

Hoberg, Gerard, and Gordon Phillips, 2016, Text-based network industries and endogenous product differ-
  entiation, Journal of Political Economy 124, 1423­1465.

Hollander, Stephan, Maarten Pronk, and Erik Roelofsen, 2010, Does silence speak? An empirical analysis of
  disclosure choices during conference calls, Journal of Accounting Research 48, 531­563.

Julio, Brandon, and Youngsuk Yook, 2012, Political uncertainty and corporate investment cycles, Journal of
   Finance 67, 45­83.

Julio, Brandon, and Youngsuk Yook, 2016, Policy uncertainty, irreversibility, and cross-border flows of capital,
   Journal of International Economics 103, 13­26.

Kim, Hyunseob, and Howard Kung, 2016, The asset redeployability channel: How uncertainty affects corpo-
  rate investment, Review of Financial Studies 30, 245­280.

Klössner, Stefan, and Rodrigo Sekkel, 2014, International spillovers of policy uncertainty, Economics Letters
  124, 508­512.

Lee, Jaewoo, and Kwanho Shin, 2000, The role of a variable input in the relationship between investment
  and uncertainty, American Economic Review 90, 667­680.

Matsumoto, Dawn, Maarten Pronk, and Erik Roelofsen, 2011, What makes conference calls useful? the in-
 formation content of managers' presentations and analysts' discussion sessions, The Accounting Review
 86, 1383­1414.

Mixon, Scott, 2007, The implied volatility term structure of stock index options, Journal of Empirical Finance
  14, 333­354.

Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, 2002, What drives firm-level stock returns?, Journal of Finance 57, 233­264.

Wagner, Alexander, Richard J. Zeckhauser, and Alexandre Ziegler, 2018, Company stock reactions to the 2016
 election shock: Trump, taxes and trade, Journal of Financial Economics 130, 428­451.




                                                      32
                                                                                          Table 1. Summary Statistics

     This table reports summary statistics for the main variables used in our empirical analyses. The final sample is a match between COMPUSTAT Quarterly North America Fundamentals and the estimated
     iU K sample for the period from 2010:Q1 to 2015:Q4. Each panel reports the mean, standard deviation, median, interquartile range (IQR), and the number of observations conditional on firms belonging
     to each subsample. Investment is defined as capital expenditures divided by lagged total assets. Employment growth is defined as the percent change in the number of employees (annual). R&D is
     defined as R&D expenditures divided by lagged total assets, considering only firms with non-missing R&D expenditures. Divestitures is defined as the value of sale of plant, property, and equipment
     divided by lagged total assets. Cash holdings is defined as cash and short-term investments divided by lagged total assets. Non-cash working capital is defined as working capital (net of cash) divided by
     lagged total assets. Tobin's Q is defined as the market value of assets divided by the book value of assets, and is calculated as the market value of equity plus the book value of assets minus book value of
     equity plus deferred taxes, all divided by book value of assets. Cash flow is defined as operating income before depreciation divided by lagged total assets. Size is defined as the logarithm of total assets.
     Sales growth is defined as the year-on-year percent change in quarterly sales. Consensus earnings forecast is defined as the standardized mean one-quarter ahead EPS forecast. Stock returns are defined
     as the quarterly buy-and-hold return. All variables are winsorized at the 1% level. Panel A summarizes data for the universe of COMPUSTAT firms. Panel B shows summary statistics for the sample of
     treated firms as defined by iU K (top tercile of iU K ). Panel C shows summary statistics for the sample of control firms as defined by iU K (bottom tercile of iU K ). Panel D shows summary statistics
     for the sample of treated firms as defined by mentions of Brexit-related words in their 2015 10-K filings (more than five 10-K entries). Panel E shows summary statistics for the sample of control firms
     as defined by mentions of Brexit-related words in their 2015 10-K filings (zero 10-K entries).


                                                                  Panel A. COMPUSTAT                            Panel B. Treated Firms:                            Panel C. Control Firms:
                                                                        Universe                                Market-Based Approach                             Market-Based Approach
                                                                                                                 (Top Tercile of iU K )                           (Bottom Tercile of iU K )

                         Firm-Level Variables           Mean     SD     Median     IQR       N          Mean     SD     Median     IQR       N         Mean        SD     Median      IQR       N

                         Investment                      0.01    0.02     0.01     0.01    76,094       0.02    0.02      0.01     0.02    11,083       0.01      0.01      0.01     0.01     12,067
                         Employment Growth (Annual)      0.08    0.28     0.03     0.16    17,620       0.08    0.29      0.03     0.19    2,659        0.06      0.20      0.03     0.11      2,965
                         R&D                             0.03    0.04     0.02     0.04    40,864       0.03    0.04      0.02     0.04     5,019       0.02      0.03      0.01     0.02      6,200
                         Divestitures (×100)             0.06    0.28     0.00     0.00    61,151       0.10    0.38      0.00     0.00     8,604       0.08      0.32      0.00     0.01      9,422




33
                         Cash Holdings                   0.22    0.25     0.12     0.27    78,044       0.20    0.24      0.11     0.26    11,176       0.17      0.18      0.11     0.19     12,097
                         Non-Cash Working Capital        0.04    0.19     0.03     0.20    76,323       0.05    0.18      0.04     0.19    10,846       0.08      0.16      0.07     0.20     11,738
                         Tobin's Q                       2.11    1.59     1.57     1.26    73,353       1.92    1.51      1.41     1.01    11,090       1.98      1.25      1.62     1.07     12,055
                         Cash Flow                       0.01    0.06     0.03     0.04    75,287       0.01    0.06      0.02     0.04    10,972       0.03      0.04      0.03     0.03     11,871
                         Size (Log Assets)               6.19    2.08     6.15     3.08    78,062       6.11    1.87      6.12     2.86    11,176       7.25      1.99      7.25     2.65     12,097
                         Sales Growth                    0.16    0.62     0.06     0.23    71,637       0.18    0.71      0.06     0.31    10,624       0.10      0.36      0.06     0.16     11,969
                         Consensus Earnings Forecast     0.07    3.51     0.09     2.05    42,031       0.01    3.40      0.01     1.83     8,963       0.07      2.33      0.04     2.40     10,720
                         Stock Returns                   0.03    0.24     0.02     0.25    67,226       0.02    0.27      0.00     0.30    11,088       0.04      0.18      0.03     0.20     12,063


                                                                                                                Panel D. Treated Firms:                            Panel E. Control Firms:
                                                                                                            Textual-Search-Based Approach                      Textual-Search-Based Approach
                                                                                                         (More Than Five 10-K Entries on Brexit)                (Zero 10-K Entries on Brexit)

                         Firm-Level Variables                                                           Mean     SD     Median     IQR       N         Mean        SD     Median      IQR       N

                         Investment                                                                     0.01    0.02      0.01     0.01    35,828       0.01      0.02      0.01     0.01     9,389
                         Employment Growth (Annual)                                                     0.08    0.30      0.03     0.17     8,004       0.08      0.30      0.03     0.16     2,248
                         R&D                                                                            0.03    0.04      0.02     0.04    19,988       0.03      0.04      0.01     0.03     4,745
                         Divestitures (×100)                                                            0.05    0.26      0.00     0.00    29,009       0.05      0.24      0.00     0.00     7,377
                         Cash Holdings                                                                  0.23    0.25      0.13     0.29    36,985       0.22      0.24      0.12     0.26     9,533
                         Non-Cash Working Capital                                                       0.01    0.20      0.02     0.20    36,292       0.06      0.19      0.04     0.21     9,260
                         Tobin's Q                                                                      2.10    1.59      1.55     1.29    34,108       2.06      1.54      1.55     1.17     9,138
                         Cash Flow                                                                      0.01    0.07      0.02     0.04    35,432       0.01      0.07      0.02     0.04     9,240
                         Size (Log Assets)                                                              6.08    2.06      6.02     3.12    37,002       5.95      2.15      5.86     3.23     9,533
                         Sales Growth                                                                   0.17    0.66      0.06     0.25    33,647       0.17      0.67      0.05     0.22     8,835
                         Consensus Earnings Forecast                                                    0.04    3.46      0.04     2.06    26,008       0.01      4.46      0.04     1.79     6,929
                         Stock Returns                                                                  0.02    0.25      0.01     0.27    29,983       0.03      0.24      0.02     0.24     8,523
                           Table 2. The Impact of the Brexit Vote on US Investment and Employment Growth: Baseline Specification

     This table reports output from Eq. (14). The dependent variables are investment and employment growth. Investment is defined as capital expenditures divided
     by lagged total assets (quarterly). Employment growth is the percentage change in the number of employees (annual). In the first specification, the measure of
     UK-exposure (iU K ) enters the regression as a linear continuous variable. In the second specification, the treatment group is composed by the top tercile of iU K ,
     while the control group is composed by firms in the bottom tercile of iU K . The third specification is a textual-search-based measure of UK-exposure that sums
     up the number of Brexit-related words in firms' 2015 10-K forms. The treatment group is made of firms with more than five entries, whereas the control group are
     firms with zero entries. The time dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to compare the two quarters following the announcement of the Brexit referendum
     victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the announcement of the vote date (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using
     robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                                                              Investment                                   Employment Growth
                                                                   Linear     Treatment      Treatment            Linear       Treatment     Treatment
                                                                    iU K        is Top         is > 5              iU K          is Top        is > 5
                                                                   Model       Tercile of      Brexit             Model         Tercile of     Brexit
                                                                                 iU K        Entries in                           iU K       Entries in
                                                                                               10-Ks                                           10-Ks
                                                                     (1)           (2)           (3)                (4)            (5)           (6)




34
                           Post                                    ­0.022                                         1.055
                                                                   (0.020)                                       (2.843)
                           P o s t × iU K                         ­0.047***                                      ­4.173**
                                                                   (0.010)                                        (2.133)
                           P o s t × H i g h iU K                              ­0.165***                                       ­4.912***
                                                                                (0.019)                                         (1.552)
                           P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                               ­0.077***                                      ­2.617***
                                                                                               (0.008)                                        (0.402)
                           Controls
                           Firm                                     Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes           Yes
                           Macroeconomic                            Yes           No             No                Yes            No            No
                           Fixed Effects
                           Firm                                     Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes           Yes
                           Industry×Time                            No            Yes            Yes               No             Yes           Yes
                           Observations                            43,025        17,199         21,253            9,143          3,540         4,173
                           R-squared                                0.67          0.75           0.73             0.35           0.45          0.45
                                                Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                               Table 3. The Impact of the Brexit Vote on R&D Expenditures and Divestitures: Baseline Specification

     This table reports output from Eq. (14). The dependent variables are R&D and divestitures. R&D is defined as total R&D expenditures divided by lagged total
     assets. Divestitures are defined as the value of SPP&E (Sale of Plant, Property, and Equipment ) divided by lagged total assets. In the first specification, the measure
     of UK-exposure (iU K ) enters the regression as a linear continuous variable. In the second specification, the treatment group is composed by the top tercile
     of iU K , while the control group is composed by firms in the bottom tercile of iU K . The third specification is a textual-search-based measure of UK-exposure
     that sums up the number of Brexit-related words in firms' 2015 10-K forms. The treatment group is made of firms with more than five entries, whereas the
     control group are firms with zero entries. The time dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to compare the two quarters following the announcement of the
     referendum and Brexit's victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the announcement (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed
     using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                                                                   R&D                                         Divestitures
                                                                   Linear      Treatment      Treatment            Linear       Treatment     Treatment
                                                                    iU K         is Top         is > 5              iU K          is Top        is > 5
                                                                   Model        Tercile of      Brexit             Model         Tercile of     Brexit
                                                                                  iU K        Entries in                           iU K       Entries in
                                                                                                10-Ks                                           10-Ks
                                                                     (1)            (2)           (3)                (4)            (5)           (6)




35
                            Post                                   ­0.002                                          0.002
                                                                   (0.131)                                        (0.001)
                            P o s t × iU K                         0.361***                                      ­0.012***
                                                                    (0.026)                                       (0.004)
                            P o s t × H i g h iU K                               0.238***                                        ­0.027**
                                                                                  (0.055)                                         (0.011)
                            P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                                0.213***                                      ­0.027***
                                                                                                 (0.058)                                       (0.005)
                            Controls
                            Firm                                     Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes           Yes
                            Macroeconomic                            Yes           No             No                Yes            No            No
                            Fixed Effects
                            Firm                                     Yes           Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes           Yes
                            Industry×Time                            No            Yes            Yes               No             Yes           Yes
                            Observations                           17,121         5,528          9,066             40,054         16,187       19,923
                            R-squared                               0.86          0.88           0.92               0.21           0.33         0.29
                                                 Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                        Table 4. Result Characterization: The Impact of the Brexit Vote on Investment of US and UK-based Subsidiaries

     This table reports output from Eq. (14) considering only US-based and UK-based subsidiaries of the parent firms in the baseline sample. The dependent variable
     is investment. In the first and third specifications, the treatment group is composed by the top tercile of iU K , while the control group is composed by firms in the
     bottom tercile of iU K . In the second and fourth specifications, we consider a textual-search-based measure of UK-exposure that sums up the number of Brexit-
     related words in firms' 2015 10-K forms. The treatment group is made of firms with more than five entries, whereas the control group are firms with zero entries. The
     first two columns consider only US-based subsidiaries and the last two columns consider only UK-based subsidiaries. The time dimension of the DID estimator
     is set so as to compare the two quarters following the announcement of the referendum and Brexit's victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the
     announcement (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                                                                                      Investment
                                           Subsidiaries located in:                  US            US           UK             UK
                                                                                  Treatment     Treatment    Treatment     Treatment
                                                                                    is Top        is > 5       is Top        is > 5
                                                                                   Tercile of     Brexit      Tercile of     Brexit
                                                                                     iU K       Entries in      iU K       Entries in




36
                                                                                                  10-Ks                      10-Ks
                                                                                      (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)
                                           P o s t × H i g h iU K                 ­0.286***                   ­0.367**
                                                                                   (0.090)                     (0.149)
                                           P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                 ­0.463***                  ­0.571***
                                                                                                 (0.107)                    (0.082)
                                           Controls
                                           Firm                                      Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
                                           Fixed Effects
                                           Firm                                      Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
                                           Industry × Time                           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
                                           Observations                             3,611         3,611        1,840         1,840
                                           R-squared                                0.80          0.80         0.80          0.84
                                              Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
         Table 5. Result Characterization: The Impact of the Brexit Vote on Employment Growth, Establishment Turnover, and Labor Skills in the US

     This table reports output from Eq. (14) considering establishment-level employment growth in the US and results on the cross-sectional effect of labor skills
     on employment growth by firms in the baseline sample. The dependent variable is employment growth. Employment growth is the percentage change in the
     number of employees (annual). Labor skills are measured by the labor skills index (LSI) defined in Ghaly et al. (2017). The LSI is constructed as the weighted
     average O*NET occupational skills classification (1 to 5 scale), weighted by the fraction of employees in a given industry engaged in a given occupation, averaged
     across all occupations in that industry. Low (high) skills firms are defined as firms in the bottom (top) tercile of the 2015 LSI (at the industry-level). In the first
     specification, the treatment group is composed by the top tercile of iU K , while the control group is composed by firms in the bottom tercile of iU K . The second
     specification is a textual-search-based measure of UK-exposure that sums up the number of Brexit-related words in firms' 2015 10-K forms. The treatment group
     is made of firms with more than five entries, whereas the control group are firms with zero entries. The time dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to
     compare the two quarters following the announcement of the referendum and Brexit's victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the announcement
     (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                              Establishment-Level                   Establishment                    Low Skills Subsample          High Skills Subsample
                                              Employment Growth                       Turnover
                                              Treatment      Treatment          Treatment       Treatment          Treatment       Treatment      Treatment      Treatment
                                                is Top      is > 5 Brexit         is Top       is > 5 Brexit         is Top       is > 5 Brexit     is Top      is > 5 Brexit
                                               Tercile of    Entries in          Tercile of     Entries in          Tercile of     Entries in      Tercile of    Entries in




37
                                                 iU K           10-Ks              iU K            10-Ks              iU K            10-Ks          iU K           10-Ks
                                                  (1)            (2)                (3)             (4)                (5)             (6)            (7)            (8)
       P o s t × H i g h iU K                  ­5.094***                         ­2.252***                         ­5.861***                       ­2.333
                                                (1.375)                           (0.719)                           (0.370)                        (1.689)
       P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                   ­4.603***                          ­1.547**                          ­7.260***                       2.316
                                                               (1.431)                            (0.765)                           (0.563)                       (2.032)
       Controls
       Firm                                      Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes               Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
       Fixed Effects
       Firm                                      Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes               No              No             No             No
       Industry×Time                             Yes             Yes                Yes             Yes               No              No             No             No
       Industry                                  No              No                 No              No                Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
       Time                                      No              No                 No              No                Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
       Observations                             3,540           4,173              3,588           4,184             1,323           1,229          1,568           705
       R-squared                                 0.33            0.32               0.46            0.43              0.10            0.29           0.14           0.41
                                                   Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                                 Table 6. Result Characterization: The Impact of the Brexit Vote on Investment of UK Offshoring Firms

     This table reports output from Eq. (14) under treatment assignment schemes based on US firms' UK-based offshoring activities. The dependent variable is
     investment. In the first two columns, we report our baseline estimates as in Table 2. In the third column, the treatment group consists of firms with scores of
     greater than five on the Hoberg-Moon UK Offshoring Index summed up over years 2010­2014, considering both input and output offshoring activities, whereas
     the control group is made of firms with scores of zero on this index. In the fourth column,the treatment group consists of firms with scores of greater than five
     on the Hoberg-Moon UK Offshoring Index summed up over years 2010­2014, considering only input offshoring activities, whereas the control group is made of
     firms with scores of zero on this index. In the final specification, the treatment group consists of firms with scores of greater than five on the Hoberg and Moon
     (2017) UK Offshoring Index summed up over years 2010­2014, considering only output offshoring activities, whereas the control group is made of firms with
     scores of zero on this index. The time dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to compare the two quarters following the announcement of the referendum
     and Brexit's victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the announcement (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust
     standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                                                               Baseline                                          UK Offshoring Index
                                                                              Investment                                              Investment
                                                              Treatment is Top       Treatment is > 5        Treatment is > 5      Treatment is > 5    Treatment is > 5
                                                               Tercile of iU K       Brexit Entries in          on the UK              on the UK          on the UK
                                                                                          10-Ks              Offshoring Index      Offshoring Index    Offshoring Index




38
                                                                                                             (Input & Output)        (Input Only)       (Output Only)
                                                                     (1)                      (2)                   (3)                    (4)                (5)
           P o s t × H i g h iU K                                 ­0.165***
                                                                   (0.019)
           P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                                            ­0.077***
                                                                                            (0.008)
           P o s t × H i g h U K O f f s ho r i ng I nd e x                                                      ­0.074***             ­0.095***            0.000
                                                                                                                  (0.019)               (0.035)            (0.006)
           Controls
           Firm                                                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes              Yes
           Fixed Effects
           Firm                                                      Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes              Yes
           Industry × Time                                           Yes                     Yes                    Yes                     Yes              Yes
           Observations                                            17,199                   21,253                 39,050                  39,050          39,050
           R-squared                                                0.75                     0.73                   0.73                    0.73            0.73
                                                  Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
         Table 7. Amplification Mechanism: The Impact of Capital and Labor Adjustment Costs on Corporate Investment and Employment Growth

     This table reports the results of the amplification effect of capital and labor adjustment costs on investment and employment growth respectively. The proxy for
     capital adjustment costs is the asset redeployability index of Kim and Kung (2016). The proxy for labor adjustment costs is the labor unionization rate from the
     Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). The treatment group is composed by firms in the top tercile of iU K , the measure of UK-exposure, while the control group is
     composed by firms in the bottom tercile of iU K . High capital irreversibility is defined as the top tercile of the Kim and Kung (2016) index of asset redeployability (at
     the firm-level). High labor irreversibility is defined as the top tercile of the labor unionization rate (at the industry-level). The time dimension of the DID estimator
     is set so as to compare the two quarters following the announcement of the referendum and Brexit's victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the
     announcement (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                                                                Investment                                    Employment Growth
                        Input irreversibility measure:                     Asset Redeployability                              Labor Unionization
                                                                   High              Low           Pooled             High              Low          Pooled
                                                              Irreversibility   Irreversibility    Sample        Irreversibility   Irreversibility   Sample
                                                               Subsample         Subsample                        Subsample         Subsample
                                                                    (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)            (6)




39
                        P o s t × H i g h iU K                   ­0.463***           0.001          ­0.037          ­3.447***         ­0.067           0.177
                                                                  (0.077)           (0.019)         (0.031)          (0.957)          (0.751)         (0.808)
                        P o s t × H i g h iU K                                                     ­0.397***                                         ­3.577***
                               × High Input Irreversibility                                         (0.044)                                           (0.712)
                        Controls
                        Firm                                        Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes                Yes          Yes
                        Fixed Effects
                        Firm                                        Yes               Yes            Yes               No                 No           No
                        Industry                                    No                No             No                Yes                Yes          Yes
                        Time                                        No                No             No                Yes                Yes          Yes
                        Industry × Time                             Yes               Yes            Yes               No                 No           No
                        Observations                               5,394            6,377           12,222            1,491               1,112       2,603
                        R-squared                                  0.76             0.77             0.75             0.11                0.14        0.12
                                                 Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                              Table 8. The Impact of the Brexit Vote on Cash Holdings, Non-Cash Working Capital, and Profitability

     This table reports output from Eq. (14). The dependent variables are cash holdings, non-cash working capital, and profit growth. Cash is defined as total cash
     holdings divided by lagged total assets net of cash holdings. Non-cash working capital is defined as working capital (net of cash) divided by lagged total assets.
     Profit growth is defined as the quarterly percentage change in profits (operating income before depreciation divided by sales). In the first specification, the
     treatment group is composed by the top tercile of iU K , while control group is composed by firms in the bottom tercile of iU K . The second specification is a
     textual-search-based measure of UK-exposure that sums up the number of Brexit-related words in firms' 2015 10-K forms. The treatment group is made of firms
     with more than five entries, whereas the control group are firms with zero entries. The time dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to compare the two
     quarters following the announcement of the referendum and Brexit's victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the announcement (2015:Q3­Q4).
     T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                                                             Cash                            NWC                               Profits
                                                                 Treatment      Treatment         Treatment      Treatment         Treatment        Treatment
                                                                   is Top         is > 5            is Top         is > 5            is Top           is > 5
                                                                  Tercile of      Brexit           Tercile of      Brexit           Tercile of        Brexit
                                                                    iU K        Entries in           iU K        Entries in           iU K          Entries in




40
                                                                                  10-Ks                            10-Ks                              10-Ks
                                                                     (1)            (2)               (3)            (4)               (5)              (6)
                          P o s t × H i g h iU K                  0.231***                         ­0.687***                         ­0.135
                                                                   (0.059)                          (0.281)                          (0.391)
                          P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                      0.357***                      ­0.608***                               0.343
                                                                                     (0.062)                       (0.079)                               (0.550)
                          Controls
                          Firm                                       Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes                Yes
                          Fixed Effects
                          Firm                                       Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes                Yes
                          Industry× Time                             Yes              Yes             Yes            Yes               Yes                Yes
                          Observations                             17,170           24,195          16,630         23,806            16,630              24,051
                          R-squared                                 0.21             0.24            0.89           0.87              0.89                0.15
                                                   Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                                      Table 9. The Impact of the Brexit Vote on Investment Accounting for Foreign Exchange Exposures

     This table reports output from Eq. (14), accounting for measures of exposure to USD­GBP foreign exchange fluctuations. The dependent variable is investment.
     Each pair of columns reports results under two specifications. In the first specification, the treatment group is composed by the top tercile of iU K , while the control
     group is composed by firms in the bottom tercile of iU K . The second specification is a textual-search-based measure of UK-exposure that sums up the number of
     Brexit-related words in firms' 2015 10-K forms. The treatment group is made of firms with more than five entries, whereas the control group are firms with zero en-
                                                                                                                           $
                                                                                                                          X /£
     tries. The first two columns include firms' quarterly equity returns exposure to changes in the British pound (iF  ,t     ) as an additional control. The next two columns
     include the Alfaro et al. (2018) firm-level USD­GBP first- and second-moment instruments as additional controls. The next two columns include, as an additional
     control, an annual dummy for whether a firm reports utilizing FX hedging in its most recent 10-K form. The final two columns include, as an additional control,
     the intensity of FX hedging measured by mentions of FX hedging-related words listed in Campello et al. (2011). The time dimension of the DID estimator is set so
     as to compare the two quarters following the announcement of the Brexit referendum victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the announcement
     of the vote date (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.

                                                                                  $/£
                                                                              X
                                                             GBP Exposure (iF
                                                                            ,t          )       Alfaro et al. (2018)                       FX Hedging           FX Hedging Intensity
                                                                                                GBP Instruments

                                                            Treatment     Treatment           Treatment       Treatment          Treatment       Treatment    Treatment     Treatment




41
                                                              is Top        is > 5              is Top          is > 5             is Top          is > 5       is Top        is > 5
                                                             Tercile of     Brexit             Tercile of       Brexit            Tercile of       Brexit      Tercile of     Brexit
                                                               iU K       Entries in             iU K         Entries in            iU K         Entries in      iU K       Entries in
                                                                            10-Ks                               10-Ks                              10-Ks                      10-Ks
                                                                (1)           (2)                 (3)             (4)                (5)             (6)          (7)           (8)

                     Post ×Hig h       iU K                 ­0.172***                          ­0.145***                          ­0.201***                   ­0.202***
                                                             (0.019)                            (0.026)                            (0.030)                     (0.031)
                     P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                  ­0.080***                           ­0.097***                          ­0.111***                 ­0.110***
                                                                            (0.009)                             (0.010)                            (0.014)                   (0.014)

                     Controls
                     Firm                                      Yes            Yes                 Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes      Yes           Yes

                     Fixed Effects
                     Firm                                      Yes            Yes                 Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes      Yes           Yes
                     Industry × Time                           Yes            Yes                 Yes             Yes                Yes                Yes      Yes           Yes

                     Observations                             16,581        20,540              16,473          20,582             11,151          12,882       11,151       12,882
                     R-squared                                 0.75          0.73                0.77            0.69               0.76            0.75         0.76         0.75

                                                               Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                                             Table 10. The Impact of the Brexit Vote on Investment Accounting for Financial Constraints

     This table reports output from Eq. (14), accounting for measures of financial constraints. The dependent variable is investment. Each pair of columns reports
     results under two specifications. In the first specification, the treatment group is composed by the top tercile of iU K , while the control group is composed by firms
     in the bottom tercile of iU K . The second specification is a textual-search-based measure of UK-exposure that sums up the number of Brexit-related words in firms'
     2015 10-K forms. The treatment group is made of firms with more than five entries, whereas the control group are firms with zero entries. The first two columns
     consider the subset of firms with existing bonds traded, and include their yields-to-maturity as an additional control. The next two columns consider the subset of
     firms which issue new bonds, and include their yields-to-maturity as an additional control. The next two columns considers the subset of firms which take on new
     syndicated loans, and include their all-drawn-in spreads as an additional control. The final two columns include the innovations in equity discount rate news,
     obtained as the residual from the Campbell-Shiller decomposition of firm equity returns, as an additional control. The time dimension of the DID estimator is set so
     as to compare the two quarters following the announcement of the Brexit referendum victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the announcement
     of the vote date (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.

                                                             Existing Bond Yields                  New Bond Yields                New Syndicated Loan Spreads    Equity Discount Rate News

                                                           Treatment       Treatment           Treatment       Treatment          Treatment       Treatment      Treatment     Treatment
                                                             is Top          is > 5              is Top          is > 5             is Top          is > 5         is Top        is > 5




42
                                                            Tercile of       Brexit             Tercile of       Brexit            Tercile of       Brexit        Tercile of     Brexit
                                                              iU K         Entries in             iU K         Entries in            iU K         Entries in        iU K       Entries in
                                                                             10-Ks                               10-Ks                              10-Ks                        10-Ks
                                                               (1)             (2)                 (3)             (4)                (5)               (6)          (7)            (8)

                    Post ×Hig h       iU K                 ­0.168***                            ­0.148***                          ­0.169***                     ­0.172***
                                                            (0.022)                              (0.018)                            (0.041)                       (0.022)
                    P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                    ­0.072***                          ­0.159***                             ­0.157***                  ­0.079***
                                                                             (0.009)                            (0.070)                               (0.032)                    (0.005)

                    Controls
                    Firm                                      Yes              Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes               Yes         Yes            Yes

                    Fixed Effects
                    Firm                                      Yes              Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes               Yes         Yes            Yes
                    Industry × Time                           Yes              Yes                 Yes            Yes                 Yes               Yes         Yes            Yes

                    Observations                             15,199          19,253               9,546          9,551               8,846             8,966       15,199        19,253
                    R-squared                                 0.78            0.76                0.91           0.92                0.77              0.91         0.78          0.76

                                                                     Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                                                                               Table 11. Robustness and Falsification Tests

     This table reports output from Eq. (14) under alternative treatment windows and alternative treatment samples. The dependent variable is investment. In the
     first specification, the treatment group is composed by the top tercile of iU K , while control group is composed by firms in the bottom tercile of iU K . The second
     specification is a textual-search-based measure of UK-exposure that sums up the number of Brexit-related words in firms' 2015 10-K forms. The treatment group
     is made of firms with more than five entries, whereas the control group are firms with zero entries. In the first two columns, the time dimension of the DID
     estimator is set so as to compare 2016:Q3 versus 2015:Q3. In the second two columns, the time dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to compare 2016:Q3­Q4
     versus 2015:Q3­Q4, excluding firms deemed as "losers" from Trump's election as in Wagner et al. (2018). In the next two columns, the time dimension of the DID
     estimator is set so as to compare 2015:Q3 versus 2014:Q3. In the final two columns, the time dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to compare 2011:Q2­Q4
     versus 2010:Q2­Q4. T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.

                                                                                       Robustness                                                                Falsification

                    Treatment Window:                        2016:Q3 vs. 2015:Q3               2016:Q3­Q4 vs. 2015:Q3­Q4                2015:Q3 vs. 2014:Q3               2011:Q2­Q4 vs. 2010:Q2­Q4

                    Event:                                    Excluding Trumpit                 Excluding Trumpit Losers                Cameron's Election                   US Debt Ceiling Crisis

                                                           Treatment        Treatment           Treatment      Treatment             Treatment       Treatment            Treatment     Treatment




43
                                                             is Top           is > 5              is Top         is > 5                is Top          is > 5               is Top        is > 5
                                                            Tercile of        Brexit             Tercile of      Brexit               Tercile of       Brexit              Tercile of     Brexit
                                                              iU K          Entries in             iU K        Entries in               iU K         Entries in              iU K       Entries in
                                                                              10-Ks                              10-Ks                                 10-Ks                              10-Ks
                                                               (1)              (2)                 (3)             (4)                  (5)             (6)                     (7)         (8)

                    Post ×Hig h       iU K                 ­0.216***                            ­0.197***                               0.018                                0.014
                                                            (0.019)                              (0.010)                               (0.011)                              (0.082)
                    P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                     ­0.064***                           ­0.074***                              0.017                                N /A
                                                                              (0.012)                             (0.010)                              (0.011)

                    Controls
                    Firm                                      Yes               Yes                 Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes                     Yes

                    Fixed Effects
                    Firm                                      Yes               Yes                 Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes                     Yes
                    Industry × Time                           Yes               Yes                 Yes             Yes                  Yes             Yes                     Yes

                    Observations                             17,199           21,253              15,967           20,669              17,199          21,253               17,199
                    R-squared                                 0.74             0.73                0.75             0.72                0.74            0.75                 0.74

                                                                     Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                                                                    Table 12. Robustness and Falsification Tests

     This table reports output from Eq. (14) under alternative treatment assignments. The dependent variable is investment. In the first column, we report our baseline
     estimates as in Table 2. In the next columns, treated firms are in the highest tercile of positive values of exposure of firm-level volatility to equity index volatility
     in the EU, China, Mexico, Japan, India, and Brazil respectively. The time dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to compare the two quarters following
     the announcement of the referendum and Brexit's victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the announcement (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in
     parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                                       Baseline        Robustness                                        Falsification
                                                      Treatment        Treatment          Treatment      Treatment       Treatment       Treatment     Treatment
                                                        is Top           is Top             is Top         is Top          is Top          is Top        is Top
                                                       Tercile of       Tercile of         Tercile of     Tercile of      Tercile of      Tercile of    Tercile of
                                                                                                                             Japan
                                                         iU K             iE U              iC hi na      iM e x i c o     i               iI nd i a     iB r a z i l




44
                                                          (1)               (2)               (3)            (4)             (5)             (6)           (7)
                                        C o unt r y
                      P o s t × H i g h i             ­0.165***         ­0.066***            0.048          0.069           0.084           0.058        ­0.054
                                                       (0.019)           (0.018)            (0.033)        (0.044)         (0.092)         (0.036)       (0.045)
                      Controls
                      Firm                               Yes                Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
                      Fixed Effects
                      Firm                               Yes                Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
                      Industry × Time                    Yes                Yes               Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
                      Observations                      17,199            12,301             8,714         11,870           8,909          14,694        15,485
                      R-squared                          0.75              0.76              0.75           0.74            0.71            0.74          0.74
                                                  Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                                            Internet Appendix

Appendix A               Model Analysis and Results
A.1     Disinvestment Decisions
In solving a firm's disinvestment problem, we first consider its decision at t = 1. If the firm had disinvested
any of its endowed projects at t = 0, then it earns 0 for those projects. Among projects that were not disin-
vested at t = 0 (i.e., remain alive a t = 1), the firm can choose to sell any of them at t = 1 and receive cash
flows of si 2 + xi 2 -  w per project. Else, it can choose not to sell and receive xi 2 per project. As in the case
of the investment decision, the firm's disinvestment policy is guided by the cash flows at t = 2 generated by
project w~ . These cash flows can be characterized as:
                                
                                0
                                                                  (Early Disinvestment ),
                            ~)=
                       i 2 (w      si 2 + xi 2 -  w
                                                  ~    if si 2 >  w
                                                                  ~    (Delayed Disinvestment ),                      (A.1)
                                                       if si 2   w     (No Disinvestment ).
                                  x
                                      i2                         ~

Next, we consider the firm's disinvestment decision at t = 0. The optimal level of disinvestment at t = 0 can
be expressed in terms of w  , the breakeven project. The firm will optimally disinvest (sell) all projects in
the range [0, w  ), and not disinvest (choose to retain) any projects in the range [w  , W ], instead of waiting
until t = 1 to decide whether or not to disinvest. The firm's cash flows from disinvesting project w           ~ at t = 0 is
si 1 + xi 1 -  w~ . Its expected cash flows from not disinvesting project w       ~ at t = 0, and choosing instead to wait
till t = 1 to decide, is xi 1 + [max (si 2 + xi 2 -  w
                                                     ~ , xi 2 )]. Simplifying these two expressions, the firm disinvests
project w   ~ at t = 0 if:
                                         si 1 -  w~  xi 2 + [max (si 2 -  w    ~ , 0)] .                              (A.2)
The breakeven condition for determining the optimal disinvestment level w  at t = 0 is:

                                       si 1 -  w  = xi 2 + [max (si 2 -  w  , 0)] .                                   (A.3)

In Lemma 3, we prove the existence of the optimal t = 0 investment level, w  .

Lemma 3. The optimal disinvestment level w  at t = 0 is given by (A.3) for sufficiently large W .

     The breakeven condition in (A.3) implies that at t = 0 the firm sells all projects up to project w  , as the
benefits of doing so, si 1 , are expected to exceed the costs. Costs are made of two components: (1) the cost of
selling the project,  w , and (2) the option value of waiting to choose whether to disinvest. The embedded
optionality in the firm's disinvestment decision is key in generating a negative relation between uncertainty
and disinvestment, as is the case with investment. As before, while the addition of a zero-mean spread does
not change the left-hand side of (A.2), it increases the right-hand side of that inequality given the firm's
option to forgo disinvestment in high income states. An increase in uncertainty in the distribution of si t
reduces the breakeven project level w  , and correspondingly shrinks the set of projects the firm disinvests
at t = 0, namely the interval [0, w  ). We establish this result in Proposition 3.

Proposition 3. Increased uncertainty leads to less disinvestment at t = 0. For r > r , namely when G (·, r ) is
                                                                                   
obtained by a mean-preserving spread of G (·, r ), w  (r ) < w  (r ). That is, ddw
                                                                                 r < 0.

    Taken together, the results of Proposition 1 and 3 imply that by increasing the value of the option to wait,
greater uncertainty leads to decreases in both investment and disinvestment.

A.2     The Effect of Input Irreversibility
We now address the role played by the degree of irreversibility of capital and labor, as captured by their
associated fixed costs. We do so by way of two propositions.

Proposition 4. An increase in the degree of irreversibility of capital leads to less investment for higher levels of
                                         n
uncertainty in the first period; i.e., d
                                       d  < 0.


                                                            45
Proposition 5. An increase in the degree of irreversibility of labor leads to less investment for higher levels of
                                         n
uncertainty in the first period; i.e., d
                                       d  < 0.

    Combining the last two propositions with Proposition 1, we have that for an increase in uncertainty in
the MPS sense (i.e., r > r ) and for greater degree of input irreversibility ( >  and  > ), the following
conditions hold with respect to investment:
                                     n  (r , , ) > n  (r , , ) > n  (r ,  , ),
                                                                                                            (A.4)
                                     n  (r , , ) > n  (r , , ) > n  (r , ,  ).
     The above conditions state that an increase in uncertainty reduces the set of projects the firm is willing
to invest in at t = 0, electing to wait until uncertainty is partially resolved at t = 1 before deciding whether
to invest. Notably, when the firm faces higher irreversible costs, it invests even less at t = 0. Differently put,
an increase in uncertainty reduces investment in the first period, and the effect is modulated by the degree
of irreversibility of capital or labor.




                                                        46
Appendix B                Proofs
B.1     Proof of Lemma 1
Proof. Let us define
                            H (n  ) = vi 1 + [vi 2 ] - ( + )n  - [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0)] .
To guarantee the existence of n  as characterized by (6), it suffices to show that H (n  ) = 0 for some n  
[0, N ]. Since H (·) is a sum of continuous functions, it is itself continuous. Since vi 1 > 0 and vi 2 > 0, it follows
that:
                                     H (0) = vi 1 + [vi 2 ] - [max(vi 2 , 0)] = vi 1 > 0.
Finally, for N  , we have that:
                   lim H (N ) = lim (vi 1 + [vi 2 ] - ( + )N ) + lim ( [max (vi 2 - ( + )N , 0)])
                 N                N                                       N 
                             = - + 0 = -.
Thus, there must exist an N  ¯  such that, for N > N  ¯ , H (N
                                                             ¯ ) < 0. Putting these conditions together with the
continuity of H (·) over [0, N ], the Intermediate Value Theorem guarantees that there exists an n   [0, N ]
such that H (n  ) = 0.

B.2     Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. Let us define
                       H (n  ; r ) = vi 1 + [vi 2 ] - ( + )n  - [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0) ; r ] = 0
By the Implicit Function Theorem,
                                                       d n      H / n 
                                                            =-          .
                                                       dr       H / r
Considering first the derivative of H with respect to n  , we have:
                              H (n  ; r )                  
                                           = -( + ) -          [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0) ; r ]
                                   n                       n
                                                             
                                           = -( + ) -            max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0) ; r
                                                              n
                                           = -( + ) - [max (vi 2 - ( + ), 0) ; r ]
                                           < 0.
Next, considering the derivative of H with respect to r , we have:
                                     H (n  ; r )       
                                                 =-        [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0) ; r ] .
                                          r            r
Because G (·, r ) is a MPS of G (·, r ), for any convex function J (·),

                                               J (vi 2 ); r =    J (vi 2 )d G (vi 2 , r )


                                                                 J (vi 2 )d G (vi 2 , r )

                                                       = [ J (vi 2 ); r ] .
Since max (vi 2 - ( + )n , 0) is convex in vi 2 , it follows that:
                             

                           max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0) ; r  [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0) ; r ] r > r .
This implies
                                          
                                                [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0) ; r ]  0.
                                          r
Thus,
                                     H (n  ; r )     
                                                 =-         [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0) ; r ]
                                      r              r
                                                  0.




                                                                47
Putting these conditions together, we have:
                                              d n     H / n 
                                                  =-         < 0.
                                              dr      H / r




B.3    Proof of Proposition 4
Proof. Let us define
                      H (n  ; ) = vi 1 + [vi 2 ] - ( + )n  - [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0)] = 0.
By the Implicit Function Theorem,
                                                   d n     H / n 
                                                       =-          .
                                                    d       H / 
Considering first the numerator, we know from Proposition 1 that:
                                                       H
                                                          < 0.
                                                       n
Next, considering the denominator,
                                   H                
                                        = -n  -        [max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0)]
                                                   
                                                      
                                        = -n  -         max (vi 2 - ( + )n  , 0)
                                                      
                                        = -n  - [max (vi 2 - n  , 0)]
                                        < 0.
Putting these together, we have:
                                                 d n      H / n 
                                                      =-          < 0.
                                                  d       H / 




B.4    Proof of Proposition 5
Proof. Symmetric to the case of capital.




                                                       48
Appendix C              Additional Robustness Tests




Figure C.1. Corporate Investment Trends around Brexit-related Events. This figure displays coefficients of in-
vestment regressions for the timeline of the main events related to Brexit. The shaded area marks the beginning of
Brexit-related events, with the announcement of the date of the UK­EU referendum (2016:Q1).




                                                       49
                               Table C.1. Summary Statistics: Matched Sample

This table reports mean values for the main variables used in our empirical analyses in the matched sample. Each
treated firm is matched to 3 control firms (with replacement) which are its nearest neighbors in terms of treatment
propensity. The propensity score is a function of lagged returns, 1-quarter-ahead consensus earnings forecast,
Tobin's Q , cash flow, sales growth, and size. Panel A shows summary statistics for the sample of treated and matched
control firms as defined by iU K (top tercile of iU K ). Panel B shows summary statistics for the sample of treated
and matched control firms as defined by mentions of Brexit-related words in their 2015 10-K filings. The table also
reports the differences in means and the p -value associated with a test statistic for the differences.


                    Firm-Level Variables              Treated   Control    Difference   p -value


                                                          Panel A: Market-Based Approach
                    Investment                         0.020     0.012       0.008       0.251
                    Employment Growth (Annual)         0.083     0.061        0.022      0.424
                    R&D                                0.030     0.016       0.014       0.385
                    Divestitures (×100)                0.129     0.088       0.041       0.404
                    Cash Holdings                      0.175     0.164       0.011       0.410
                    Non-Cash Working Capital           0.058     0.086       ­0.028      0.272
                    Tobin's Q                          1.948     1.928       0.020       0.383
                    Cash Flow                          0.016     0.032       ­0.016      0.610
                    Size (Log Assets)                  6.677     7.205       ­0.528      0.528
                    Sales Growth                       0.195     0.105       0.090       0.203
                    Consensus Earnings Forecast        0.023     0.025       ­0.002      0.594
                    Stock Returns                      0.021     0.038       ­0.017      0.618

                                                      Panel B: Textual-Search-Based Approach
                    Investment                         0.013     0.014       0.000       0.269
                    Employment Growth (Annual)         0.084     0.078        0.006      0.429
                    R&D                                0.030     0.022       0.008       0.749
                    Divestitures (×100)                0.062     0.056       0.006       0.210
                    Cash Holdings                      0.232     0.194       0.038       0.339
                    Non-Cash Working Capital           0.041     0.057       ­0.016      0.522
                    Tobin's Q                          2.199     2.037       0.162       0.166
                    Cash Flow                          0.018     0.021       ­0.003      0.836
                    Size (Log Assets)                  7.059     6.581       0.478       0.293
                    Sales Growth                       0.162     0.167       ­0.005      0.605
                    Consensus Earnings Forecast        0.055     0.023        0.032      0.137
                    Stock Returns                      0.028     0.030       ­0.002      0.758




                                                         50
           Table C.2. The Impact of the Brexit Vote on Investment, Employment, R&D Expenditures and Divestitures: Propensity-Score Matching

     This table reports output from Eq. (14) in a matched sample. The dependent variables are investment, employment growth, R&D and divestitures. Each treated
     firm is matched to 3 control firms (with replacement) which are its nearest neighbors in terms of treatment propensity. The propensity score is a function of
     lagged returns, 1-quarter-ahead consensus earnings forecast, Tobin's Q , cash flow, sales growth, size. In the first specification, the treatment group is composed
     by the top tercile of iU K , while the control group is composed by matched firms in the bottom tercile of iU K . The second specification is a textual-search-based
     measure of UK-exposure that sums up the number of Brexit-related words in firms' 2015 10-K forms. The treatment group is made of firms with more than
     five entries, whereas the control group are matched firms with zero entries. The time dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to compare the two quarters
     following the announcement of the Brexit referendum victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus the two quarters preceding the announcement of the referendum vote date
     (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                                       Investment                  Employment Growth                          R&D                    Divestitures
                                                 Treatment     Treatment         Treatment      Treatment         Treatment      Treatment     Treatment     Treatment
                                                   is Top        is > 5            is Top         is > 5            is Top         is > 5        is Top        is > 5
                                                  Tercile of     Brexit           Tercile of      Brexit           Tercile of      Brexit       Tercile of     Brexit
                                                    iU K       Entries in           iU K        Entries in           iU K        Entries in       iU K       Entries in




51
                                                                 10-Ks                            10-Ks                            10-Ks                       10-Ks
                                                     (1)           (2)               (3)            (4)               (5)            (6)           (7)           (8)
          P o s t × H i g h iU K                 ­0.151***                        ­3.156***                        0.401***                    ­0.040***
                                                  (0.025)                          (1.129)                          (0.065)                     (0.012)
          P o s t × H i g h 10-K E n t r i e s                  ­0.097***                        ­3.379**                           0.183***                 ­0.022***
                                                                 (0.012)                          (1.283)                            (0.066)                  (0.008)
          Controls
          Firm                                      Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes
          Fixed Effects
          Firm                                      Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes
          Industry × Time                           Yes            Yes               Yes            Yes               Yes             Yes         Yes           Yes
          Observations                             12,715        20,919             2,469          2,480             3,842           8,895       12,053       19,500
          R-squared                                 0.75          0.73              0.49           0.45               0.88            0.87        0.34         0.29
                                                   Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
                              Table C.3. Parallel Trends: Market-Based Approach

This table reports the average investment (Panel A), employment growth (Panel B), R&D (Panel C), and divestitures
(Panel D) for firms in the treated and control groups going back different periods prior to Brexit. The treatment group
is composed by the top tercile of iU K , while the control group is composed by firms in the bottom tercile of iU K .
The table also reports the differences in means and the p -value associated with a test statistic for the differences.


                    Periods prior to Brexit   Treated     Control   Difference       p -value


                                                  Panel A (Quarterly Frequency): Investment
                              One              1.165       1.027      0.138            0.156
                              Two              1.184       0.942      0.242            0.153
                             Three             1.362       1.135     0.227             0.281
                             Four              1.100       1.381     ­0.281            0.600
                              Five             1.433       1.115      0.318            0.369
                               Six             0.996       1.526     ­0.530            0.380

                                              Panel B (Annual Frequency): Employment Growth
                              One              3.794       3.906     ­0.112            0.951
                              Two              9.723       4.812      4.911            0.369
                             Three             6.434       5.033     1.401             0.374
                             Four              9.265       5.217      4.048            0.126
                              Five            10.178       8.083     2.095             0.223
                               Six             8.113       8.985     ­0.872            0.670

                                                       Panel C (Quarterly Frequency): R&D
                              One              4.441       2.641      1.800            0.317
                              Two              2.568       4.369     ­1.801            0.311
                             Three             2.275       3.760     ­1.485            0.434
                             Four              4.150       2.376      1.774            0.197
                              Five             4.342       2.399      1.943            0.221
                               Six             4.287       2.465      1.822            0.229

                                                 Panel D (Quarterly Frequency): Divestitures
                              One              0.076       0.057       0.019           0.234
                              Two              0.056       0.102      -0.046           0.748
                             Three             0.071       0.077      -0.006           0.710
                             Four              0.073       0.054       0.019           0.218
                              Five             0.071       0.054       0.017           0.289
                               Six             0.056       0.043       0.013           0.304




                                                           52
                         Table C.4. Parallel Trends: Textual-Search-Based Approach

This table reports the average investment (Panel A), employment growth (Panel B), R&D (Panel C), and divestitures
(Panel D) for firms in the treated and control groups going back different periods prior to Brexit. The treatment
indicator is a textual-search-based measure of UK-exposure that sums up the number of Brexit-related words in
firms' 2015 10-K forms. The treatment group is made of firms with more than five entries, whereas the control group
are firms with zero entries. The table also reports the differences in means and the p -value associated with a test
statistic for the differences.


                    Periods prior to Brexit   Treated     Control   Difference      p -value


                                                 Panel A (Quarterly Frequency): Investment
                             One               0.958       1.064     ­0.106          0.202
                             Two               0.930       1.047     ­0.117          0.186
                            Three              1.124       1.203     ­0.079          0.419
                            Four               1.174       1.090      0.084          0.348
                             Five              1.194       1.140      0.054          0.570
                              Six              1.110       1.122     ­0.012          0.897

                                              Panel B (Annual Frequency): Employment Growth
                             One               9.711       8.881      0.830          0.678
                             Two              11.400      13.321     ­1.921          0.343
                            Three              7.600      6.290      1.310           0.448
                            Four               8.972       6.828      2.144          0.258
                             Five             10.286      10.076      0.210          0.914
                              Six              9.928       8.619      1.309          0.498

                                                       Panel C (Quarterly Frequency): R&D
                             One               4.972       5.334     ­0.362          0.488
                             Two               4.830       5.054     ­0.224          0.653
                            Three              4.230       4.218     0.012           0.979
                            Four               4.246       4.423     ­0.177          0.683
                             Five              4.733       4.258      0.475          0.279
                              Six              4.263       4.419     ­0.156          0.729

                                                Panel D (Quarterly Frequency): Divestitures
                             One               0.051       0.059     -0.008          0.566
                             Two               0.062       0.058      0.004          0.783
                            Three              0.062       0.076     ­0.014          0.297
                            Four               0.066       0.054      0.012          0.378
                             Five              0.055       0.038      0.017          0.165
                              Six              0.039       0.046     ­0.007          0.578




                                                           53
                Table C.5. The Impact of the Brexit Vote on Investment, Employment, R&D and Divestitures: Cash Flow News Decomposition

     This table reports output from Eq. (14). The dependent variables are investment, employment growth, R&D and divestitures. The treatment group is composed
                              K                                                                          UK                UK
     by the top tercile of iU
                            ,C F , while the control group is composed by firms in the bottom tercile of i ,C F . A firm's i ,C F is estimated as follows. First, we decompose
     volatility of monthly stock returns into cash flow and discount rate news components using the Campbell and Shiller (1988) approach as applied to individual
                                                                                                                                                     K
     stocks by Vuolteenaho (2002). Next, we estimate Eq. (13) with the cash flow component as the dependent variable, to obtain iU                 ,C F for each firm. The time
     dimension of the DID estimator is set so as to compare the two quarters following the announcement of the referendum and Brexit's victory (2016:Q3­Q4) versus
     the two quarters preceding the announcement (2015:Q3­Q4). T -statistics (in parentheses) are computed using robust standard-errors double-clustered at the
     firm and calendar quarter levels.


                                                   Investment               Employment Growth                     R&D                       Divestitures
                                                Treatment is Top              Treatment is Top              Treatment is Top             Treatment is Top
                                                               K                             K                             K                            K
                                                 Tercile of iU
                                                             ,C F              Tercile of iU
                                                                                           ,C F              Tercile of iU
                                                                                                                         ,C F             Tercile of iU
                                                                                                                                                      ,C F




54
                                                        (1)                           (2)                           (3)                          (4)
                                          K
                     P o s t × H i g h iU
                                        ,C F        ­0.330***                      ­5.147**                      0.348***                    ­0.034***
                                                     (0.014)                        (1.925)                       (0.050)                     (0.010)
                     Controls
                     Firm                              Yes                           Yes                           Yes                          Yes
                     Fixed Effects
                     Firm                              Yes                           Yes                           Yes                          Yes
                     Industry×Time                     Yes                           Yes                           Yes                          Yes
                     Observations                     14,709                        3,247                         5,060                        14,953
                     R-squared                         0.75                          0.45                          0.88                         0.33
                                               Statistical significance levels: *** p -value<0.01, ** p -value<0.05, * p -value<0.10.
Appendix D                    Timeline of Brexit Key Events

                Jun · 26 · 2012 · · · · · ·· David Cameron is elected with support of the UK Independent Party

                                               PM David Cameron makes contingent promise: A referendum before 2017 if Conservatives win
                Jan · 11 · 2013 · · · · · ··
                                               the 2015 general elections

               May · 07 · 2015 · · · · · ·· General Elections: Cameron wins another term on tight margin of votes

                Jun · 09 · 2015 · · · · · ·· House of Commons approves the European Union Referendum Act

               Dec · 14 · 2015 · · · · · ·· House of Lords approves the Referendum

                                               EU Referendum Act receives Royal Assent. A referendum is to be held on the question "Should
               Dec · 17 · 2015 · · · · · ··
                                               the UK remain a member of the EU or leave?"

                Feb · 20 · 2016 · · · · · ·· Announcement: Cameron announces that referendum will be held on June 23 2016

                Apr · 15 · 2016 · · · · · ·· Start of the referendum campaign period

                Jun · 23 · 2016 · · · · · ·· Referendum takes place, Brexit wins

                Jun · 24 · 2016 · · · · · ·· Result of the referendum is announced (Brexit wins)

                 Jul · 13 · 2016 · · · · · ·· David Cameron resigns, Theresa May assumes as Prime Minister

                Oct · 02 · 2016 · · · · · ·· PM May voices intention to trigger Article 50 (exit process) by March 2017

                                               UK Supreme Court rules that the UK government must hold a vote in parliament before
                Jan · 24 · 2017 · · · · · ··
                                               beginning the process of leaving EU, delaying Prime Minister May's timetable

                                               House of Commons approves Theresa May's Article 50 bill without amendments to proceed with
                Feb · 08 · 2017 · · · · · ··
                                               Brexit negotiation with the EU

               Mar · 29 · 2017 · · · · · ·· UK­EU Brexit negotiations begin


Figure D.1. Timeline of the Brexit Referendum. This figure lists the key events preceding the referendum leading
to Brexit. Events in bold blue represent two key dates used in our analysis; the Announcement of the date when the
referendum would be held, and the Referendum vote itself.




                                                                          55
