                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     ARE LARGE DEFICITS AND DEBT DANGEROUS?

                                       Michael J. Boskin

                                      Working Paper 26727
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26727


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




I would like to thank Alan Auerbach, Seth Benzell and Olivier Blanchard for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Michael J. Boskin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Are Large Deficits and Debt Dangerous?
Michael J. Boskin
NBER Working Paper No. 26727
February 2020
JEL No. E62,H6,H62,H63,H68

                                          ABSTRACT

The Traditional View (TV) of large deficits and debt is they have large economic costs, save in a
recession and early recovery, because they crowd out investment and lower future income, and
taken to extremes, can cause inflation and even a financial crisis. The TV has been challenged,
most fundamentally in Olivier Blanchard's 2019 AEA Presidential Address, an elegant extension
of Peter Diamond's OLG model to account for risk in an expected utility framework. He
concludes they may have no fiscal cost and increase welfare. I present evidence of looming large
deficit and debt/GDP increases and their effects on recovery from recession, interest rates and
long-run growth. I discuss several substantive issues with the "no fiscal cost" view that limit its
applicability, including accounting neither for the effect of increasing debt on interest rates and
growth nor the pre-existing primary deficit, debt and their projected evolution; disputable
readings of the data; strong assumptions and parameter values driving the results; and a political
economy of deficits and debt likely to lead to even larger debt ratios. Acknowledging
uncertainties, the evidence still suggests that large increases in the debt ratio could lead to much
higher taxes, lower future incomes and intergenerational inequity.


Michael J. Boskin
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
434 Galvez Mall
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
boskin@stanford.edu
                               Are Large Deficits and Debt Dangerous? 1


                                             Michael J. Boskin
                           Hoover Institution and Department of Economics
                                            Stanford University


Introduction
Economists have debated the effects of deficit financed government spending on short-run
aggregate demand, the price level, long-run growth and economic welfare since the classical
economists. These effects will vary depending on economic conditions, assumptions on
economic behavior, the details of the spending or tax changes, expectations of, and eventually
realizations of, whether the policy is temporary or permanent and what future policy changes
ensue. While the intellectual debate continues, a rough quasi-consensus, which I will label the
Traditional View (TV), has emerged.


Recently, it has been sharply questioned on both analytical and empirical applicability grounds.
After a description of the conclusions of this traditional view, I present estimates of a looming
large debt/GDP ratio increase, the policies that would be necessary to contain it, and brief
summaries of recent empirical research on the short- and long-run effects of deficits and debt. I
then turn to the most fundamental critique, by Blanchard (2019), who suggests there may be no
fiscal cost or welfare loss to sizable increases in the debt/GDP ratio, followed by analytical,
empirical and political economy critiques of his analysis.


The Traditional View (TV)
The TV posits 2 that deficits and debt have macroeconomic benefits: 1) as a counter-cyclical
device, the automatic stabilizers should certainly be allowed to work; additional discretionary
fiscal policy may be desirable in a deep long-lived recession after the central bank moves




1
  I would like to thank Alan Auerbach, Seth Benzell, and Olivier Blanchard for helpful comments. A condensed
version of this paper will appear in the AEA Papers and Proceedings, 2020.
2
  See the early summary in Elmendorf and Mankiw (1999).


                                                                                                               1
aggressively to the zero lower bound (ZLB) 3 on its nominal target interest rate if, but only if, it
can be designed and implemented politically to help quickly at reasonable long-run cost 4; 2) to
finance productive investment (that passes rigorous cost-benefit tests); 3) for tax smoothing of
large, temporary spending swings (e.g. WWII; 1980's defense buildup) Deficits and debt have
potentially large economic costs: 1) as they crowd out private investment and reduce future
income; 2) if they cause the central bank to monetize enough debt to cause serious inflation; 3) if
they are, or are expected to be, so big for long enough they lead to elevated risk premia,
expectations of inflation, depreciation of currency, capital flight, and/or a financial crisis
(technically, an alternative equilibrium, briefly discussed below).


These are all likely to be more relevant in a low private saving context, need to be leavened for
some partial Ricardian private saving offset behavior (Barro (1974), Boskin and Kotlikoff
(1985)) and account for the extent and duration of foreign capital inflows and any feedback
effects on spending and taxes. Finally, the TV is that the incidence of the debt falls primarily on
younger generations, who will inherit a smaller capital stock, lower incomes, and pay higher
taxes. The equity of the intergenerational transfer from young to old varies with the rate of
productivity growth. 5


The Projected Debt Trajectory
Figure 1 shows the Congressional Budget Office (2019) long-run debt outlook. From a pre-Great
Recession 37% of GDP, the debt ratio has now more than doubled to 79% 6 and is projected by

3
  A warning on overinterpreting the ZLB or sticky prices: Swanson and Williams (2014) report that even one- and
two-year yields were NOT constrained in the first three years of the ZLB; Bils and Klenow (2004), that prices
change quite frequently.
4
  Consolidating the budget once beyond substantial slack, or announcing a credible program to do that in advance,
likely also have macroeconomic benefits.
5
  An exception occurs when the debt finances productive public investment or lower capital income taxes.
6
  For decades, various authors (Auerbach and Kotlikoff (1987) Auerbach, Gokhale and Kotlikoff (1994), Auerbach,
Gale and Krupkin (2019), Boskin (1982, 1989), Eisner (1986)) have argued that the official deficit and national debt
measures convey an incomplete or inaccurate picture of the government's liabilities. Even after adjusting for the
business cycle and temporary factors, there is little capital budgeting, little accrual accounting and little accounting
for inflation. The official measures account insufficiently for contingent liabilities of the banking system, e.g. bad
loans in China and Japan, historically the S&L's; government assets, e.g. tangible capital (buildings, computers,
infrastructure, planes) and land and mineral rights (the value of these assets is about equal to the official debt) and
Federal Reserve assets; intangible investments in R&D, education, etc. and, most importantly, the unfunded
liabilities in entitlement programs. The CBO and OMB, and several international agencies, now publish several
alternative deficit, debt and government capital series incorporating some of these adjustments. While, conceptually,
these adjustments should be incorporated, I use the official figures in this paper for simplicity and comparability.


                                                                                                                      2
2049 to reach 144% under its (already obsolete from the year-end 2019 legislation) extended
baseline (EB) scenario and 219% under its increasingly likely alternative fiscal (AF) scenario.
Table 1 shows the corresponding primary and total deficits are -3.0% and -8.7% for EB and
6.1% and -15.5% for AF. Compared to a gradual reduction in the debt/GDP ratio to the 50-year
average of 42%, GDP is estimated to be 4.3%, and per capita GDP $3400, lower in 2049,
worsening thereafter. For the AF, an additional 2.5% and 3.6% lower for GDP and GNP (the
difference reflecting larger interest payments to foreigners). The CBO update in January 2020,
which accounted for the late 2019 spending and tax legislation, raised the 2049 EB debt/GDP
projection by 30 percentage points, to 174%; and the corresponding primary deficit by over 1.4
percentage points (Table 1). Thus, the effects in the EB case reported throughout this paper are
likely to be considerably larger; in the cases where they are proportional to the increase in the
debt ratio, about 45% larger than those described below.


To stabilize the debt ratio at the current 79% would require a consistent reduction in the primary
deficit of 1.8% of GDP, e.g. achieved by a reduction of 10 percent in non-interest spending;
returning to the historical average 42% debt ratio starting in a decade would require a reduction
in the primary deficit of 4.4% from then on, or well over 20% of non-interest spending, even in
the optimistic EB, more under AF. The largest multiyear spending reduction since 1930, except
the post WWII demobilization, was 5% of GDP.


The source of these imbalances is spending outstripping revenues, and projected slow economic
growth due to demography and modest productivity growth. CBO (2019) estimates the primary
drivers of growing deficits and debt are Social Security and major health programs. Projected
spending on these entitlements grows 6.1% of GDP from 2019 to 2049. Contrary to most
commentary, just under half of this growth is due to an aging population; over half to growing
real costs per beneficiary. Revenues are expected to grow by 3 percent of GDP, just over half
due to real bracket creep. The larger debt and higher interest rates increase interest costs as well
in the total deficit.


Evaluating Efficacy of Counter Cyclical Fiscal Policy




                                                                                                       3
There are five methods used to evaluate the effects of fiscal policy: 1. Stylized analytical models;
2. Macro econometric models; 3. Direct estimation of key relationships, e.g. an expenditure or
tax multiplier; 4. Structural vector autoregressions (SVARs); 5. Historical case studies, which
may utilize some of the others as inputs. Each of these approaches has its strengths and
weaknesses: model assumptions, data limitations, difficulties of identification, generalizability,
etc. Often, this renders direct comparison of results tricky. Conclusions differ and are heavily
dependent upon the model assumptions on the nature, timing, assumed duration and financing of
fiscal actions; the assumed path of monetary policy; the degree of wage and/or price rigidities,
including the probability and duration of the ZLB; the degree of forward-looking behavior by
consumers and firms, etc.


Modern research 7 decisively rejects the simplified Keynesian notions of expenditure multipliers
that are large and larger than tax multipliers, with little if any long-run cost. While the results
vary by research methodology, considerable evidence 8 since the financial crisis suggests:
1. present value expenditure multipliers generally below one, lower still in models with variable
labor supply and capital stock; peak multipliers somewhat, possibly well, above one at the ZLB
(Hall (2009); Christiano, Eichenbaum and Rebello (2011)) initially, but rapidly declining; and
potentially negative, a dampener, if the increased spending is expected to last beyond the ZLB
period (Woodford (2011) or in economies with high debt ratio (Ilzetzki et al. (2013)). 2.
estimated tax multipliers are considerably larger than those for expenditure, (Mountford and
Uhlig (2009); Romer and Romer (2010)), especially for permanent rate reductions, which turns


7
  Important issues lie beneath the headline deficit and debt numbers. Estimating effects on historical data, unless
controlled for, implicitly assumes the typical conditional mix of these details. Leaving assumptions about the
reaction of monetary policy aside, the degree of tightening of credit conditions, changes or prospective changes in
regulation of major sectors of the economy, the structure of tax and transfer rules, and policy uncertainty
all can have important effects. For example, the credit tightening surrounding the 1990-91 and 2008-9 recessions
was even more extreme than economic conditions suggested; Mulligan (2012) demonstrates substantial disincentive
effects from the transfer policies accompanying the 2009 fiscal stimulus; and the policies and uncertainty concerning
the new regulation of financial services, healthcare and energy likely created a drag on the economy--something I
argued in 2008 was likely. Similarly, the extremely strong rebound from the 1981-2 recession may well have been
aided by the structure of the tax reductions, e.g. lower marginal rates and increased investment incentives. Then
CEA Chair Art Okun later said the corporate investment tax changes were the most effective part of the Kennedy-
Johnson program. Separating these types of effects from more traditional "Keynesian stimulus" effects operating
through increasing cash flows of liquidity constrained consumers or firms, especially when accompanied by
unusually tight credit conditions, is difficult and, despite some important work in this area (Barro and Redlick;
Mulligan), remains a high research priority.
8
  See Ramey (2019) and the earlier discussion in Auerbach and Gale (2010).


                                                                                                                   4
the simple unitary Keynesian balanced budget multiplier negative. 3. the stimulus may turn
negative in year two through four depending on assumptions (Mountford and Uhlig (2009) and
Ramey (2019)); and 4. some early studies suggested large multipliers in recessions, smaller, even
negative, in expansions (Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013)), but Ramey and Zubairy (2018)
find no evidence of multipliers above one in slack times or even in recessions. 5. more recent
studies, redone with consistent robust methods, of multipliers for the 2009 ARRA are consistent
with the real time Cogan, Cwik, Taylor and Wieland (2010) estimates of about 0.6. In her
excellent survey, Ramey (2019) concludes knowing what we know now, the 2009 stimulus
package should have relied "more on tax rate cuts and less on expenditure." 6. fiscal
consolidations relying primarily on spending reductions are more successful in improving the
fiscal position and avoiding recession than those focused on tax increases (Alessina et al. 2019).


Deficits, Debt and Longer-run Growth
The long-term costs of deficit spending are not emphasized often enough in academic studies and
even less in policy debates. They can be substantial. For example, Uhlig (2013) merges New
Keynesian DSGE and neoclassical growth models and estimates each dollar of debt financed
spending ultimately costs the economy $3.40 in present value, a sobering figure. Reinhart and
Rogoff (2009) demonstrate damaging effects from high debt ratios in numerous historical
episodes.


To the extent deficits decrease national saving and crowd out investment, incomes, especially
wages, will be lower than they would have been in the future. While, as noted above, the effects
likely vary based on a number of factors, a rough sense of the order of magnitude of this loss
from the CBO scenarios 9 can be calculated from a simple production function and an assumption
on how much the debt substitutes for tangible capital, as opposed to increasing private saving or
crowding in foreign capital. In the full crowding out case, for example, with a standard
production function, the result is roughly a 15% decrease over a generation for AF. With a
productivity growth rate of 1 ¼ % per year, that's roughly a third smaller improvement in living
standards. There is a range of empirical estimates of these effects. One influential IMF study


9
  As noted above, the CBO EB scenario 2049 debt ratio was revised up in January by 30 percentage points to 174%,
a 45% larger debt ratio increase from the current level.


                                                                                                               5
(Kumar and Woo (2010)), which adjusted for factors such as reverse causality. estimated that
each 10% increase in the debt/GDP ratio lowered the growth rate 0.2 percentage points, which
would lead to larger income losses. Finally, modern research on the nature and biases of
technical change concludes that production in the G-7 economies in the post-WWII period has
been capital and human capital augmenting, which Boskin and Lau (2000) show implies that
even if the potential rate of technical progress is exogenous, the rate realized is an increasing
function of the levels of capital. Thus, debt substituting for tangible capital may cause even
larger income losses. The same would follow if technical change is embodied in new capital or
there is substantial learning by doing (Arrow (1962); De Long and Summers (1992), Auerbach,
Hassett and Oliner (1994)). So numerous cautionary signs against "debt is free" abound.


A main mechanism through which deficits and debt affect the economy, both in the analysis of
fiscal effects on growth and in the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level analyses of the ultimate
causes of inflation (Sargent and Wallace (1981); Leeper (1991); Woodford (1994); Cochrane
(1998)) is by raising interest rates. While there is a range of estimates in the literature, two
respected studies suggest the affect can be sizable. Laubach (2009) estimates each 1% of GDP
debt ratio increase raises long-term interest rate by 3-4 basis points. Greenlaw, Hamilton,
Hooper and Mishkin (2013) estimate by 4.5 basis points, accelerating rapidly at debt ratios above
80%, just above the current U.S. level, more with large current account deficits. They conclude
there is an important feedback effect not fully included in official projections.


The U.S. likely would have been affected even more, except the global reserve currency status of
the dollar, the depth, liquidity and relative safety of U.S. financial markets, the substantial
growth outperformance relative to Europe and Japan and the capital inflows from rapidly
growing Asia and international portfolio diversification from other countries have thus far muted
these effects. Simply put, the supply of foreign capital to the U.S. has been far more elastic over
much larger levels for longer than many early analyses predicted (Feldstein and Horioka (1980)).
For example, foreigners now hold almost two-thirds of federal debt held outside the government.
There ultimately must be an upper bound on the share of wealth investors are willing to hold in
U.S. government bonds (Sargent and Wallace (1981)). So the supply of foreign capital to the
United States must turn increasingly inelastic as the upper bound is approached. But exactly



                                                                                                      6
when, how and why that will occur is difficult to say. Mathematically, our present value
intertemporal government budget constraint and dynamic model transversality conditions tell us
only what ultimately must happen, not when.


The Deficit and the Evolution of the Debt
Most analyses of the deficits and debt play off the same two equations we teach our students: the
government's intertemporal budget constraint that the NPV of future primary surpluses must
cover the current debt net of assets:


                                        
                                               - 
                                 0  
                                             (1 + )
                                        =0



where B0 = government debt net of assets; G = outlays other than interest; T = revenue. And the
debt dynamics difference equation:


                                        1+
                                    = 1+ -1 + 
                                             




where d = ratio of debt to GDP; xt = ratio of primary surplus to GDP; r = interest rate paid by
government; and g = growth rate.


Before proceeding to discuss Blanchard (2019), it is important to remember from traditional
optimal growth theory that when i, the marginal product of capital, exceeds g, the economy is
said to be dynamically efficient (Diamond 1965). If the growth rate exceeds the marginal product
of capital, the economy is dynamically inefficient with too much capital, beyond the Golden
Rule level (Phelps 1961), and current consumption can use up some of the capital while holding
constant the consumption of future generations. Empirical estimates suggest i substantially
exceeds g. But adjustments must be made for risk. In an uncertain world, Abel, Mankiw,
Summers and Zeckhauser (1989) show that the productive economy generating more capital cash
flow than investment is the analogous criterion, which NIPA data shows has been easily met.
Subtracting labor compensation and two-thirds of proprietors' income from, and adding capital
consumption to, national income yielded $8.6 trillion, compared to gross investment of $4.3

                                                                                                  7
trillion, in 2017. That implies that debt policy decreasing capital accumulation reduces steady
state consumption.


The TV conclusion has been challenged recently by a number of authors arguing secular
stagnation ­ investment is insufficient to equilibrate with saving permanently at a positive
interest rate, among other things therefore increasing the likelihood of ZLB periods. And so-
called modern monetary theory -- there is no cost to a central bank buying up all the bonds
denominated in its own currency. The proponents of each view argue that it alters the need to be
concerned, for some long period of time, about large deficits and the debt growing rapidly. That
analysis coincides with political pressure to increase federal spending, paid for with more debt if
necessary, even in a fully employed economy.


The most fundamental critique is Blanchard's (2019) elegant extension of the Diamond (1965)
OLG model to account for risk by focusing on expected utility. In his model, both the safe
(maturity adjusted, net of tax) Treasury rate, r, and the risky marginal product of capital, i, are
relevant to the evaluation of debt policy on generational welfare. Recently, r has been below g,
the bond market expects that to continue, and i is well above g. He concludes that a sizable
increase in debt may well have no fiscal cost and improve welfare. He thus echoes the traditional
optimal growth theory dynamic inefficiency result mentioned above.


Blanchard's theoretical analysis is accompanied by simulations, spanning four 25-year
generations, that in many instances support his conclusions. Before turning to concerns about the
analysis, which still lead me to conclude that a large debt increase is likely to be economically
damaging, it is worth emphasizing that Blanchard's analysis makes a case for increased current
consumption. Many of the other arguments for more debt make a case for more public
investment, not more consumption. Reconciling the two requires a neo-Galbraithian (1958),
"relative poverty of the public sector" argument focused on investment. It would likely depend
on whether public capital was more complementary to consumption or private capital, among
other factors. Many commentators believe the U.S. has major public investment needs, most
clearly for recapitalizing the military and for infrastructure. Sound public finance principles
dictate that some of the latter is appropriately a government function, some of that appropriately



                                                                                                      8
federal. Lower government borrowing costs would, cet. par., imply more long-lived, capital
intensive projects would pass benefit cost tests. But if the lower r was accompanied (even
caused) by lower g, slower growth of the project benefits would be an offset.


Figures 2 and 3 clearly show there have been long periods Treasury yields were continuously
lower, or higher, than nominal growth. Economists and financial markets have badly missed the
shifts between them. For example, when the FED hit the ZLB in late 2008, it was expected to
stay there for nine months, not seven years. Even if, on average, Treasury costs are below the
growth rate, debt rollovers might fail if the rate paid by the government exceeds the growth rate
for long enough for the debt to explode.


But is the government's net cost, r, likely to remain below the growth rate, g? Blanchard reports
a calculation that current budget projections might lead to an increase in r of 1.2-1.8 percentage
points. The CBO AF has g at 3.9%, r at 4.6%. With only one-third of debt held by taxable
investors, the net of tax Treasury cost still exceeds the growth rate. The Laubach (2009)
estimates imply a 240 bp increase for EB, 10 500 bp for AF (Greenlaw et al. (2013) even more)
which easily reverses the recent inequality between the Treasury rate and growth rate.


The welfare implications in Blanchard's model are determined by two effects: a partial
equilibrium direct effect of the transfer that depends on the safe rate r which, if below the growth
rate, is positive. And a general equilibrium effect on wages and returns to capital
that depends on the risky marginal product of capital i, which, if greater than the growth rate,
decreases welfare. The more the marginal product of capital exceeds the growth
rate, the further below the growth rate the safe rate must be for the transfer to be welfare
improving. Estimates of the marginal product of capital from national income data are far above
the growth rate. After adjusting for the ratio of capital goods to output prices and eliminating
land and mineral rights from the value of the capital stock, Caselli and Fehrer (2007)
estimate a marginal product of capital of 9% for the U.S. (8.4% for all rich economies).




10
  The January 2020 CBO EB scenario revised the 2049 debt ratio up 30 percentage points to 174%, a 45% larger
increase from current levels. That would raise the Laucbach interest rate effect up to almost 350 basis points.


                                                                                                                  9
Applying the same adjustment factors to 2017 U.S. NIPA net capital income and BEA net
reproducible capital stock data would also yield high estimates. Monopoly profits and intangibles
account for some of the return, but they would have to be immense, over one third of capital
returns for the entire economy, not just Big Tech, to reduce i to less than 4% above the growth
rate; and by over half to reduce i to less than 2% over g. The maturity adjusted, net of tax,
interest cost to the government r, is about 1.5% below the growth rate. Hence, the debt
operations Blanchard envisions are quite likely welfare decreasing.


In Blanchard's most realistic example, the simulated welfare effects of a debt and rollover
finance of about 12% of GDP intergenerational transfer turn negative, and in some cases,
substantially so, for future generations. In this case, one would need a very large discount rate to
make the gains (in many, not all, cases) to the first generation worth the harm to future
generations. Decadal productivity growth slowed, and estimates of future growth remain low,
thus slower improvement of living standards suggests a low social discount rate. That makes the
likelihood of (possibly sizable) social welfare losses much larger. Surely d, g and r are not
independent. Productivity pessimists (Gordon (2016) argue new technology does and will not
raise productivity nearly as much as did electricity, the automobile, etc.; optimists (Brynjolfsson
et al. 2019) counter that the "killer app" has or will show up for social media, nanotechnology,
AI, precision biomedicine, etc. Time will tell.


Like all modelers, Blanchard makes assumptions, some for tractability, and inputs parameter
values, but changing several would affect the no cost, increased welfare results, most weakening
(w), others strengthening (s) his argument. To his credit, he analyzes some, but dismisses most,
while acknowledging that these and other reasons may cause the growth rate to fall, and/or the
safe rate to increase, even by enough to reverse the recent relationship.


Among these, with likely effect on conclusions from altering them in parentheses, are 1) most
fundamentally, the effects of d on r and g is minimized, as is the fact x> 0 (w); 2) debt is nearly
fully net wealth even when the government must levy future taxes to pay interest costs (s); 3)
there is no pre-existing government, so no spending, tax and debt paths already in the
government's intertemporal budget constraint and no greater harm from any future tax rate



                                                                                                   10
increases on top of existing taxes (the deadweight loss rises with the square of tax rates (w)); 4)
the young generation, with a lognormal wage distribution, also has a nonstochastic endowment,
E, equal to the average wage. But E is not derived or justified and is wildly exaggerated for
most workers, especially so for the young, less skilled and renters; U.S. total labor compensation,
including benefits, divided by fulltime work equivalents is about $90,000, far above the median.
Adding a large E may insure the transfers are feasible, but likely limits cases of large risk premia
in Treasury yields (w); 5) capital and labor are equally risky, ignoring capital price risk
(perhaps w); 6) there is no longer an artificially low safe rate in the observed data caused by
financial repression leading to a liquidity discount (w); 7) the economy is closed to trade and
capital flows; opening the model, Blanchard notes, to external debt to comport with the
considerable observed external debt means some of the substitution of debt for capital is in
foreigners' portfolios, which decreases crowding out of domestic investment (but the foreigners
get the returns to the capital, even as domestic wages fall less than otherwise) (s); further, if the
debt increases become large and crowd out enough other countries' domestic investment, foreign
governments might react to keep capital at home, which could raise U.S. interest rates (w),
rendering the net welfare implications ambiguous. 7) downplaying the possibility that dual
equilibria may exist, one with a low rate and one with a higher rate when investors believe the
debt is risky; as Blanchard notes, the expectations can be self-fulfilling, and the equilibrium may
be unstable, with interest rates and risk premia continuing to rise (w). Sargent (1982, 1999), in
the context of causes of, and remedies for, high inflation argues a major fiscal regime change
was involved.


Blanchard argues the bad equilibrium can be offset by an aggressive contingent fiscal rule.
Unfortunately, the history of fiscal rules does not lead to optimism on this score. As a
participant in designing fiscal rules, budgeting to implement them and academic observer my
conclusion is they are potentially useful only when they have strong automatic enforcement
mechanisms and only so long as a political consensus is maintainable in the face of short run
economic and political cost. Witness the EU Growth and Stability Pact failures and several
rounds of U.S. fiscal rules that did not endure. Recall also the difficult political economy of even
getting back to primary budget balance and the historically enormous spending and/or tax




                                                                                                    11
changes that would be required, raising questions about the relevance of Blanchard's debt
rollover with primary balance cases (w).


An additional political economy point extends Buchanan and Wagner's (1977) argument that by
reducing the perceived tax price that ultimately must be paid for more spending, a fiscal illusion
leads to excessive spending. Surely imbuing elected officials with the notion that price is zero
would substantially worsen the tendency, drive up the debt, crowd out still more investment and
weaken whatever cost benefit discipline exists in spending decisions.


Conclusion
Blanchard said "My purpose...is not to argue for more public debt... It is to have a richer
discussion of the costs of debt...than is currently the case." By that standard, it is already well on
its way to being one of the most influential AEA Presidential addresses since Milton Friedman's
in December 1967 (Hall and Sargent (2017)). It is widely cited in the polity and media as a
justification for substantial debt increases to finance more spending. But for serious economists,
he has done us the favor of raising vital analytical and empirical issues. For that he should be
lauded.


But there are serious substantive issues with Blanchard's argument that limit its applicability,
including failing to account for the effect of increasing debt on interest rates and growth and the
pre-existing spending, taxes, primary deficit, debt and their projected evolution; disputable
readings of the data; strong assumptions and parameter values driving the results; and a political
economy of deficits and debt likely to lead to even larger debt ratios that would reinforce the
case against the view that large increases in debt are likely much less costly than commonly
supposed. Acknowledging many uncertainties about the necessary size and timing, the evidence
still suggests that large increases in the debt ratio pose many major risks: much higher taxes and
lower future incomes; in the extreme, eventually inflation or other financial problems; and
serious intergenerational inequity, among them.




                                                                                                   12
13
                                       Table 1
                        Fiscal Variables Projected 2049 (%)
                                  EB             EBU             AF
              d                  144             174            219
              x                  -3.0            -3.6*          -6.1
        total surplus            -8.7           -10.2*         -15.5
change in:
 x from 2020 to reach 2019 d     1.8             NA             NA
 x from 2030 to reach ave. d     4.4             NA             NA
      entitlements/GDP           6.1             6.4*           NA

EBU is the CBO January 2020 updated extended baseline.
*2041-2050 average; the 2049 value would be slightly larger
(in absolute value). The exact x to reach the 2019 d and
historical average d is not available, but would be slightly
larger than for the EB scenario.

Source: Congressional Budget Office 2019 and author's
calculations




                                                                       14
References:

Abel, Andrew, N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawrence Summers and Richard Zeckhauser. 1989.
"Assessing Dynamic Efficiency: Theory and Evidence" Review of Economic Studies, 56, 1-20.

Alesina, Alberto, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi. 2019. Austerity: When It Works and
When It Doesn't. Princeton University Press.

Arrow, Kenneth J. 1962. "The Economic Implications of Learning By Doing," Review of
Economic Studies, Vol. 29, Issue 3.

Auerbach, Alan J. and William G. Gale. 2010. "Activist Fiscal Policy," Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Vol. 24, No. 4: 141-64.

Auerbach, Alan J., William G. Gale, and Alan Krupkin. 2019. "If Not Now, When? New
Estimates of the Federal Budget Outlook. Brookings Institution.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2013. Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and
Expansion. Chap. 2 in Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis, edited by Alberto Alesina and
Francesco Giavazzi. University of Chicago Press.

Auerbach, Alan J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.

Auerbach, Alan J., Jagadeesh Gokhale and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1994. "Generational
Accounting: A Meaningful Way to Evaluate Fiscal Policy," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
Vol. 8, No. 1.

Auerbach, Alan J., Kevin A. Hassett and Stephen D. Oliner. 1994." Reassessing the Social
Returns of Equipment Investment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 109, Issue 3.

Barro, Robert J. 1974. "Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?" Journal of Political Economy
82, 1095-1117.

Barro, Robert J. and Charles Redlick. 2011. "Macroeconomic Effects from Government
Purchases and Taxes," Quarterly Journal of Economics. 89 (6). 121 (1): 51-102.

Bils, Mark and Peter Klenow. 2004. "Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices,"
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112, No. 5.

Blanchard, Olivier. 2019. "Public Debt and Low Interest Rates," American Economic Review,
March. Vol. 109 (4): 1197-1229.

Boskin, Michael. J. 1982. "Federal Government Deficits: Some Myths and Realities," American
Economic Review, vol. 22, no.2




                                                                                                15
Boskin, Michael J. and Laurence J. Kotlikoff. 1985. "Public Debt and U.S. Saving: A New
Test of the Neutrality Hypothesis," Carnegie Rochester Conference Series.

Boskin, Michael J. and Lawrence J. Lau. 2000. "Generalized Solow Neutral Technical Progress and
Postwar Economic Growth." NBER Working Paper 8023.

Boskin, Michael J., Marc Robinson and Alan Huber. 1989. "Government Saving, Capital
Formation and Wealth in the United States, 1947-85," in The Measurement of Saving, Income
and Wealth, Robert Lipsey and Helen Tice, eds, University of Chicago Press for NBER.

Brynjolfsson Erik, Erwin Deiwert, Felix Eggers, Kevin Fox and Avi Gannamaneni. 2018.
"The Digital Economy, GDP and Consumer Welfare: Theory and Evidence." MIT Initiative on
the Digital Economy.

Buchanan, James and Richard Wagner. 1977. Democracy in Deficit. New York. Academic
Press.

Caselli, F. and J. Fehrer. 2007. "The Marginal Product of Capital," Quarterly Journal of
Economics, May.

Christiano, Lawrence, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. 2011. "When is the
Government Spending Multiplier Large?" Journal of Political Economy 119 (1): 78-121.

Cogan, John F., Tobias Cwik, John B. Taylor, and Volker Wieland. 2010. "New Keynesian
versus Old Keynesian Government Spending Multipliers." Journal of Economic Dynamics and
Control 34 (3): 281-95.

Congressional Budget Office. 2019. "Long Term Budget Outlook 2019-2049." Congress of the
United States.

Congressional Budget Office, 2020. "The Budget and Economic Outlook: 2020-2030."
Congress of the United States.

De Long, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers. 1992. "Equipment Investment and
Economic Growth: How Strong Is the Nexus?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. No. 2.

Diamond, Peter A. 1965. "National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model." American
Economic Review 55, 1126-1150.

Eisner, Robert. 1986. How Real Is the Federal Deficit? New York, Free Press.

Elmendorf, Douglas W. & N. Gregory Mankiw. "Government Debt" in J. B. Taylor & M.
Woodford (ed.), Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume 1, Chapter 25, pages 1615-1669,
Elsevier.




                                                                                            16
Feldstein, Martin and Charles Horioka. 1980. "Domestic Saving and International Capital
Flows,"The Economic Journal Vol. 90, No. 358, pp. 314-329

Galbraith, John Kenneth. 1958. The Affluent Society, New York, Houghton Mifflin.

Gordon, Robert J. 2016. The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U. S. Standard of Living
since the Civil War. Princeton University Press.

Greenlaw, D., J. Hamilton, P. Hooper and Frederic Mishkin. 2013. "Crunch Time: Fiscal
Crisis
And the Role of Monetary Policy," paper prepared for U.S. Monetary Policy Forum, New York.

Hall, Robert E. 2009. "By How Much Does GDP Rise When the Government Buys More
Output?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall.

Hall, Robert E. and Thomas Sargent. 2017. "The Short-Run and Long-Run Influence of
Milton Friedman's Presidential Address," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 32 (1): 121-34.

Ilzetzki, Ethan, Enrique G. Mendoza, and Carlos A. Vegh. 2013. "How Big (Small?) Are
Fiscal Multipliers?" Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (2): 239-254.

Kumar, M. and J. Woo. 2010. "Public Debt and Growth," International Monetary Fund Study
Paper 10/174.

Laubach, Thomas 2009. "New Evidence on the Interest Rate Effects of Budget Deficits and
Debt," Journal of the European Economic Association, 7(4), June.

Leeper, Eric M. (1991). "Equilibria under 'Active' and 'Passive' Monetary and Fiscal
Policies". Journal of Monetary Economics. 27 (1): 129-147.

Mountford, Andrew, and Harald Uhlig. 2009. "What Are the Effects of Fiscal Policy
Shocks?" Journal of Applied Econometrics 24 (6): 960-92.

Mulligan, Casey. 2012. The Redistribution Recession. Oxford University Press.

Phelps, Edmund S. 1961. "The Golden Rule of Accumulation: A Fable for Growthmen."
American Economic Review, 51, 638-642.

Ramey, Valerie. 2019. "Ten Years After the Financial Crisis: What Have We Learned From the
Renaissance in Fiscal Research?" Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 33, No. 2, Spring.

Ramey, Valerie A., and Sarah Zubairy. 2018. "Government Spending Multipliers in Good
Times and in Bad: Evidence from US Historical Data." Journal of Political Economy 126 (2):
850-901.




                                                                                             17
Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff. 2009. This Time Is Different. Princeton University
Press.

Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. 2010. "The Macroeconomic Effects of Tax
Changes Estimated Based on a New Measure of Fiscal Shocks." American Economic Review
100(3): 763-201.

Sargent, Thomas. 1982. "The Ends of Four Big Inflations," in: Inflation: Causes and Effects.
pages 41-98. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Sargent, Thomas. 1999. The Conquest of American Inflation. Princeton, NJ, Princeton
University Press.

Sargent, Thomas and Neil Wallace. 1981. "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic," Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Vol. 5 (Fall)

Swanson, Eric T., and John C. Williams. 2014. "Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower
Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates." American Economic Review, 104 (10):
3154-85.

Uhlig, Harald. 2013. "Some Fiscal Calculus," American Economic Review," Vol. 100 Issue 2.

Woodford, Michael. 1995. "Price Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary
Aggregate" (PDF). Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy. 43: 1­46.

Woodford, Michael. 2011. "The Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier."
American Economic Journal Macroeconomics 3 (1): 1-35.




                                                                                               18
