                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           RISK PREMIUM SHOCKS CAN CREATE INEFFICIENT RECESSIONS

                                        Sebastian Di Tella
                                          Robert E. Hall

                                       Working Paper 26721
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26721


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




Hall's research is supported by the Hoover Institution. We thank Chris Tonetti, Chad Jones,
Emmanuel Farhi, Tom Winberry, Alp Simsek, Moritz Lenel, Rohan Kekre, and seminar
participants in Princeton, LSE, Fed Board, AEA meetings, and Cleveland Fed. We thank Bernard
Herskovic, Bryan Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh for sharing their data with
us. Neither author has any financial relationships calling for disclosure. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26721.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Sebastian Di Tella and Robert E. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Risk Premium Shocks Can Create Inefficient Recessions
Sebastian Di Tella and Robert E. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 26721
January 2020
JEL No. E21,E22,E32

                                        ABSTRACT

We develop an equilibrium theory of business cycles driven by spikes in risk premiums that
depress business demand for capital and labor. Aggregate shocks increase firms' uninsurable
idiosyncratic risk and raise risk premiums. We show that risk shocks can create quantitatively
realistic recessions, with contractions in employment, consumption, and investment. Business
cycles are inefficient--output and employment fall too much during recessions, compared to the
constrained-efficient allocation, and consumption should rise. Optimal policy involves
stimulating employment and consumption during recessions.


Sebastian Di Tella
Stanford University
Graduate School of Business
655 Knight Way
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
sditella@stanford.edu

Robert E. Hall
Hoover Institution
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
rehall@gmail.com
                  Risk Premium Shocks Can Create
                               Inefficient Recessions
                                         Sebastian Di Tella
                                            Stanford GSB


                                             Robert Hall
           Hoover Institution and Department of Economics, Stanford University

                                            January 2020



                                               Abstract
           We develop an equilibrium theory of business cycles driven by spikes in risk pre-
       miums that depress business demand for capital and labor. Aggregate shocks increase
       firms' uninsurable idiosyncratic risk and raise risk premiums. We show that risk shocks
       can create quantitatively realistic recessions, with contractions in employment, con-
       sumption, and investment. Business cycles are inefficient--output and employment
       fall too much during recessions, compared to the constrained-efficient allocation, and
       consumption should rise. Optimal policy involves stimulating employment and con-
       sumption during recessions.


       JEL: E32, E21, E22
       Keywords: Business cycles, risk premium, recession, precautionary saving


1      Introduction
Market economies experience recurrent recessions with sharp contractions in economic ac-
tivity. Why do employment, investment, and consumption suddenly fall, and what is the
appropriate policy response? In this paper we explore a risk-premium view of business
cycles: recessions are periods of heightened economic uncertainty when firms and investors
shrink from risk. We propose a model of business cycles driven by spikes in risk premiums
that depress business demand for labor and capital.
    
    sditella@stanford.edu and rehall@stanford.edu. Hall's research is supported by the Hoover Institution.
We thank Chris Tonetti, Chad Jones, Emmanuel Farhi, Tom Winberry, Alp Simsek, Moritz Lenel, Rohan
Kekre, and seminar participants in Princeton, LSE, Fed Board, AEA meetings, and Cleveland Fed. We
thank Bernard Herskovic, Bryan Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh for sharing their data
with us.


                                                    1
   The premise of our model is that businesses face significant uninsurable idiosyncratic
risk which spikes during downturns, driving risk premiums up. Figure 1 shows idiosyncratic
risk in stock returns, from Herskovic et al. [2016]. Spikes in idiosyncratic risk are clearly
visible during recessions, especially during the Great Depression and the 2008 financial
crisis. We show that risk shocks can create quantitatively realistic business cycles, with
co-movement among employment, consumption, and investment. Furthermore, these eco-
nomic fluctuations are inefficient--output and employment fall too much during recessions,
compared to the constrained-efficient allocation, and consumption should rise. Optimal
policy involves stimulating employment and consumption during recessions.
   A long tradition attributes business cycles to time-varying risk premiums, dating back,
at least, to chapter 12 of the General Theory (Keynes [1936]). The co-movement pattern of
macroeconomic aggregates during business cycles, however, poses a challenge to this view.
It is hard to explain why employment, consumption, and investment all simultaneously
contract. As Barro and King [1984] noted, as long as the productive capacity of the economy
is not affected by the shock, contractions in investment demand produce expansions in
consumption in standard equilibrium models.
   In response to this challenge, modern macroeconomics has focused on two broad views of
business cycles. The RBC model highlights the role of TFP shocks that reduce productive
capacity--recessions are periods of low productivity. The New Keynesian model highlights
nominal rigidities and suboptimal monetary policy--recessions are periods when the central
bank does not or cannot reproduce the flexible-price allocation, possibly because of a zero
lower bound problem.
   We aim to provide an alternative view of business cycles that highlights the role of
risk premiums--recessions are periods when firms and investors demand large premiums to
compensate them for risk. Our model features only risk shocks and no nominal rigidities.
The only departure from the standard neoclassical growth model is that entrepreneurs
cannot fully insure against the idiosyncratic risk in their firms. This friction enables the
model to provide an account of business cycles driven by spikes in risk premiums.
   The effects of risk shocks in our model can be understood in terms of risk premiums
and precautionary saving. First, because the marginal products of capital and labor are
uncertain, business demand for them carries a risk premium to compensate for uninsurable
idiosyncratic risk. A spike in risk premiums therefore depresses demand for capital and
labor symmetrically.
   Second, higher idiosyncratic risk creates a precautionary saving motive that stimulates
investment, because capital serves as a store of value that is attractive when risk is high.
Investment trades off consumption today for consumption over a long period in the future.
In contrast, labor does not serve as a store of value. It trades off disutility for output within
a period, and is therefore not directly affected by the precautionary motive. Precautionary


                                               2
                  0.8


                  0.6


                  0.4


                  0.2


                  0.0


                -0.2


                -0.4
                               1940              1960             1980             2000


Figure 1: HP-filtered annualized idiosyncratic risk in daily stock market returns, after
extracting five principal components, from Herskovic et al. [2016]. Post-war mean is 0.28.


saving therefore affects capital and labor asymmetrically.
      We can map the role of incomplete idiosyncratic risk sharing into capital and labor
wedges relative to the first-best with perfect risk-sharing, in the tradition of Chari et al.
[2007]. Risk shocks create a large increase in the labor wedge and a small reduction in
the capital wedge. This configuration of wedges enables the model to deliver realistic
business cycles. An increase in the labor wedge--like a labor tax--reduces employment and
output, and thereby consumption and investment. It creates a recession. The distribution
of the decline in output between lower consumption and lower investment depends on
intertemporal substitution, the persistence of the shock, and capital adjustment costs.
      An increase in the capital wedge--like a capital tax--reduces investment and employ-
ment, but increases consumption. To the extent that risk shocks show up as spikes in the
capital wedge, they can't produce business cycles. The observation in our paper is that
the precautionary motive compensates the effect of the risk premium on the capital wedge,
but not on the labor wedge, as explained above. As a result, risk shocks generate business
cycles with realistic co-movement among employment, consumption, and investment.
      To evaluate the quantitative plausibility of the mechanism, we calibrate the model to
US data. We find that it can successfully reproduce the business cycle behavior of the
main macroeconomic aggregates. Idiosyncratic risk rises in recessions, both in terms of
establishment-level TFP and sales, or stock returns as shown in Figure 1.1 The model is
stylized in the interest of theoretical clarity, but our claim is that the theoretical mechanism
we describe is quantitatively plausible and a promising way to understand business cycles.
      We also pursue a sufficient statistic approach that allows us to quantitatively evaluate
  1
      See Christiano. et al. [2014], Gilchrist et al. [2014], Herskovic et al. [2016], and Bloom et al. [2018].



                                                         3
the relationship between the labor and capital wedges in terms of measurable equilibrium
objects, without having to specify many structural details of the environment. When we
plug in data from the US, we find that while the labor wedge is positive and rises during
recessions, the capital wedge is negative and falls even more during recessions. Besides
giving us a quantitative sense of the mechanism, the sufficient statistic also allows us to see
how it would change under different scenarios.
   The view of business cycles we propose has important implications for the design of
policy interventions. In Section 5 we study the efficiency of the competitive equilibrium.
We solve for the constrained-efficient allocation that respects the incomplete risk-sharing
environment. We find that the competitive equilibrium is inefficient. Under the optimal
allocation, risk shocks create a small reduction in the labor wedge and a large increase in
the capital wedge--the opposite of the competitive equilibrium. As a result, in the plan-
ner's allocation risk shocks depress investment but produce an expansion in consumption,
and output and employment fluctuations are smaller than in the competitive equilibrium.
The constrained-efficient allocation can be implemented by stimulating employment and
consumption during recessions. A simple way of doing this is subsidizing labor and taxing
capital during recessions.

1.1   Relationship to the Literature

Our paper builds on a large literature that highlights the role of time-varying risk premiums
in business cycles, such as Cochrane [2011]. A higher risk premium causes a negative
demand shock to investment. However, these models are typically unable to deliver the
co-movement pattern between consumption, investment, and employment that occurs over
the business cycle. This is the essence of the problem identified in Barro and King [1984],
and the reason that the wedge accounting analysis in Chari et al. [2007] minimizes the role
of investment wedges. Christiano. et al. [2014], Di Tella [2017], Gilchrist et al. [2014], and
Bloom et al. [2018] study the impact of aggregate shocks to idiosyncratic risk on investment
dynamics. However, without nominal rigidities, risk shocks lead to consumption growth in
these models. On their own, risk shocks cannot produce realistic recessions.
   There is also a large literature on financial frictions where tighter financial constraints
reduce asset prices and investment, including Kiyotaki and Moore [1997], Bernanke et al.
[1999], Brunnermeier and Sannikov [2014], and He and Krishnamurthy [2012]. However, in
the absence of movements in TFP or nominal rigidities, consumption must rise in reces-
sions in these models. Di Tella [2019] shows how money can produce persistent slumps with
excessively depressed investment when idiosyncratic risk premiums rise, but consumption
increases on impact. On the other hand, Caballero and Simsek [2018] study the effect of
risk shocks in a model with nominal rigidities which create a Keynesian aggregate demand
channel that can deliver recessions. Kekre and Lenel [2019] highlight the role of heteroge-


                                              4
nous risk tolerance in generating time-varying risk premiums, also in a model with nominal
rigidities. In contrast, the mechanism in our paper does not require nominal rigidities.
   It's worth distinguishing the mechanism we propose from the real options channel high-
lighted in the literature that follows from Bloom [2009]. The crucial ingredient in this class
of models is non-convex adjustment costs, which create inaction regions, but risk sharing
is complete. Risk shocks on their own do not produce business cycles, and the competitive
equilibrium is typically efficient. In contrast, we assume convex adjustment costs. The
crucial ingredient in our model is incomplete idiosyncratic risk sharing, which creates a risk
premium on capital and labor and a precautionary motive for saving. Risk shocks produce
realistic recessions and the competitive equilibrium is inefficient. We focus on the effect of
time-varying idiosyncratic risk for simplicity. A time-varying price of risk would have simi-
lar effects. This could be a result of habits as in Campbell and Cochrane [1999] (exploited
by Kehoe et al. [2019]), heterogenous risk aversion as in Longstaff and Wang [2012] and
Gârleanu and Panageas [2015], or balance sheet effects as in He et al. [2015].
   Hall [2017] treats employment as a form of investment, in the context of search models.
Higher risk premiums act like a negative demand shock for labor, and has the potential to
deliver recessions. His analysis is at the level of the labor market. Kilic and Wachter [2018]
apply this idea in a general-equilibrium asset pricing model with rare disasters. Kehoe
et al. [2019] incorporate persistent human capital accumulation to overcome the puzzle of
low employment volatility uncovered in Shimer [2005]. These models largely abstract from
investment, however. This limitation is important because, while a higher risk premium
may depress job creation, it also reduces the demand for investment. In the short run,
consumption may well rise in recessions in models that include investment. Kilic and
Wachter [2018] briefly describe results for an extension of their model to include investment,
but in that extension, a financial shock induces a substantial jump in consumption.
   Arellano et al. [2019] study the role of uninsurable idiosyncratic risk for demand for
labor in an open economy with financial frictions. In their model higher risk increases the
probability of default, and, through higher credit spreads, reduces demand for labor. How-
ever, they abstract from investment. Jermann and Quadrini [2012] incorporate investment
in a model with borrowing constraints where labor must be paid in advance, as working
capital. When financial conditions tighten, firms that are up against the constraint must
reduce employment. But this mechanism also affects investment, and in general equilibrium
consumption spikes on impact. In a similar line, Occhino and Pescatori [2015] look at the
effect of a debt-overhang problem, which also show up as both capital and labor wedges.
It also produces countercyclical consumption.
   In contrast to these papers, our paper focuses on the general equilibrium response to
higher risk premiums and the resulting co-movement of consumption, investment, and em-
ployment. Higher idiosyncratic risk creates both a risk premium, which depresses demand


                                              5
for capital and labor symmetrically, and a precautionary saving motive, which depresses
interest rates. The difference in duration between capital and labor plays a central role
in generating realistic co-movement. Because capital has a long duration, lower interest
rates stimulate demand, dampening the effects of the risk premium. The result is a large
countercyclical labor wedge, and a small procyclical capital wedge.
      We use a simple neoclassical model with a frictionless spot market for labor. Unin-
surable idiosyncratic risk is the only friction. While we abstract from search frictions, we
believe that incorporating them into the framework is a promising approach for future
work. The focus of our paper is on uninsurable idiosyncratic risk on the business side, an
issue highlighted by Angeletos [2007] and Meh and Quadrini [2004]. We also abstract from
uninsurable labor income risk, which is the topic of a large literature, for example, Aiyagari
[1994].


2      Setting
There are two types of agents, workers and entrepreneurs. A representative worker supplies
labor, and entrepreneurs use capital ki,t and labor              i,t   to produce goods. Each entrepreneur
is exposed to idiosyncratic risk. The output flow for entrepreneur i is

                            dYi,t = f (ki,t ,   i,t )dt   + f (ki,t ,   i,t )t dBi,t ,                    (1)

where Bi,t is a Brownian motion specific to this entrepreneur, and f (k, ) = k                    1-   is the
usual Cobb-Douglas production function. Idiosyncratic risk washes out in the aggregate, so
aggregate output flow is f (kt , t )dt, as usual. As a result, the aggregate resource constraints
are
                                      ct + (xt )kt = f (kt , t )                                          (2)

and
                                        dkt = (xt kt - kt )dt,                                            (3)

where ct = cw,t + ce,t is aggregate consumption, ce,t =                       ci,t di is total consumption by
entrepreneurs, (xt )kt is investment,  is the rate of depreciation of capital, and xt -  is
the rate of growth of the capital stock. The function (x) incorporates convex adjustment
costs. We assume it takes the form (x) = (exp( (x -  )) - 1)/ +  . In the steady-state
( ) =  and  ( ) = 1, just like with quadratic adjustment costs. With                        = 0 we have the
case without adjustment costs.
      The level of idiosyncratic risk t follows a diffusion

                                                                 
                                         - t )dt +
                                 dt =  (¯                              t v dZt                            (4)



                                                      6
driven by an aggregate Brownian motion Z that captures risk shocks. This is the only
source of aggregate risk in this economy and the only exogenous driving force for business
cycles.
    Entrepreneurs cannot insure against their idiosyncratic risk Bi for incentive reasons,
but markets are complete for aggregate risk. This is the only friction in the economy.


The representative worker's problem. The representative worker has impatience w and
Frisch elasticity of labor supply  . The worker's problem is to choose values for consumption
cw and labor        to solve

                                                                                      1+1/
                                                           -w t                       t
                               max E                   e          log(cw,t ) -                   dt                              (5)
                                cw ,            0                                   1 + 1/

subject to the intertemporal budget constraint
                                                                                         
                                E               t cw,t dt  nw,0 + E                         t t wt dt ,                          (6)
                                         0                                           0

where t is the pricing kernel, dt /t = -rt dt - t dZt , rt is the interest rate, and t is the
price of aggregate risk, Z .


Entrepreneurs' problem. Entrepreneurs have impatience e > w . We take entrepreneurs
to be more impatient than workers as a device to obtain a stationary wealth distribu-
tion. An entrepreneur's problem is to choose consumption, production, and risk sharing
(ci , ki , i , xi , n,i ) to solve

                                                                       
                                             max             E             e-e t log(ci,t )dt                                    (7)
                                       ci , i ,ki ,xi ,n,i         0

subject to the dynamic budget constraint

dni,t =         ni,t rt + t ni,t n,i,t - ci,t + f (ki,t ,              i,t )   - (xi,t )ki,t - wt     i,t   + qt ki,t [xi,t -  + µq,t

              -rt - t q,t ] dt + t f (ki,t ,                 i,t )dBi,t    + n,i,t ni,t dZt                                      (8)

and the solvency constraint ni,t  0, where qt is the price of capital and µq,t and q,t its
drift and volatility. We treat n,i as a choice variable because there are complete markets
for aggregate risk sharing. Entrepreneurs can use financial instruments to choose any n,i
independently of other choices. But they cannot share their idiosyncratic risk. If they
could, they would perfectly insure and eliminate the t f (ki,t ,                                  i,t )dBi,t   term. This is the
only friction in this economy.




                                                                       7
Competitive equilibrium. Total wealth is ne,t + nw,t = qt kt , where ne,t =                     ni,t di is the total
wealth of entrepreneurs. For a given initial distribution of wealth, a competitive equilibrium
is a process for prices (r, , w, q ), aggregate capital k , a plan for the representative worker
(cw , ), and a plan for each entrepreneur (ci , kt , i , xi , n,i ) such that every agent optimizes
taking prices as given; the aggregate resource constraints (2) and (3) hold; and markets
clear:     i,t di   =    t,   ki,t di = kt and ne,t + nw,t = qt kt .

2.1      Discussion of Assumptions

Technology. A crucial feature of the environment is that the marginal products of capital
and labor are locally uncertain. An entrepreneur making decisions about k and                                has a
probability distribution of how this will affect profits, but doesn't know for sure. The
realized marginal product is uncertain when the factor quantity decision is made. The
central premise of the paper is that economic activity involves uninsurable idiosyncratic
risk of this type.
    To clarify the technology, consider an entrepreneur who employs a constant amount of
capital and labor for one year. The output produced over this year has a normal distribution:

                                     1                     1
                        Yi,1 =           f (k, )dt +           f (k, )dBi,t = f (k, )(1 + Bi,1 ),               (9)
                                 0                     0

where Bi,1 is distributed as standard normal. The continuous-time formulation says that
this uncertain output is revealed gradually and the entrepreneur can continuously adjust
labor and capital, but the marginal product is locally uncertain. This formulation allows
us to map the entrepreneurs' problem into standard portfolio-choice theory.
    Idiosyncratic output over a year can be negative, Yi,1 < 0. Economic activity may
actually destroy resources--for example, a factory could burn down. However, because
entrepreneurs can continually adjust k and , their wealth remains always positive, and has
a lognormal distribution in equilibrium. Bankruptcy never occurs in equilibrium.
    Idiosyncratic shocks are iid, which yields considerable tractability. Introducing persis-
tent shocks would require keeping track of the cross-sectional joint distribution of produc-
tivity and wealth. But the crucial property remains that the marginal products are locally
uncertain.


Aggregation. The setting with two types of agents is tractable because it won't be necessary
to keep track of the distribution of wealth among entrepreneurs. Homothetic preferences,
iid idiosyncratic shocks, and a linear budget constraint make the entrepreneur's problem
homogeneous in the entrepreneur's wealth, so aggregation is easy. Crucially, entrepreneurs
face uninsurable idiosyncratic risk, but don't have non-tradable labor income. The repre-
sentative worker has non-tradable labor income, but doesn't face idiosyncratic risk. This


                                                                  8
formulation has no role for uninsurable labor income risk, which is the focus of an extensive
literature. The focus in this paper is on the role of uninsurable idiosyncratic risk on the
entrepreneur's side, and the resulting risk premium on labor and capital.


Entrepreneurs and risk sharing. Entrepreneurs in the model are insiders who retain a sig-
nificant stake in the firm for incentive reasons.2 They represent (1) founding entrepreneurs
who often retain, for decades, substantial undiversified equity positions in large, successful
startups, (2) members of families operating family-owned firms, (3) top executives whose
incomes are linked to the success of their employers, and (4) private-equity fund managers
who hold significant stakes in their portfolio companies. In the model workers do not take
on idiosyncratic risk because they don't have the same incentive problems as these insiders.
The type of risk sharing that the first-best allocation requires does not involve workers, but
rather risk sharing across entrepreneurs.


3       Characterizing the Competitive Equilibrium
The main departure of our model from the neoclassical growth model is time-varying unin-
surable idiosyncratic risk. We can understand its effects in terms of a countercyclical risk
premium, which depresses demand for capital and labor, and a precautionary motive for
idiosyncratic risk which reduces interest rates.
    Agents' problem. The representative worker's problem is completely standard. The
entrepreneur's problem can be mapped into a consumption-portfolio problem. Homothetic
preferences and linear budget constraints imply that policy functions are linear in wealth,
which avoids the need to keep track of the distribution of wealth across entrepreneurs. In
what follows, hatted variables are normalized by the entrepreneur's wealth, such as c
                                                                                    ^ = c/n.
                                                                    1
    An entrepreneur's value function takes the form Vt (n) =            log n + At , where At captures
the forward-looking investment opportunities facing entrepreneurs. The HJB equation is

         1                                            1       1 2 1      ^ ^))2 + µA,t , (10)
    ·      log n + At   = max log c
                                  ^ + log n +           µn,t - n - (t f (k,
                          c ^ ^,x,n
                          ^,k,                                2   2

where µA,t is the drift of At , and the drift of wealth is

                         ^ ^) - (x)k
    µn,t = rt + t n + f (k,        ^ + (xi,t -  + µq,t - rt - t q,t )qt k
                                                                        ^ - wt ^ - c
                                                                                   ^.             (11)



Idiosyncratic risk. The entrepreneur's exposure to idiosyncratic risk plays a central role
in our model,              ^t , ^t )t = yt /ne,t × t . Using the FOC for consumption, ci,t =
               ~n,e,t = f (k
   2
     See Angeletos [2007], Meh and Quadrini [2004], Moskowitz and Vissing-Jørgensen [2002], and Himmel-
berg et al. [2004].



                                                  9
ni,t , we get that idiosyncratic risk in entrepreneurs' consumption is ~c,e,t = ~n,e,t . Using
the resource constraint, we obtain an expression for idiosyncratic risk in entrepreneurs'
consumption,
                                           (kt / t )-1     1 + zt
                           ~c,e,t =             - 1
                                                                  e t .                  (12)
                                      (kt / t )     - (xt ) zt
where zt = ce,t /cw,t is the consumption ratio of entrepreneurs relative to workers. We will
later use zt as a state variable in the recursive formulation of the problem.


Risk premium for idiosyncratic risk. Using the FOCs for ^ and k
                                                              ^ we obtain Marshallian
demand functions for labor and capital,

                                 perfect risk sharing        risk premium
                                                   
                           wt = (1 - )(kt / t )         1-     ~c,e,t t                  (13)

and
                               Rt = (kt / t )-1 1 - ~c,e,t t                             (14)

With perfect idiosyncratic risk sharing, we would get the usual expressions where the wage
and the rental price of capital are equal to the marginal products of each factor. With incom-
plete risk sharing a risk premium emerges to compensate entrepreneurs for the uninsurable
idiosyncratic risk they face when using capital and labor. The risk premium captures the
covariance of the marginal product of capital or labor with the entrepreneur's marginal
utility, c- 1
          i,t , and reduces demand for capital and labor symmetrically.


Precautionary saving motive for idiosyncratic risk. Uninsurable idiosyncratic risk also shows
up as a precautionary saving motive for entrepreneurs, which depresses equilibrium real
interest rates. The entrepreneurs' Euler equation is

                                                 2       2
                               rt = e + µc,e,t - c,e,t -~c,e,t ,                         (15)

where  2
      ~c,e,t                                                               2
             captures the precautionary motive for idiosyncratic risk, and c,e,t for aggregate
risk. The workers' Euler equation is

                                                    2
                                  rt = w + µc,w,t - c,w,t .                              (16)

Since they don't on take any idiosyncratic risk, they only have a precautionary motive for
               2
aggregate risk c,w,t .
   Complete aggregate risk sharing means that the consumption of entrepreneurs and
workers have the same exposure to aggregate risk. From the FOCs for aggregate risk




                                                 10
sharing for entrepreneurs and workers, we obtain

                                         t = c,e,t = c,w,t = c,t .                                        (17)

                                                                     2
Their precautionary motive for aggregate risk is therefore the same, c,e,t   2
                                                                           = w,e,t   2 .
                                                                                   = c,t
    Weighting the Euler equations by their consumption shares, 1/(1 + zt ) and zt /(1 + zt ),
we obtain
                                       perfect risk sharing   lower interest rate

                                                   2            zt         2
                                  rt = ¯t + µc,t - c,t -                  ~c,e,t ,                        (18)
                                                              1 + zt
                                                               ce,t /ct prec. mot.

              1              zt
where ¯t =   1+zt w     +   1+zt e   is the consumption-weighted impatience rate. The first part
of (18) is the expression for the real interest rate in a model with perfect risk sharing.
With incomplete risk sharing, entrepreneurs' precautionary motive for idiosyncratic risk
depresses the real interest rate, weighted by their consumption share.
    The Euler equations and aggregate risk sharing conditions also give us a law of motion
for the consumption ratio zt ,

                                                   2
                                   µz,t = w - e + ~c,e,t ,             z,t = 0                            (19)

    The term  2
             ~c,e,t is entrepreneurs' precautionary saving motive. Here we can see that if
entrepreneurs and workers had the same impatience rate, e = w , entrepreneurs would
eventually account for all the consumption in the economy (zt  ) because of their pre-
cautionary saving motive for idiosyncratic risk. We assume e > w to obtain a stationary
distribution for z .


Labor and capital markets. The two main equilibrium conditions come from the labor and
                                                                          1/
capital markets. The worker's FOC for labor supply is                     t    = c- 1
                                                                                  w,t wt . Plugging in (13) and
using cw = ct /(1 + zt ), we obtain the equilibrium condition in the labor market:

                                       cw,t                          wt
                            1/
                            t    × ct /(1 + zt ) = (1 - )(kt / t ) (1 - ~c,e,t t ) .                      (20)

The optimality condition  (xt ) = qt implies

                                     log qt                               qt - 1
                             xt =             +     and       (xt ) =              + .                    (21)

Next we use the entrepreneur's FOC for k to obtain an asset-pricing equation for qt ,

                            Rt
                       -1
            (kt / t )       (1 - ~c,e,t t ) -(xt ) + qt (xt -  + µq,t - rt - t q,t ) = 0.                 (22)


                                                        11
   The competitive equilibrium is pinned down by the equilibrium conditions for employ-
ment and investment, (20) and (21); prices (13), (17), (18), and (22); the resource constraint
(2); entrepreneurs' idiosyncratic risk (12); and the laws of motion of kt , t , and zt , given
by (3), (4), and (19).

3.1    Recursive Equilibrium

We construct a recursive equilibrium with (k, , z ) as state variables. Working with zt as
a state variable is useful because its law of motion is particularly simple. The two basic
endogenous variables will be employment (k, , z ) and the price of capital q (k, , z ) and
will be characterized with a system of differential equations. All other endogenous variables
can be derived from them and the state variables.
   Equations (20) and (22) are our two main equilibrium conditions, and will define a
system of differential equations for q (k, , z ) and (k, , z ). From (12) and (21) we know
how to express ~c,e and x in terms of q and , in addition to the states (k, , z ). Equations
(17) and (18) give us expressions for  and r; we only need to find expressions for the drift
and volatility of aggregate consumption, µc and c . Use the resource constraint to replace
c = k [(k/l)-1 - (x)] in (20) and to obtain an expression for µc and c in terms of the
drift and volatility of q and :

                               (1 - )(k/ )-1 µ - (x -  ) -  2
                                                              2 - (q/ )µ
                                                                        q
              µc = (x -  ) +                      - 1
                                                                                          (23)
                                            (k/ )     - (x)

and
                                     (1 - )(k/ )-1  - (q/ )q
                              c =                            .                            (24)
                                          (k/ )-1 - (x)
   We already know the laws of motion of k ,  , and z , so we use Ito's lemma to compute
the drift and volatility of q and :

                                                1                              
           qk (x -  )k + q  (¯
                              -  ) + qz µ z z + 2 q, ( v )2                   q v
      µq =                                                  ,             q =     ,       (25)
                                 q                                              q

                                                         1        2               
            k (x   -  )k +     (¯
                                    - ) +   z µz z   +   2 , ( v )                v
      µ =                                                             ,    =          .   (26)

Putting this together, equation (22) gives us a second order partial differential equation
and equation (20) an algebraic equation, which pin down q (k, , z ) and (k, , z ). We solve
this system numerically using Smolyak interpolation, as described in Judd et al. [2014].




                                                 12
               Meaning                                      Parameter       Value
               Capital share                                                 1/3
               Frisch elasticity of labor supply                              3
               Capital adjustment cost                                        5
               Depreciation                                                 0.07
               Impatience rate, workers                          w          0.035
               Impatience rate, entrepreneurs                    e         0.0975
               long run idiosyncratic risk                       ¯          0.10
               Mean-reversion of idiosyncratic risk                         0.693
               Aggregate volatility of idiosyncratic risk        v          0.16



                                   Table 1: Parameter Values

4     Main Results
4.1   Parameter Values

We solve the model with the parameter values shown in Table 1. We use an informal
combination of calibration to existing research and rough matching of observed moments
to arrive at these values. Our objective is to evaluate the quantitative plausibility of the
theoretical mechanism we propose. In Section 4.6 we perform a sensitivity analysis to
understand how results change under different parameter specifications.
    The Cobb-Douglas capital elasticity,  = 1/3, is standard. The Frisch elasticity of
labor supply,  = 3, is standard in the macro literature when employment volatility is
an issue. Hall [2009] suggests that an elasticity around that value is a reasonable working
approximation for employment fluctuations in an economy with a search and matching setup
and realistic equilibrium wage stickiness, in the sense of Hall [2005]. For the elasticity of the
adjustment costs, which helps determine how lower output is split between lower investment
and consumption, we use        = 5 to roughly match the observed split.
    We set workers' impatience w = 0.035 and the depreciation rate  = 0.07 to match
the steady-state ratios kss /yss = 3 and css /yss = 0.8, which play an important role in the
model, as we describe below in section 4.4. We set e = w +0.0625 to obtain a steady-state
                                           
idiosyncratic volatility of wealth ~n,e,t = e - w = 25 percent, roughly corresponding to
the idiosyncratic risk in the stock market as in Herskovic et al. [2016].
    For the stochastic process for t we use ¯ = 0.1, in line with evidence in Bloom et al.
[2018] on idiosyncratic productivity risk at the establishment level;  = 0.692 so risk shocks
                                         
have a half-life of one year; and v = 1 2  ¯ = 0.158 so that a two-standard deviation shock
doubles idiosyncratic risk. We aim to capture transitory fluctuations in idiosyncratic risk at


                                               13
                              St. dev.        Rel. st. dev.   Corr. w/output       Autocorr.
      Variable             Model    Data      Model   Data    Model    Data    Model     Data
      Output        y      1.7%     1.6%        1       1       1        1       0.91    0.85
 Consumption        c      0.86%    0.80%     0.49    0.50    0.84     0.80      0.89    0.84
  Investment      (x)k     5.8%     6.34%     3.36    3.96    0.95     0.85      0.94    0.82
 Employment                2.1%     1.89%     1.24    1.18    0.87     0.87      0.87    0.91

Table 2: Business Cycle Moments from the Model Compared to HP-Filtered Data (1600),
at Quarterly Frequency, Per-Capita, and in Logs, for the full postwar period.


the business cycle frequency. These numbers are broadly in line with evidence in Herskovic
et al. [2016] for idiosyncratic risk in the stock market. The implied steady-state ratio of
entrepreneurial consumption to worker consumption is zss = 5 percent.

4.2     Impulse-Response Functions and Business-Cycle Moments

Figure 2 shows the impulse response to a one-standard deviation risk shock. The economy
starts in the steady state, the long run if aggregate shocks realize to zero, and we follow
the response of the economy in the absence of further shocks.
   The first panel shows the behavior of idiosyncratic risk t , which spikes by 5.5 percentage
points on impact and then returns to its long run value of 10 percent, and the behavior
of the idiosyncratic risk of entrepreneurs' wealth or consumption, ~c,e,t , which spikes by
10 percentage points on impact and then returns to its long run value of 25 percent. The
idiosyncratic risk premium, ~c,e,t t , therefore displays the same behavior. It spikes on
impact by 3 percentage points, and then returns to its long run value of 2.5 percent.
   Risk shocks create recessions in the model. The second panel shows the responses of
consumption, investment, and employment. They all fall on impact and slowly recover
afterwards. Investment falls by 5.5 percent, consumption by 1 percent and employment by
3 percent. This is broadly in line with stylized facts about US business cycles.
   The third panel shows the behavior of real interest rates and wages. Wages fall on
impact by around 2 percent, reflecting weaker labor demand--entrepreneurs demand a
larger risk premium to compensate for uninsurable idiosyncratic risk. Interest rates are
roughly acyclical, reflecting the interaction of an expected recovery of consumption, which
raises interest rates, and a larger precautionary motive, which lowers them. The fourth panel
shows the capital and labor wedges generated by uninsurable idiosyncratic risk, which we
will discuss in the next section in detail.
   Figure 3 shows output, consumption, investment, and hours of work, in the model and
the data. For the data we use output, consumption of nondurables and services, investment
(including durables), and hours in the non-farm business sector, all quarterly, in logs, and



                                               14
                                 
                            ¡ ¢                                                                       c, i, l
                                                                       1.00
 0.35                                                                                            c
                                    ~
 0.30                               ce                                 0.99
                                                                                                 l
 0.25                                                                  0.98
 0.20
                                                                       0.97
 0.15                               
                                                                       0.96                      i
 0.10
 0.05                                                                  0.95

                                                          years                                                                 years
               1             2             3          4                       0              1          2               3   4

                          w and r
                                                                                                     l and k
 1.03                        r
                                                                        0.05
 1.02                                                                   0.04                     l

 1.01                                                                   0.03

 1.00                                                                   0.02
                            w
                                                                        0.01
 0.99
                                                                                                                                years
 0.98                                                                                        1   k       2              3   4
                                                          years        E0.01
        0      1             2             3          4


                                 Figure 2: Impulse Response to a Risk Shock
                           Output                                                                        Consumption

                                                                                   0.02
  0.02
                                                                                   0.01
  0.00                                                                             0.00

 -0.02                                                                            -0.01
                                                                                  -0.02
 -0.04
                                                                                  -0.03
 -0.06                                                                            -0.04
 -0.08                                                                            -0.05
        1980       1990             2000       2010                                   1980           1990           2000    2010


                          Investment                                                                            Hours

  0.10

  0.05
                                                                                   0.00
  0.00

 -0.05
                                                                                  -0.05
 -0.10

 -0.15                                                                            -0.10
 -0.20
        1980       1990             2000       2010                                   1980           1990           2000    2010


Figure 3: Output, Consumption, Investment, and Hours in the Model (solid) compared to
HP-Filtered (1600) Data (dotted) Per-Capita and in Logs, from 1980q1-2012q4.




                                                                  15
per capita terms, HP-filtered (1600). We start the model at the steady state in 1980, and
back out a yearly series for idiosyncratic risk t to match the time series for idiosyncratic
risk in stock returns in Figure 1 (adding a 0.25 mean), which corresponds to ~c,e,t = ~n,e,t
in the model. The model does a good job explaining the fluctuations in the data, with the
salient exception of the 1981-82 recession. That recession was likely related to a monetary
policy shock associated with the Volcker disinflation. The following three recessions are
captured fairly well by the model, with the caveat that the model slightly leads the data.
Idiosyncratic risk in stock returns spikes early in the recession, and it seems to take a short
time for real variables to respond.
   Table 2 summarizes key moments in the model and compares them to US data. It
shows the standard deviation and correlation structure of cyclical output, consumption,
investment, and hours. The model can successfully replicate business cycle behavior in the
data. In Section 4.6 we explore the sensitivity of these results to alternative parametriza-
tions. Our model is stylized in the interest of tractability and theoretical clarity. But our
takeaway is that the mechanism we propose is quantitatively plausible and seems like a
promising approach to understanding business cycles.

4.3   Wedges

During downturns idiosyncratic risk rises, making both capital and labor less attractive.
The result is lower employment, consumption, and investment. The mechanism involves
subtle general equilibrium effects. These can be understood from the wedges created by
time-varying uninsurable idiosyncratic risk, in the spirit of Chari et al. [2007], where we
take as the benchmark the efficient allocation with perfect risk sharing.
   Risk shocks create time-varying labor and capital wedges. While higher risk reduces
demand for labor and capital symmetrically, in general equilibrium lower interest rates
affect labor and capital asymmetrically. The source of asymmetry is that capital provides
a vehicle for precautionary saving, while labor does not. There is in addition a wedge in
the law of motion of the consumption ratio zt . While this plays an important role in the
long run, it's a slow-moving state variable that does not respond on impact to risk shocks,
and therefore does not play an important role in business cycles.
   We start with the labor wedge  ,t . From the market clearing condition for labor,
equation (20), we write

                               1/     ct
                               t           = (1 - )(kt / t ) (1 -  ,t ),                  (27)
                                    1 + zt

where the labor wedge     ,t   is equal to the risk premium for idiosyncratic risk,

                                               ,t   =~c,e,t t .                           (28)



                                                     16
Higher risk t raises the risk premium on labor, making employment less attractive.
    With       ,t   = 0, equation (27) is the equilibrium condition for employment in an economy
with perfect risk sharing. If         ,t   > 0 the economy behaves as if labor income is taxed.
Increases in this type of wedge reduces equilibrium employment and output, as well as
consumption and investment. The extent of consumption-smoothing and the magnitude
of capital adjustment costs determine the distribution between lower investment and lower
consumption.
    It's important to highlight that the 1 + zt term on the left side of equation (27) reflects
only agent heterogeneity. We would have this even with perfect risk sharing, because
only some agents actually provide labor. When zt is large, workers' share of aggregate
consumption is small so the income effect induces them to work more. Crucially, however,
zt does not react to the risk shocks, z,t = 0. The direct impact of a risk shock on the
equilibrium condition for labor is purely through the labor wedge  ,t .
    Second, there is a capital wedge, as if capital income was taxed or subsidized. Combining
both agents' Euler equations and the asset pricing equation for capital, (22), we obtain

   (kt / t )-1 (1 - k,t ) - (xt ) + qt (xt -  + µq,t - (¯          2
                                                        t + µc,t - c,t ) - c,t q,t ) = 0,                (29)

where k,t is the capital wedge. With k,t = 0, equation (29) yields the equilibrium con-
dition for investment in an economy with perfect risk sharing. If k,t > 0 it's as if capital
income is taxed, reducing incentives for investment. In contrast to the labor wedge, this
wedge does not create a recession. By itself, a larger wedge k,t reduces investment but
increases consumption.
    The capital wedge is
                                                 ,t
                                                               1 e kt qt
                                          c,e,t  ) × 1 -
                                   k,t = (~                              .                               (30)
                                                                ct
It has the same form as the labor wedge, but the risk premium is dampened by the 1 -
1 e kt qt
 ct         < 1 factor.
    Two forces operate on the capital wedge. Higher risk t raises the risk premium on
capital, making investment less attractive, as shown in (14). However, it also creates a
precautionary saving motive, which depresses the interest rate conditional on the behavior
of consumption, as shown in (18), and makes investment more attractive. Which force
                                                 1 e kt qt
dominates depends on the sign of 1 -              ct .       In general this term could be positive or
negative.
    To explain this, it's useful to go over a well-known benchmark. In a simple AK economy
                                                                             1 e kt qt
with  = 1, and e = w , we know that ct = e kt , and so 1 -                    ct         = 0. In this case the
intertemporal wedge k,t = 0 for any kt , t , and zt . The risk premium and the precautionary
motive always exactly cancel out. This is in fact a well-known property of log preferences.
    If, still in the AK environment, the intertemporal elasticity is greater than 1 (relative

                                                      17
risk aversion below 1), then the risk premium dominates. Higher risk depresses investment
and raises consumption on impact. If instead the intertemporal elasticity is below 1 (relative
risk aversion greater than 1), then the precautionary saving motive dominates. Higher risk
raises investment and depresses consumption.
   As we move away from the simple AK environment, we lose the simple characterization
of the sign of the capital wedge. Angeletos [2007] studies this issue in an economy with
uninsurable idiosyncratic risk on capital, but safe labor, and finds that the risk premium
dominates if the intertemporal elasticity is greater than . In our environment intertemporal
elasticity is 1 (log preferences) but labor is also exposed to uninsurable idiosyncratic risk,
and we don't have an analytical characterization. We therefore turn to numerical solutions,
and below in section 4.4 we provide a sufficient statistic in terms of measurable equilibrium
objects.
   The fourth panel of Figure 2 shows the labor and capital wedge as an impulse response.
The main takeaway is that risk shocks cause a large increase in the labor wedge, and a
small contraction in the capital wedge. This constellation of wedges is what is needed to
generate business cycles where consumption, investment, and employment co-move. The
average labor wedge is 2.7 percent and has a standard deviation of 2.2 percent, while the
average capital wedge is -0.35 percent and has a standard deviation of 0.25 percent. Their
correlation is -0.9.
   Finally, there is also a wedge in the law of motion of the consumption ratio zt . With
perfect risk sharing µz,t = w - e and in the long run entrepreneurs' consumption share
vanishes, zt /(1 + zt )  0. With incomplete risk sharing entrepreneurs have a precautionary
motive for saving, so µz,t = w - e +  2 . As a result, their consumption share z /(1 +
                                     ~c,e,t                                     t
zt ) has a non-degenerate ergodic distribution. However, because of perfect aggregate risk
sharing zt does not respond on impact to risk shocks, z,t = 0. It's a slow-moving variable,
analogous to the capital stock kt . As a result, while zt plays an important role in the long
run, its role in business cycles is secondary.


Asymmetry between capital and labor. The first thing to note is that the risk-adjusted
marginal product of capital and labor are affected symmetrically by the risk premium. The
asymmetry comes from the long duration of capital, which makes investment a way to save
as a precaution against future adverse shocks, and the short duration of the employment
relationship (zero because of frictionless spot labor markets), which means that labor does
not serve as a store of value. While the risk premium depresses investment, the precau-
tionary motive drives the risk-free interest rate down. Because capital has a long duration,
lower interest rates stimulate investment. The capital wedge is dampened relative to the
labor wedge, and in the quantitative calibration is negative and stimulates investment in
recessions.


                                                 18
   To show this, we write the capital wedge as:

                                                                 lower interest rate
                                            qt                     zt         2
                     k,t   = ~c,e,t  -                                       ~c,e,t      .   (31)
                                       (kt / t )-1               1 + zt
                             risk prem.   price-dividend ratio            prec. motive


The first term captures the role of the risk premium on capital, which depresses demand for
capital. This role is symmetric to labor. The second term captures the compensating role of
lower interest rates because of entrepreneurs' precautionary saving motive for idiosyncratic
risk, weighted by entrepreneurs' consumption share zt /(1+ zt ) = ce,t /ct . The price-dividend
ratio of capital plays a central role. If capital had a zero duration, like labor, its price
dividend ratio would be zero and we would recover k,t = ~c,e,t t , as for labor.
   We conjecture that if employment relationships had a short but strictly positive dura-
tion, such as in a search model, then the precautionary saving motive would also dampen
the labor wedge, but to a lesser extent than the capital wedge because of the shorter du-
ration of employment (reflected in a lower price-dividend ratio). The proper duration in
these models is not the expected length of an employment relationship, but the duration
of the dividends from a marginal increase in recruiting activity--for example, creating a
match 2 or 3 months earlier than otherwise.
   There is also a technological asymmetry between labor and capital, in that capital
supply is inelastic in the short-run, while labor has an elastic labor supply. This is why
employment can fall on impact, while capital use is fixed. We conjecture that with variable
capital utilization, capital use will also fall on impact. But this asymmetry is relevant to
the different response of capital and labor to given wedges. It does not explain why the
wedges themselves are different.


Summary. Risk shocks create time-varying labor and capital wedges. The labor wedge
depresses employment, output, consumption, and investment. The capital wedge, instead,
twists the economy by depressing investment and raising consumption. While higher risk
reduces demand for labor and capital symmetrically, the lower interest rates produced
by the precautionary saving motive affects them asymmetrically because of their different
duration. Because capital has a long duration, lower interest rates dampen the capital
wedge and may even stimulate investment. In contrast, employment has a short duration,
so lower interest rates don't affect it. The result is a large increase in the labor wedge and a
small reduction in the capital wedge after risk shocks, precisely what is needed to produce
business cycles.




                                                  19
4.4      A Sufficient Statistic for the Sign of the Capital Wedge

The capital wedge arises out of two conflicting forces. The risk premium reduces demand for
capital, while the precautionary motives stimulates it. While we don't have an analytical
characterization of the sign of the capital wedge, we can express it in terms of meaningful
measurable equilibrium objects that help us get a sense of its value. The sign of the capital
wedge depends on whether the following expression is above or below 1:

                                   1 e k t q t      yt 1 k t qt
                                               = e × × ×        .                                         (32)
                                    ct              ct    yt

We know that  = 1/3, and that in steady-state the capital income ratio, kss qss /yss = 3
and the consumption-income ratio css /yss = 0.8, approximately. We can understand this
formula in light of equation (31). Notice that    1
                                                      × ky
                                                         t qt
                                                           t
                                                              =    qt
                                                                  yt /kt   is the price-dividend ratio of
                                                                                      2
                                                                                     ~c,e,t        zt
capital at the aggregate level (around 9 in steady-state), and e yt /ct =           ~c,e,t    ×   1+zt   is the
ratio of precautionary motive to the risk premium, weighted by entrepreneurs' consumption
share zt /(1 + zt ) = ce,t /ct .
    The only remaining parameter is e . The model pins down its value in terms of workers'
impatience rate w = 0.035 and the steady-state idiosyncratic risk of entrepreneurs' wealth
(or consumption), ~n,e,t = 25 percent, which is a core object of interest in this model:

                                              2
                                     e = w + ~n,e,t = 0.0975                                              (33)

This expression is easy to recover from the law of motion of the consumption ratio, µz =
w - e +  2
        ~c,e,t = 0. Essentially, entrepreneurs' consumption will grow faster than workers'
because of their idiosyncratic precautionary motive, until their exposure to risk ~c,e,t =
~n,e,t falls to the point where it just compensates their higher impatience. In other words,
expression (33) tells us how much more impatient entrepreneurs must be if we observe them
in a steady-state, given their exposure to idiosyncratic risk. The value of e we recover is
high but not unreasonable.
                                                          1 e kss qss
    These numbers yield a steady-state value of               css       = 1.097. The precautionary
motive is slightly larger than the risk premium. In response to shocks, the capital-income
ratio kt qt /yt and the consumption-income rate ct /yt will move a little, but not much. So
we get a small reduction in the capital wedge after risk shocks, as shown in Figure 2.
    While we have a good idea of how to discipline w , kss qss /yss , and css /yss , the value of
e is more uncertain because it's pinned down by the model in a roundabout way. However,
this gives us a model-consistent benchmark we can use to understand the mechanism and
think of comparative statics. For example, if we reduce e while still maintaining the
kss /yss and css /yss ratios, the precautionary motive will become weaker relative to the risk
premium and the capital wedge will become positive. It will always be dampened (more


                                                20
negative) compared to the labor wedge,         ,t   > k,t .

4.5   Excess Return of Capital, Markups, and Labor Share

Here we explore implications of our model for some salient equilibrium objects that have
received significant attention in the macro literature.


Excess return of capital. Our model creates a time-varying excess return of capital. Part of
it corresponds to a risk premium for aggregate risk, which can be identified with the equity
premium. But the incomplete idiosyncratic risk sharing produces a further excess return,
above the risk premium for aggregate risk. We can re-write the equilibrium condition for
capital, (22), using the expected or average marginal product of capital,

                                                                              fk (kt , t )
 fk (kt , t ) - (xt ) + (xt -  + µq,t - rt )qt = qt ×         t q,t       +                ×~c,e,t t . (34)
                                                                                  qt
                                                         equity premium           excess return


The difference with the capital wedge in equation (30) is that here we are using the equi-
librium interest rate rt , while the wedge k,t is defined using the interest rate in the model
with perfect risk sharing. That is, the wedge helps us understand the effect of incomplete
idiosyncratic risk sharing in terms of capital and labor taxes in a model with perfect risk
sharing, while the excess return in (34) highlights the failure of the perfect-risk-sharing
asset-pricing equation at equilibrium prices, ignoring that the equilibrium interest rate rt
is lower than what it would be with perfect risk sharing given the same allocation.
   The advantage of equation (34) is that it's more directly related to the data. Farhi and
Gourio [2018] point out that because the return to capital has remained roughly constant
over the past decades, while interest rates have gone down, the excess return on capital
has become larger. A rising risk premium is one possible explanation, together with rising
market power and intangibles, but measures of the equity premium suggest it's stable or
even decreasing. Although our model is not designed to address secular trends, the presence
of an excess return above the equity premium is consistent with our mechanism.
   Quantitatively, however, the total excess return attributable to idiosyncratic risk is
small, 0.3 percent on average, with a standard deviation of 0.23 percent and a correlation
with output of -0.84. The equity premium produced by the model is also small, around
0.017 percent, with a standard deviation of 0.02 percent. Our model is essentially a con-
sumption CAPM with log preferences. It is well known that such models cannot explain
the equity premium quantitatively.
   Likewise, our model produces an almost acyclical interest rate rt . This is the result of
two conflicting forces that play out over time. A larger precautionary saving motive lowers
rt after risk shocks, but a transitory contraction in consumption means agents expect higher


                                                    21
consumption in the future, which raises rt .
    The asset pricing literature has explored several avenues to explain the equity premium
puzzle and the behavior of risk-free rates, such as habits as in Campbell and Cochrane
[1999], heterogenous risk aversion as in Longstaff and Wang [2012], Gârleanu and Panageas
[2015], or Kekre and Lenel [2019], or balance sheet effects as in He et al. [2015]. Our model
does not have any of these ingredients, but we believe that exploring the interaction of asset
pricing and business cycles is a fruitful area for future research.


Markups and labor share. Following Rotemberg and Woodford [1999], a common approach
to business cycles is to focus on the cyclical properties of markups. In our model markups
rise in recessions. These markups are not signs of market power, but rather are competitive
rents arising from the limited risk bearing capacity of entrepreneurs. The marginal cost of
goods is wt /fl (kt , t ) = (1 - ~c,e,t t ), so we get markups over marginal cost

                                              1
                                    µt =              -1~c,e,t t ,                                        (35)
                                           1-~c,e,t t

equal to the risk premium for idiosyncratic risk. Alternatively, we can compute the pro-
cyclical labor share of income,

                                         wt t
                                 =                 = (1 - )(1 - ~c,e,t t ).                               (36)
                                       f (kt , t )

It's worth stressing that the mechanism in our paper does not reduce to a time-varying
markup because the precautionary saving motive for idiosyncratic risk also depresses the
interest rate relative to the model with perfect risk sharing and a time-varying markup.
Taking prices as given, the average user cost of capital is qt × (rt + t q,t +  + (xt ) - xt -
µq,t ) = fk (kt , t ) × (1 - ~c,e,t t ), which implies a markup of fk (kt , t ) divided by the user
cost of capital, equal to 1/(1 - ~c,e,t t )  ~c,et, t , the same as using the labor margin. The
capital share of income is also procyclical.3 But we have to remember that the equilibrium
interest rate is lower than what it would be with perfect risk sharing and a variable markup
because of the precautionary saving motive for idiosyncratic risk. As a result, instead of a
common capital and labor wedge (as we would get from adding markups to a perfect risk
sharing model), our model delivers a large increase in the labor wedge and a small reduction
in the capital wedge after risk shocks.
    The average markup in the model is 2.7 percent, with a standard deviation of 2.2 percent
and a correlation with output of -0.82. The average labor share is roughly 64 percent, with
   3
     When computing markups and capital and labor shares of income, we are counting the profits obtained
by entrepreneurs, f (kt , t )~
                             c,e,t t , as neither labor nor capital income. The pure profit share, ~c,e,t t , is
countercyclical. In the data, depending on exactly how these profits are distributed, a fraction might show
up as labor income (or example, bonuses) or capital income (for example, accounting profits for private
firms).


                                                      22
a standard deviation of 1.4 percent, and a correlation with output of 0.82. In the data, an
average markup of 15 percent is common in the literature.4 While the presence of markups
is consistent with our model, quantitatively our model cannot explain such large markups.
Common ingredients such as imperfect competition and distortionary taxes are required to
account for markups in the data.

4.6     Sensitivity Analysis

To understand how the model works, we consider perturbations to the benchmark cali-
bration. We focus on the standard deviations of output, consumption, investment, and
employment. Because the objective is to understand how the model works, we don't recal-
ibrate the model when changing each parameter. Table 3 summarizes the results.


Frisch elasticity  . A successful model of business cycles requires a relatively large elasticity
of labor supply. The value  = 3 in the baseline calibration is reasonable in the macro
literature. With a smaller Frisch elasticity around  = 1, more consistent with micro
evidence, the effects of risk shocks are dampened, but would still look like business cycles.
The second column of table 3 shows the standard deviations of all variables would be
smaller.
      In the limiting case with  = 0 employment and output would be fixed and could not
respond to risk shocks. We would still get a countercyclical capital wedge, so risk shocks
would create a small spike in investment and a small contraction in consumption, with no
movement in employment or output on impact.


Persistence  and capital adjustment costs . The mean reversion parameter  and the
curvature of the adjustment cost function are important in determining how lower output
is split into lower consumption and lower investment in response to a larger labor wedge.
The elasticity of intertemporal substitution would also play a role here, but it's pinned at
one with log preferences.
      We calibrate a transitory risk shock with a half-life of one year. Agents are averse to
fluctuations in consumption in response to such transitory shocks, so investment must take
the brunt of the adjustment. A convex capital adjustment cost function reduces fluctuations
in investment and increases fluctuations in consumption.
      We calibrate the model with = 5 to obtain a ratio of standard deviation of consumption
to investment roughly in line with the data. To put this number in context,             = 5 means
that a contraction in investment of 10 percent is accompanied by a reduction in the marginal
  4
    See Edmond et al. [2018], Hall [2019]. Recent work by De Loecker and Eeckhout [2017] finds an
average markup of 60 percent. However, this is a sales-weighted markup. Edmond et al. [2018] report a
cost-weighted markup using the same data of 25 percent.




                                                 23
        Benchmark       =3        =5     v = 0.693    v = 0.16     ¯ = 0.10    e = .0975
           Variant      =1        =3     v = 0.462    v = 0.10     ¯ = 0.05    e = 0.0575
   y        1.7%         1%      1.8%       1.9%         1.3%       0.75%         1.2%
   c        0.86%       0.5%     0.7%      0.94%        0.59%       0.55%         0.98%
   i        5.8%        3.8%     6.6%       8.3%         4.6%        1.6%         2.4%
            2.1%        1.2%     2.3%       2.5%         1.5%        0.8%         1.2%



Table 3: Log Standard Deviations of Key Variables at Quarterly Frequency in the Bench-
mark Case and Variants

cost of capital of around 3 percent. Without adjustment costs, the effect on the marginal
cost of capital would be zero.
   The second and third columns of table 3 show standard deviations for smaller adjustment
costs   = 3 and for more persistent risk shocks v = 0.462, which implies a half-life of two
years. With smaller adjustment costs the standard deviation of consumption becomes
smaller, and that of investment larger. With more persistent shocks all standard deviations
become larger.


Volatility of risk shocks v . Risk shocks are the only exogenous driving force in the model.
With a smaller volatility of idiosyncratic risk, the standard deviation of all variables would
become smaller. The fourth column of table 3 shows standard deviations for a smaller
v = 0.1.


Steady-state level of idiosyncratic risk ¯ . The effects of risk shocks become larger with
the long run level of idiosyncratic risk. The effect of risk enters the model through second
moments, so if idiosyncratic risk is on average very small, an increase has only small effects.
We calibrate the long run level of idiosyncratic risk ¯ = 10 percent in line with Bloom et al.
[2018]. A lower long run level of idiosyncratic risk ¯ = 5 percent reduces the effects of risk
shocks, and therefore reduces the standard deviation of all variables, as shown in the fifth
column of table 3.


Steady-state idiosyncratic risk in entrepreneurs' consumption ~c,e,ss . The effects of risk
shocks also depend on the level of idiosyncratic risk in entrepreneurs' consumption or
wealth. The sixth column of table 3 shows standard deviations for a smaller target for
this idiosyncratic risk, ~c,e,ss = 15%. Hitting this target requires a lower impatience rate
of entrepreneurs, e = w +  2
                          ~c,e,ss = 0.0575.




                                              24
5     Efficiency
To study the efficiency of the competitive equilibrium, we consider a planner who can use
taxes on capital and labor to manipulate the capital and labor wedges in the competitive
equilibrium. Because the role of risk shocks can be understood in terms of time-varying
labor and capital wedges, this allows us to ask if the planner would like a different macroe-
conomic behavior in response to risk shocks. The planner has to live with the fundamental
frictions in the model and cannot eliminate incomplete risk sharing or prevent agents from
saving and sharing aggregate risk.
    This planner's problem can be fully microfounded in an environment with a moral
hazard problem with hidden trade, as in Di Tella and Sannikov [2016] or Di Tella [2019].
An entrepreneur's idiosyncratic shock, as well as the resulting capital and labor decisions
and hidden savings cannot be observed. The optimal private contract takes the form of the
reduced-form incomplete risk sharing problem we've used this far. We can then ask what
is the best that a planner can do subject to the same contractual frictions. The resulting
planner's problem coincides with the planner's problem in the next sub-section. In the
interest of simplicity, we focus here on the reduced-form problem where the planner can use
taxes to distort wedges, but the contractual microfoundation is useful to understand why
this is the right planner problem to consider, and where the source of inefficiency lies.
    The main takeaway from this section is that the response of the competitive equilib-
rium to a risk shock is inefficient. Output and employment fluctuations are too large, and
consumption should rise in recessions. In the competitive equilibrium, risk shocks create
a small reduction in the capital wedge that stimulates investment, and a large increase in
the labor wedge that discourages employment. As a result, risk shocks create recessions
with positive co-movement in output, employment, investment, and consumption. The
planner, instead, wants a large increase in the capital wedge that discourages investment,
and a small reduction in the labor wedge that stimulates employment. Output, employ-
ment, and investment fall, but consumption goes up. Because consumption and investment
are negatively correlated, fluctuations in output and employment are smaller than in the
competitive equilibrium.

5.1    The Planner's Problem

We consider the case where the planner can use labor and capital taxes with lump-sum
rebates. In this case, the planner can effectively control employment      t,   investment xt ,
and therefore aggregate consumption ct . However, in addition to the resource constraints,
equations (2) and (3), and the law of motion of the exogenous states t , equation (4), the




                                             25
planner must take as given entrepreneurs' idiosyncratic risk. Computing ~c,e,t , we obtain:5

                                                     f (kt , t )      k  1- 1 + zt
                                          ~c,e,t =               e t = t t         e t .                                      (37)
                                                        ce,t            ct    zt

In addition, because all agents have access to the same financial market, the planner must
respect their Euler equations and their aggregate risk sharing. Combining them, we get a
law of motion for the consumption ratio, zt = ce,t /cw,t ,

                                                                2
                                             µz,t = (w - e ) + ~c,e,t ,               z,t = 0.                                (38)

This means that zt will be a state variable for the planner (z0 is chosen optimally). If the
planner could control agents' access to the financial market, preventing entrepreneurs and
workers from trading intertemporally or across aggregate states, then zt would not be a
state variable. It's important to note that while the planner must respect agents' Euler
equations, this does not restrict the control of aggregate consumption, which is a choice
variable, not a state variable. For any behavior of aggregate consumption, as long as we
respect the law of motion of zt , there is a process for the real interest rate rt and the price
of aggregate risk t that satisfies agents' Euler equations and aggregate risk sharing.
       The planner's objective function is a weighted average of the utility of the representative
worker and entrepreneurs, Uw + (1 -  )Ue . Strictly speaking, we should specify the Pareto
weight on each entrepreneur, i . However, entrepreneurs' allocations differ only in their
scale, so for aggregate allocations we only need to know the Pareto weight on entrepreneurs
as a whole. It is useful to write an individual entrepreneur's utility as6
                                                                      
                                                                                               1 1 2
                    E               e-e t log ci,t dt = E                e-e t log ce,t -         ~      dt .                 (39)
                             0                                    0                            2 e c,e,t

       The planner's objective function is therefore

                                                     1+1/
                                                                                                      1 1 2
       E            e-w t           log cw,t -       t
                                                                + (1 -  )e-e t log ce,t -                ~      dt .          (40)
            0                                     1 + 1/                                              2 e c,e,t
   5
      In the moral hazard microfoundation, the IC constraint requires U it = f (kc    it , it )
                                                                                        it
                                                                                                t , and consumption
is cit = c^t exp(e Uit ), where c
                                ^t depends only on the aggregate states. Computing       ~c,e,t , we obtain (37).
    6
      An individual entrepreneur's consumption follows dci,t /ci,t = µc,e,t dt + ~c,e,t dBit + c,e,t dZt , so ci,t =
                                    t
(ci,0 /ce,0 ) × ce,t × exp          0
                                        ~c,e,t dBi,t - 1
                                                         ~ 2 dt . His utility is
                                                         
                                                       2 c,e,t

                                                                                                         t
                                                                                                             1 2
                E           e-e t log ci,t dt = log(ci,0 /ce,0 ) + E              e-e t log ce,t -             ~c,e,s ds dt
                     0                                                     0                         0       2
                                                                               
                                                                                                     1 1 2
                                                 = log(ci,0 /ce,0 ) + E           e-e t log ce,t -       ~c,e,t dt
                                                                           0                         e 2
  The first term captures the initial inequality among entrepreneurs. If they all had the same Pareto weight
we would pick ci0 = ce0 for all entrepreneurs.



                                                                      26
Notice that because entrepreneurs are more impatient than workers, e > w , in the
first best with perfect risk sharing they would receive zero consumption in the long run,
limt zt = 0. Here because entrepreneurs can save on their own and have a precautionary
motive, their consumption will not vanish in the long run. The consumption ratio zt will
have an ergodic distribution, and will converge to a steady state in the absence of shocks.
However, it is still true that entrepreneurs' utility vanishes from the objective function in
the long run. As we'll see below, there is a fundamental disagreement between the planner
and private entrepreneurs about their consumption profile. They save according to their
Euler equations, but the planner would like them to follow an inverse Euler equation, that
eliminates the precautionary saving motive for idiosyncratic risk. Because we care about the
properties of the planner problem in the ergodic distribution, we can ignore entrepreneurs'
utility in the objective function, and maximize only workers' utility subject to a given zt .
The entrepreneur's Pareto weight (1 -  ) > 0 matters for how we choose z0 and how we
converge to the ergodic distribution.
   The planner's HJB equation is therefore

                                                   1          1+1/
              w V (k, , z ) = max log c + log            -  + Vk k (x -  )                (41)
                                c,x,              1+z1 + 1/
                                      2                   1    2
                      +Vz z (w - e + ~c,e          -  ) + V v
                                          ) + V  (¯
                                                          2

subject to
                                                         1-
                                         c + (x)k = k                                     (42)

and (37). Notice that, in this formulation, the planner does not care directly about en-
trepreneurs' consumption or exposure to idiosyncratic risk. The planner only cares because
if he exposes them to risk ~c,e,t they will save (higher zt in the future), leaving less con-
sumption for workers, cw,t = ct /(1 + zt ).
   Instead of working with the HJB equation, it's easier and more revealing to work with
the co-states, mk = Vk , m = V , mz = Vz . Taking first-order conditions, we have

                                    1             2
                                       1 - 2mz z ~ce =                       [c]          (43)
                                    c
                                             ~2
                                             
                (1 - )(k/ )         + 2mz z  ce      = 1/                    [ ]          (44)
                                           k 1-
                                                 (x) = mk ,                 [x],          (45)

where  is the Lagrange multiplier on the resource constraint. The first condition says that
giving consumption not only delivers utility, but also relaxes entrepreneurs' risk sharing,
~c,e . This determines the marginal value of goods . The second condition equates the
marginal disutility of labor,    1/ ,   to its marginal product, taking into account that more



                                                 27
labor increases entrepreneurs' exposure to idiosyncratic risk. The third condition says that
the marginal value of more capital should be equated to its marginal cost. Together with
the resource constraint we can solve for the controls c, x , , and  as a function of the
states and co-states. It's hard to obtain closed-form expressions, but it's easy to eliminate
c and  and obtain a system of two equations for x and .
   Now we differentiate the HJB equation with respect to each state to obtain a law of
motion for mk and mz (m is not directly used):

                             
     w mk = mk (x -  ) + 2mz z +  (k/ )-1 - (x) + µmk mk
                                2
                               ~ce                                                  [mk ]         (46)
                             k
               1          ~2 1
                          
     w mz = -     - 2mz z ce   + mz (w - e +  2
                                             ~c,e ) + µmz mz                        [mz ].        (47)
              1+z        1+zz

The equation for mk resembles an asset-pricing equation for capital. Capital delivers divi-
dends net of new investment, transformed into utility using . It grows at rate x -  but it's
discounted more heavily because it exposes entrepreneurs to idiosyncratic risk. With this
interpretation, the first-order condition for investment, x, can be understood as a Tobin's
Q expression, properly taking into account the role of idiosyncratic risk. The equation
for mz captures the fact that higher z means that a smaller fraction of consumption goes
to workers (who are all the planner cares about in the long run formulation). On the
other hand, higher z reduces entrepreneurs' exposure to idiosyncratic risk, and therefore
the future value of z .
   We construct a pair of C 2 functions mk (k, , z ) and mz (k, , z ). Using Ito's lemma we
transform equations (46) and (47), together with the first-order conditions (43) and the
resource constraint, into a system of two second-order PDEs and two algebraic constraints,
using the the resource constraint and first FOC to eliminate c and . We can solve this
differential-equation system using numerical methods analogous to those used to solve for
the competitive equilibrium.


Implied prices, wedges, and taxes. After finding the optimal allocation, we can back out
                                              1/                                  2 -        zt   2 ,
prices and wedges. Set qt =  (xt ), wt =      t ct /(1   + zt ), rt = ¯t + µc,t - c,t       1+zt ~c,e,t
and t = c,t . The implied labor and capital wedges,          ,t   and k,t are defined by:

                             1/     ct
                             t           = (1 - )(kt / t ) (1 -  ,t )                             (48)
                                  1 + zt

  (kt / t )-1 (1 - k,t ) - (xt ) + qt xt -  + µq,t - (¯          2
                                                      t + µc,t - c,t ) - c,t q,t = 0. (49)

The optimal allocation can be implemented with a labor and capital tax,                ,t    and k,t .
Entrepreneurs' after-tax expected marginal product of labor is f (kt , t )(1 -  ,t ); for capital




                                                28
                                                Percent Standard Deviations
                       Var.           Comp. Eq.        Social Planner    Comparison
                         y                1.7               0.62               
                         c                0.88              0.96              =
                         i                5.8                  5.5            =
                                          2.2               0.56               
                             t            2.2                  0.9             
                        kt                0.3                  24              



Table 4: Percent Standard Deviations of Main Variables under Competitive Equilibrium
and Social Planner's Allocation.

it's fk (kt , t )(1 - k,t ). We get

                                                        (kt / t )-1     1 + zt   2
                                 ,t   =   ,t   -             - 1
                                                                               e t                (50)
                                                   (kt / t )     - (xt ) zt

and
                                            (kt / t )-1   1 + zt    2             1 e kt qt
                k,t = k,t -                                      e  t        1-               .   (51)
                                       (kt / t )-1 - (xt ) zt                      ct
The tax does not affect the idiosyncratic risk, it's levied before the idiosyncratic shock
realizes, so that it does not interfere with the incomplete risk sharing problem.




5.2    Numerical Results

The main result is that the recession pattern of the responses of capital, employment, and
consumption in the competitive equilibrium is inefficient. In the constrained efficient allo-
cation, output and employment fluctuations are smaller, and consumption moves counter-
cyclically. Figure 4 shows the impulse response to a risk shock in the planner's allocation.
While employment and investment fall, consumption expands. As a result, employment
falls less than in the competitive equilibrium.
    We can probe these results by looking at the implied labor and capital wedges. The
competitive equilibrium featured a large increase in the labor wedge and a small reduction
in the capital wedge after risk shocks. In contrast, the planner wants a small reduction
in the labor wedge and a large increase in the capital wedge. The capital wedge twists
the economy in the direction of less investment but more consumption. In contrast to the
competitive equilibrium, employment and total output fall because with more consumption,
the income effect reduces labor supply. This effect is reflected in an increase in real wages.


                                                          29
                            
                     ¡ n                                                               c, i, l
 0.35
                               ~                                               c
 0.30                          ce                        1.00

 0.25                                                                          l
                                                         0.98
 0.20

 0.15                                                    0.96
 0.10                                                                          i
                                                         0.94
 0.05

                                            years                                                        years
              1         2           3   4                       0          1             2       3   4

                    w and r
                                                                                   l and k
                                                          0.2
 1.03
                        r                                                          k
                                                          0.1
 1.02                                                                                            l

                                                                                                         years
 1.01                                                                      1             2       3   4
                        w
                                                         E0.1
 1.00
                                            years
        0     1         2           3   4


            Figure 4: Impulse Response to a Risk Shock in the Planner's Solution


In contrast, in the competitive equilibrium the labor wedge reduced demand for labor, so
wages fell on impact.
    The real interest rate falls on impact. Lower expected consumption growth and a larger
precautionary saving motive push interest rates down. In contrast, in the competitive
equilibrium the larger precautionary motive lowered interest rates but it was compensated
by higher expected consumption growth as the economy recovered. As a result, in the
planner's allocation interest rates fall more than in the competitive equilibrium in response
to risk shocks.
    Table 4 compares the competitive equilibrium with the constrained efficient alloca-
tion. In the ergodic distribution the standard deviation of consumption and investment are
roughly the same as in the competitive equilibrium, but their negative correlation (-0.88)
means that the standard deviations of output and employment are lower. The average labor
wedge (4.5 percent) and capital wedge (-8.4 percent) are larger than in the competitive
equilibrium, but while the labor wedge becomes less volatile, the capital wedge becomes
much more volatile.
    The planner's allocation can be implemented by lowering labor taxes during recessions
to stimulate employment and raising the capital tax to reduce investment and free more
resources for consumption. Figure 5 shows the impulse response of the labor and capital
tax to a risk shock. In the ergodic distribution                    ,t   has a mean of 1.7 percent (a tax
on labor) with a standard deviation of 2.6 percent. It's positive in the steady-state, but
becomes negative after risk shocks. In contrast, k,t has a mean of -8 percent but a very


                                                    30
                                                      l , k

                         0.2

                                                k

                         0.1

                                                                        l

                                                                                       years
                                          1            2            3             4



                        -0.1




       Figure 5: Impulse Response Function of the Labor and Capital Tax,  and k


large standard deviation of 24 percent. It's negative in the steady-state but becomes very
positive after risk shocks.

5.3    Understanding the Inefficiency

To understand why the competitive equilibrium is inefficient, it's useful to go over the role
of hidden savings, and then use that to understand why the planner wants different wedges
than in the competitive equilibrium.


The role of hidden savings. The inefficiency ultimately arises from the presence of hidden
savings in the environment. Without hidden savings, the planner would like agents to follow
the inverse Euler equation, which eliminates the precautionary saving motive. Understand-
ing the optimal allocation without hidden savings helps us see what the planner is hoping
to accomplish in the environment with hidden savings.
    To see this issue in detail, consider the environment without hidden savings, so zt is
not a state variable. The planner can decide how much consumption goes to workers and
entrepreneurs separately. The first-order conditions for consumption for finite t are

                                                                            1 2
                           e-w t c- 1
                                  w,t = t = (1 -  )e
                                                     -e t -1
                                                         ce,t 1 +            ~      .                   (52)
                                                                            e c,e,t

Interpret t be the pricing kernel (up to a constant), so workers satisfy their FOCs. Re-
                                                 1 2
arranging, we get that t ee t ce,t /(1 +         e ~c,e,t )   must be a constant, and because an indi-
vidual entrepreneur's ci,t is equal to ce,t times an idiosyncratic martingale, we get that
                    1 2                                                  1 2
t ee t ci,t /(1 +   e ~c,e,t )   is a martingale. The term ci,t /(1 +    e ~c,e,t )   is the marginal cost of
delivering utility to the entrepreneur, so this expression says that the discounted marginal
cost of utility must be a martingale. This is the essence of the inverse Euler equation.
In the standard setting, the marginal cost of utility is the inverse of the marginal utility
of consumption, c- 1
                 i,t . Here it's modified to take into account that higher consumption re-


                                                        31
duces the entrepreneur's exposure to idiosyncratic risk, as captured by (37). In a steady
state without aggregate shocks, however, ~c,e,t is constant, so we recover the inverse Euler
equation: e(e -rt )t ci,t is a martingale, or in flow form,

                                             µc,e,t = rt - e .                                (53)

The crucial difference with the Euler equation is that it's missing the precautionary savings
term,  2 .
      ~c,e,t
   Looking at (52), we see that, besides eliminating entrepreneurs' precautionary motive,
the planner would like to front-load entrepreneurs' consumption relative to workers' (raise
zt = ce,t /cw,t ) when idiosyncratic risk ~c,e,t is large, to relax idiosyncratic risk sharing. But
when agents have access to hidden savings, he is forced to respect their Euler equation and
aggregate risk sharing, captured by (38). If he wants to increase entrepreneurs' consump-
tion, to relax the idiosyncratic risk sharing constraint (37), he must also increase workers'
consumption.


Labor wedge. Coming back to the setting with hidden savings, we can study the inefficiency
in terms of the implied labor and capital wedges, and how they compare to those in the
competitive equilibrium. As in the competitive equilibrium, the difference in duration plays
a central role in generating the asymmetric response of capital and labor. It is easier to
focus first on the labor wedge, which does not involve dynamic considerations, and then
extend the analysis to the capital wedge.
   We can re-write the first-order condition for labor to obtain an expression for the labor
wedge,
                                     improve risk sharing>0   worsen risk sharing<0

                                                  2                    2          ct
                                    1 -(2mz,t zt ~c,e,t ) + (2mz,t zt ~c,e,t )×
                                                                                  yt
                    1-     ,t   =                                                      .      (54)
                                                         1 + zt
                                                     income effect

The forces can be split into those that are primarily about the long run, and those that are
important for business cycles.


Business cycles. The numerator of (54) captures the impact of employment on idiosyncratic
risk. One the one hand, more employment increases entrepreneurs' exposure to idiosyn-
cratic risk. Private agents also realize this, which is why they demand a risk premium
to compensate them. But the planner also realizes that more aggregate consumption ct
relaxes the idiosyncratic risk sharing problem, as can be seen in equation (37). Essentially,
if aggregate consumption is higher, entrepreneurs' consumption must also be higher, given
the consumption ratio zt . Because their consumption policy is ce,t = e ne,t , this means that



                                                    32
                                                                                       f (kt , t )
their wealth is higher and their exposure to idiosyncratic risk, ~c,e,t = ~n,e,t =        ne,t       is
lower, other things equal.
   These countervailing forces create a labor wedge that goes down after risk shocks. Con-
sider increasing employment by a small amount d > 0, and using the extra output to
increase aggregate consumption. Besides the usual considerations (marginal product vs.
marginal rate of substitution between labor and consumption), this will improve idiosyn-
cratic risk sharing. We can write entrepreneurs' exposure to idiosyncratic risk

                                      f (kt , t ) + f (kt , t )d 1 + zt
                           ~c,e,t =                                     e  t .                 (55)
                                          ct + f (kt , t )d        zt

Because yt = f (kt , t ) > ct , increasing output and consumption by the same amount,
f (kt , t )d , reduces entrepreneurs' exposure to idiosyncratic risk ~c,e,t . Instead of increasing
idiosyncratic risk, as private agents think, more employment actually improves idiosyncratic
risk sharing. In consequence, the planner wants a lower labor wedge after risk shocks when
t is large. He wants to subsidize labor.
   To formalize this, notice that the marginal value of an extra unit of aggregate consump-
tion is not only that it delivers marginal utility, c- 1
                                                     t , but also the marginal improvement in
idiosyncratic risk sharing, -2c- 1
                               t mz,t zt 
                                          2
                                         ~c,e,t > 0. This is reflected in the expression for ,
equation (43). It's useful to write
                                                    1
                                              t =      Mt ,                                    (56)
                                                    ct
where Mt = 1 - 2mz,t zt  2
                        ~c,e,t > 1 captures the extra value of consumption from improving
risk sharing.
   When the planner considers the marginal value of labor, he takes into account that
it adds to idiosyncratic risk, just like agents in the competitive equilibrium. That's what
                   2 /(k     1-
the term 2mz,t zt ~c,e,t t   t  )     in equation (44) captures. But he also realizes that the
extra output relaxes idiosyncratic risk sharing through higher consumption. That's why
the marginal product of labor is weighted with t . The numerator in the labor wedge
equation (54) captures both these considerations. The two forces go in opposite directions
and become larger after risk shocks, but it's clear that the improvement in idiosyncratic
risk sharing dominates because ct /yt < 1. This gives us a labor wedge that decreases after
risk shocks.


Long run. The denominator of (54) eliminates the 1+ zt denominator in the definition of the
labor wedge, equation (48), which captures an income effect on labor supply. The planner
doesn't care about entrepreneurs' utility in the long run because they are more impatient.
He would like to give them zero consumption, zt = 0, but can't prevent them from saving
following their Euler equation, which includes an inefficient precautionary saving motive,
as explained above.

                                                   33
   As a result, we have zt > 0 and only a fraction 1/(1 + zt ) of the extra consumption goes
to workers. But the planner gives workers only part of aggregate consumption not because
he puts less than complete weight on them, in which case they would also be made to work
more, but because of a constraint. He must give entrepreneurs some consumption, but he
is not forced to make workers work more. The result is a positive labor wedge that undoes
the income effect on labor supply. However, it's important to notice that because z,t = 0,
the denominator does not respond on impact to risk shocks, so this force does not play an
important role in business cycles.


Capital wedge. The same forces apply to the capital wedge, but because capital is a
long-duration asset, investment involves intertemporal tradeoffs. First, notice that mk,t =
t  (xt ) = t qt is the marginal cost of new capital in utility terms. In standard models, it
would be c- 1
          t qt , reflecting the forgone utility from consumption. Here, instead, the lower
aggregate consumption also worsens idiosyncratic risk sharing, which is taken into account
by t = c- 1
        t Mt . So the cost of investment for the planner is larger than what private agents
realize, and moves with risk shocks. On the other hand, the marginal product of capital will
not only be risky, as private agents realize, but also improve risk sharing through increased
aggregate consumption, analogously to labor. So it will also be weighted by t in the future.
   Now we can use the law of motion for mk , equation (46), and rewrite it in terms
analogous to the competitive equilibrium condition, equation (22),

                                                               1-
               (kt / t )-1 1 - (mz,t zt 2~ 2
                                         c,e,t             
                                               )(1 - ct /(kt   t  ))    - Mt (xt ),              (57)

                                                      2
                    +Mt qt xt -  + µq,t - (¯
                                           t + µc,t - c,t ) - c,t q,t ,                          (58)

                      +Mt qt (µM,t + M,t (q,t - c,t ) + (¯
                                                         t - w )) = 0                            (59)

The differences from equation (22), help explain the inefficiency. First, the marginal product
                                           2 )(1 - c /(k    1-
of capital is multiplied by 1 - (2mz,t zt ~c,e,t    t   t   t  ))      instead of (1 - ~c,e,t t ). The
planner internalizes that the marginal product of capital is risky but also helps improve
idiosyncratic risk sharing through higher aggregate consumption. This is symmetric with
labor.
   Second, the cost of creating new capital (xt ), and the value of capital in the future
qt , is weighted by Mt because those resources could also be used to relax idiosyncratic risk
sharing. If Mt is high today--for example, if t is large--but is expected to be lower in the
future (µM,t < 0)-- today is a bad time to invest. In this case, investment uses goods when
their value from relaxing idiosyncratic risk sharing is high, and will deliver goods when their
value relaxing idiosyncratic risk sharing is expected to be low. The term M,t (q,t - c,t )
captures the covariance between Mt and the marginal-utility-weighted value of capital c- 1
                                                                                       t qt
to properly incorporate aggregate risk. In a steady-state without aggregate shocks Mt is


                                              34
constant, µM,t = M,t = 0, and these dynamic issues vanish.
   The last term, ¯t - w > 0, reflects that the planner doesn't care directly about en-
trepreneurs (in the long run), and so would like to discount the future using w rather than
        zt           1
¯t =   1+zt e   +   1+zt w .   The planner would like to give entrepreneurs zero consumption,
zt = 0, in which case ¯t = w , but cannot because they save to prevent this. This issue is
analogous to the role of the 1 + zt denominator in the expression for the labor wedge, (54).
Ultimately, the disagreement reflects the inefficiency of entrepreneurs' precautionary saving
motive, as we explained above. However, while this inefficiency may be important in the
steady-state, it does not play a role in the impact of risk shocks, because zt and therefore
¯t do not respond on impact.
   We can use equation (57) to obtain an expression for the capital wedge:

                                improve risk sharing>0           worsen risk sharing<0

                                             2                    2                 ct
                               1 -(2mz,t zt ~c,e,t ) + (2mz,t zt ~c,e,t )×
                                                                                    yt
            1 - k,t =                                       2                                             (60)
                                              1 -(2mz,t zt ~c,e,t )
                                                   worse risk sharing>0
                                    qt
                        +                            µM,t + M,t q,t - M,t c,t + (¯
                                                                                 t - w ) .
                               (kt / t )-1
                            pirce-dividend ratio                dynamic ineff.            zt >0


   If we compare the expressions for the labor and capital wedge, equations (54) and (60),
                                                                           qt
we see that if the price-dividend ratio for capital,                  (kt / t )-1
                                                                                    was zero, the dynamic part
of the capital wedge would disappear. We wouldn't quite obtain the labor wedge 1 -  ,t ,
however, because instead of 1 + zt in the denominator we have Mt . The difference is that
investment requires goods which could be used to relax idiosyncratic risk sharing, captured
by Mt , while labor requires only forgoing workers' utility from leisure, which cannot relax
idiosyncratic risk sharing. In the ergodic distribution, most of the variation in the capital
wedge comes from the second term in equation (60). The first term has a standard deviation
of 2.5 percent, compared to 25 percent for the total capital wedge.


The role of e > w . We assumed entrepreneurs are more impatient than workers to obtain
a stationary distribution of consumption and wealth, in both the competitive equilibrium
and the planner's allocation. It may seem that this assumption is driving the result that in
the long run, the planner does not care about entrepreneur's utility directly. That is, their
utility vanishes from the planner's objective functions (40).
   Here we'll show that e > w is not essential to this issue. The fundamental issue is that
the planner and private entrepreneurs disagree on their appropriate consumption profile.
The planner would like to eliminate the precautionary saving motive for idiosyncratic risk
and front-load their consumption, so in the long run the only reason he cares about their


                                                           35
consumption and risk sharing is to satisfy the hidden savings constraint.
    An analogous situation would arise with e = w . In this case, because of the precau-
tionary saving motive for idiosyncratic risk, entrepreneurs would accumulate all the wealth
and consumption in the long run, limt zt = , both in the competitive equilibrium
and the planner's allocation. The planner would be forced to give almost all of the con-
sumption to entrepreneurs because of the hidden savings constraint. So while the utility
of entrepreneurs would not vanish from the objective function (40), the allocation would
be so far away from the distribution of consumption that optimizes the objective function
in the absence of the hidden savings constraint, that on the margin the planner would not
value entrepreneurs' utility directly (it vanishes relative to the utility of workers). The only
motive to give entrepreneurs consumption or reduce their exposure to risk would come from
the hidden savings constraint, as in the e > w case.


Summary. In the planner's allocation the labor wedge goes down after risk shocks because,
while the marginal product of labor has idiosyncratic risk, the planner internalizes that
the extra output can also be used to improve idiosyncratic risk sharing through higher
aggregate consumption. Both forces go in opposite directions and both become larger after
risk shocks, but the improvement in idiosyncratic risk sharing dominates.
    The same logic applies to investment, but the resources used to produce capital could
also be used to improve idiosyncratic risk sharing through higher aggregate consumption.
Periods when idiosyncratic risk is high, and especially if it's expected to be lower in the
future, are particularly bad periods for investment. The planner does not want to use
resources when their value relaxing idiosyncratic risk sharing is high, and get more output
or capital in the future when the value of relaxing idiosyncratic risk sharing is low. So the
capital wedge goes up after risk shocks.
    The inefficiency arises from the presence of hidden savings, which are important in
the microfoundation of the incomplete idiosyncratic risk-problem. The planner would like
entrepreneurs to follow an inverse Euler equation which front-loads their consumption,
especially when idiosyncratic risk is high. However, he must respect their Euler equations.
This creates inefficiency both in the long run and in response to risk shocks.


6    Conclusions
In this paper we propose a theory of business cycles driven by spikes in risk premiums that
act like negative demand shocks for capital and labor. In this view, recessions are periods of
heightened uncertainty, when businesses and investors shrink from risky economic activity.
There is a long tradition that attributes business cycles to time-varying risk premiums,
going back to chapter 12 of the General Theory (Keynes [1936]). However, the co-movement



                                              36
pattern of recessions poses a long-standing challenge to this view. It is hard to explain why
employment, consumption, and investment contract simultaneously. This is essentially the
reason why the macro literature has focused on productivity shocks and monetary shocks
with nominal rigidities as drivers of business cycles. In this paper we aim to provide a novel
theoretical framework to explain business cycles.
   Our model is parsimonious, quantitatively plausible, and policy-relevant. The only de-
viation from the neoclassical growth model is uninsurable idiosyncratic risk on the business
side. We show that risk shocks can generate quantitatively realistic business cycles, with
co-movement between employment, consumption, and investment. The mechanism hinges
on the interaction of risk premiums and the precautionary saving motive, and the different
duration of capital and labor plays a central role. The resulting business cycles are not
efficient. Employment and output fluctuations are too large, and consumption should move
countercyclically. Optimal policy involves stimulating employment and consumption during
recessions. This can be achieved by subsidizing labor and taxing capital during recessions.




                                             37
References
S. Rao Aiyagari. Uninsured idiosyncratic risk and aggregate saving. The Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, pages 659­684, 1994.

George-Marios Angeletos. Uninsured idiosyncratic investment risk and aggregate saving.
  Review of Economic Dynamics, 10(1):1­30, 2007.

Cristina Arellano, Yan Bai, and Patrick J Kehoe. Financial frictions and fluctuations in
  volatility. Journal of Political Economy, 127(5):2049­2103, 2019.

Robert J. Barro and Robert G. King. Time-separable preferences and intertemporal-
  substitution models of business cycles. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 99(4):
  817­839, 11 1984.

Ben Bernanke, Mark Gertler, and Simon. Gilchrist. The financial accelerator in a quan-
  titative business cycle framework. In John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, editors,
  Handbook of Macroeconomics, volume 1, chapter 21, pages 1341­1393. Elsevier, 1999.

Nicholas Bloom. The impact of uncertainty shocks. Econometrica, 77(3):623­685, 2009.

Nicholas Bloom, Max Floetotto, Nir Jaimovich, Itay Saporta-Eksten, and Stephen J Terry.
  Really uncertain business cycles. Econometrica, 86(3):1031­1065, 2018.

Markus Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov. A macroeconomic model with a financial sector.
  American Economic Review, 104(2):379­421, 2014.

Ricardo Caballero and Alp Simsek. A risk-centric model of demand recessions and macro-
  prudential policy. Technical Report 23614, NBER, 2018.

John Y Campbell and John H Cochrane. By force of habit: A consumption-based explana-
  tion of aggregate stock market behavior. Journal of political Economy, 107(2):205­251,
  1999.

Varadarajan V Chari, Patrick J Kehoe, and Ellen R McGrattan. Business cycle accounting.
  Econometrica, 75(3):781­836, 2007.

Lawrence Christiano., Roberto Motto, and Massimo Rostagno. Risk shocks. American
  Economic Review, 104(1):27­65, 2014.

John H Cochrane. Presidential address: Discount rates. The Journal of Finance, 66(4):
  1047­1108, 2011.

Jan De Loecker and Jan Eeckhout. The rise of market power and the macroeconomic
  implications. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.


                                           38
Sebastian Di Tella. Uncertainty shocks and balance sheet recessions. Journal of Political
  Economy, 125(6):2038­2081, December 2017.

Sebastian Di Tella. Risk premia and the real effects of money. November 2019.

Sebastian Di Tella and Yuliy Sannikov. Optimal asset management contracts with hidden
  savings. Stanford GSB, 2016.

Chris Edmond, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Daniel Yi Xu. How costly are markups? Technical
  Report 24800, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Emmanuel Farhi and François Gourio. Accounting for macro-finance trends: Market power,
  intangibles, and risk premia. Technical Report 25282, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, 2018.

Nicolae Gârleanu and Stavros Panageas. Young, old, conservative, and bold: The implica-
  tions of heterogeneity and finite lives for asset pricing. Journal of Political Economy, 123
  (3):670­685, 2015.

Simon Gilchrist, Jae W Sim, and Egon Zakrajsek. Uncertainty, financial frictions, and
  investment dynamics. Technical Report 20038, National Bureau of Economic Research,
  2014.

Robert E. Hall. Employment fluctuations with equilibrium wage stickiness. American
  Economic Review, 95(1):50­65, March 2005.

Robert E. Hall. Reconciling cyclical movements in the marginal value of time and the
  marginal product of labor. Journal of Political Economy, 117(2):281­323, April 2009.

Robert E Hall. High discounts and high unemployment. American Economic Review, 107
  (2):305­30, 2017.

Robert E. Hall. Using empirical marginal cost to measure market power in the us economy.
  Technical Report 25251, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2019.

Zhigu He and Arvind Krishnamurthy. A model of capital and crises. Review of Economic
  Studies, 79(2):735­777, 2012.

Zhiguo He, Bryan T Kelly, and Asaf Manela. Intermediary asset pricing: New evidence
  from many asset classes. 2015.

Bernard Herskovic, Bryan Kelly, Hanno Lustig, and Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh. The common
  factor in idiosyncratic volatility: Quantitative asset pricing implications. Journal of
  Financial Economics, 119(2):249­283, 2016.



                                             39
Charles P Himmelberg, R Glenn Hubbard, and Inessa Love. Investor protection, ownership,
  and the cost of capital. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (2834), 2004.

Urban Jermann and Vincenzo Quadrini. Macroeconomic effects of financial shocks. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 102(1):238­271, 2012.

Kenneth Judd, Lilia Maliar, Serguei Maliar, and Rafael Valero. Smolyak method for solving
  dynamic economic models: Lagrange interpolation, anisotropic grid and adaptive domain.
  Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 44:92­123, 2014.

Patrick J Kehoe, Pierlauro Lopez, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino. Asset prices
  and unemployment fluctuations. Working Paper 26580, National Bureau of Economic
  Research, December 2019.

Rohan Kekre and Moritz Lenel. Redistribution, risk premia, and the macroeconomy. Uni-
  versity of Chicago, May 2019.

J.M. Keynes. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Harcourt, Brace,
  1936.

Mete Kilic and Jessica A Wachter. Risk, unemployment, and the stock market: A rare-
  event-based explanation of labor market volatility. The Review of Financial Studies, 31
  (12):4762­4814, 2018.

Nobuhiro Kiyotaki and John Moore. Credit cycles. Journal of Political Economy, 105:
  211­248, 1997.

Francis A Longstaff and Jiang Wang. Asset pricing and the credit market. The Review of
  Financial Studies, 25(11):3169­3215, 2012.

Césaire Assah Meh and Vincenzo Quadrini. Uninsurable investment risks. 2004.

Tobias J Moskowitz and Annette Vissing-Jørgensen. The returns to entrepreneurial invest-
  ment: A private equity premium puzzle? American Economic Review, 92(4):745­778,
  2002.

Filippo Occhino and Andrea Pescatori. Debt overhang in a business cycle model. European
  Economic Review, 73:58­84, 2015.

Julio J Rotemberg and Michael Woodford. The cyclical behavior of prices and costs. Hand-
  book of Macroeconomics, 1:1051­1135, 1999.

Robert Shimer. The cyclical behavior of equilibrium unemployment and vacancies. Amer-
  ican Economic Review, 95(1):24­49, 2005.



                                           40
