                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     HOURS AND WAGES

                                         Alexander Bick
                                         Adam Blandin
                                        Richard Rogerson

                                       Working Paper 26722
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26722


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank seminar/conference participants at ASU, the Richmond Fed, the Atlanta Fed, McGill
University, Goethe University, University of Delaware, the Bank of Canada, CASEE Conference
on Labor Markets, the 2018 SF Fed Micro Macro Labor Conference, UCL, the Minneapolis Fed,
the 2019 Southern Economics Association, EIEF, and the 2019 SED. We thank Gary Hansen,
John Kennan, Derek Neal, Josep Pijoan-Mas and Aysegul Sahin, for comments on an earlier
version. We would like to thank Spencer Perry, Siyu Shi, and especially Minju Jeong for
outstanding research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26722.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alexander Bick, Adam Blandin, and Richard Rogerson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Hours and Wages
Alexander Bick, Adam Blandin, and Richard Rogerson
NBER Working Paper No. 26722
January 2020
JEL No. E24,J22

                                          ABSTRACT

We develop and estimate a static model of labor supply that can account for two robust features
of the cross-sectional distribution of usual weekly hours and hourly wages. First, usual weekly
hours are heavily concentrated around 40 hours, while at the same time a substantial share of total
hours come from individuals who work more than 50 hours. Second, mean hourly wages are non-
monotonic across the usual hours distribution, with a peak for those working 50 hours. The novel
feature of the model is that earnings are non-linear in hours and the nature of the nonlinearity
varies over the hours distribution. We estimate the model on a sample of older males for whom
human capital considerations are plausibly not of first order importance. Our estimates imply that
an individual who chooses to work either less than 40 hours or more than 40 hours faces a wage
penalty. As a consequence, individuals working typically 40 hours are not very responsive to
variation in productivity. This has significant implications for the role of labor supply as a
mechanism for self-insurance in a standard heterogeneous agent-incomplete markets model and
for strategies designed to estimate the intertemporal elasticity of substitution.


Alexander Bick                                   Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
W. P. Carey School of Business                   JRR Building Room 292
Arizona State University                         Princeton University
P.O. Box 879801                                  Princeton, NJ 08544
Tempe, AZ 85287-9801                             and NBER
alexander.bick@asu.edu                           rdr@princeton.edu

Adam Blandin
Department of Economics
Snead School of Business
Virginia Commonwealth University
Box 844000
Richmond, VA 23284
ajblandin@vcu.edu
1     Introduction

Recent work in macroeconomics emphasizes the desirability of deriving aggregate implications from models
that also capture the salient aspects of cross-sectional heterogeneity found in the data.1 But what set of
statistics represents the key cross-sectional facts? We pursue this question in the context of heterogeneous
agent models of labor supply. Central to any study of labor supply is the relation between wages and
hours. While the existing literature on heterogeneous agent models of labor supply has tended to focus on
first and second moments of the cross-sectional hours and wages distribution (see, for example, Heathcote
et al (2014)), we focus on two features of the micro data not captured by these moments, and argue that
addressing them has important implications for the role of labor supply in macroeconomic models.
     The first feature is the concentration of usual weekly hours around 40 hours, while at the same time
a significant share of workers have usual hours of 50 or more. The second feature is the non-monotonic
relationship between wages and usual weekly hours­it increases until 50 hours and decreases after. In
particular, hourly wages for those working 70 hours are about the same as for those working 30 hours,
which are about 30 log points below the hourly wage at 40 hours. Our emphasis on this cross-sectional
relationship is novel to our analysis and one contribution of our paper is to document that the non-monotonic
relation between hourly wages and usual weekly hours is a robust feature of the data­it is not an artifact of
measurement issues and it also holds when we cut the data by gender, age, and education.2
     A simple static labor supply model in the spirit of the one in Heathcote et al (2014) can account for
the first and second moment properties of the cross-sectional hours-wage distribution but fails to generate
sufficient concentration of hours around 40, the sizeable share of workers with hours above 50 and the non-
monotonicity in the wage-hours relationship. This failure motivates us to extend the simple model. The
key innovation is to allow earnings to depend non-linearly on hours. Our specification generalizes the one
introduced by French (2005); whereas he assumed an elasticity of earnings with respect to hours that was
constant and greater than one, we allow this elasticity to vary with hours of work and do not restrict it to be
greater than one.
     We choose parameter values for our model to yield the best fit of the model to the shape of the hours
distribution and the profile of mean hourly wages versus weekly hours. Because our model abstracts from
    1 As Krueger et al (2010) wrote in their introduction to the special issue of the Review of Economic Dynamics devoted to this
topic, ". . . .restricting heterogeneous agent macro models so that the equilibrium distributions of hours worked, income, consump-
tion and wealth line up well with their empirical counterparts is crucial for a convincing policy analysis."
    2 A large literature on the part-time wage penalty focuses on the increasing profile below 40 hours. Some work examines wages

associated with long hours, including, for example, Kuhn and Lozano (2008), Michelacci and Pijoan-Mas (2012), Weeden et al
(2016), Goldin (2014), Gicheva (2019), Denning et al (2019), and Fuentes and Leamer (2019)). Although Fuentes and Leamer
(2019) display the same cross-sectional relationship that we do, they do not focus on the decline in wages for hours above 50.


                                                                1
dynamic considerations such as human capital accumulation, we estimate it for a sample of men aged 50 -
54, for whom dynamic considerations are commonly assumed to be less important. (See, for example,
Heckman et al, 1998).
   Our estimated model provides a good fit to the data and generates three important results. First, there is
a modest wage penalty for part-time work: a worker who chooses to work 30 hours per week rather than 40
hours per week will receive an hourly wage that is lower by about 11 percent. Our estimate is nearly identical
to that of Aaronson and French (2004), who relied on plausibly exogenous variation in usual weekly hours
generated by features of the Social Security system.
   Second, and strikingly, we find a large wage penalty associated with working longer than 40 hours. In
particular, an individual who chooses to work 50 hours rather than 40 hours will receive earnings that are
only about 3 percent higher, implying a wage penalty of almost 20 percent. Our estimate of the (static)
"long hours penalty" is similar in magnitude to the one estimated by Michelacci and Pijoan-Mas (2012)
using dynamic panel analysis of PSID data.
   Third, selection plays an important role in how individuals allocate themselves across the weekly hours
distribution. It follows that the hours and wage choices facing a given individual cannot be directly inferred
from the cross-sectional relation between hours and wages.
   The first two results just described imply a large kink in the earnings function at 40 hours, where the
elasticity of earnings with respect to hours drops from well above one to well below one. Within our
moment-matching exercise, this kink plays a key role both in generating the concentration of workers around
40 hours and the decreasing wage profile for hours beyond 50 hours. More generally, this kink has important
implications for a variety of labor supply issues. The basic insight is that the large number of individuals
who work around 40 hours will be much more reluctant to adjust along the intensive margin: lowering
hours exposes them to the part time wage penalty and hence a large drop in earnings, and increasing hours
generates only very modest increases in earnings. In contrast, individuals who work either below or above
the kink are much more willing to adjust their labor supply.
   To illustrate the quantitative significance of these effects we embed our estimated earnings function into
an otherwise standard heterogeneous agent-incomplete markets model with endogenous labor supply, as
studied by Pijoan-Mas (2006). In his model with a linear earnings function, labor supply was an impor-
tant margin for responding to productivity shocks and thus to provide self-insurance beyond savings against
income risk. Our non-linear earnings function significantly decreases the potency of this margin, but impor-
tantly, this effect is not uniform across individuals who differ in their average labor supply. In particular,
an individual who typically works 40 hours displays almost no fluctuations in labor supply in response to


                                                       2
temporary variation in productivity and thus induces households to solely rely on asset accumulation for
self-insurance. In contrast, workers who typically work more or less than 40 hours behave more similarly
to those in Pijoan-Mas (2006). Yet, their ability to use hours as a form of insurance differs drastically
depending on which side of 40 they fall.
    A related implication is that workers at the kink in the earnings function are not well-described by the
labor supply equations used in traditional exercises to estimate the Frisch elasticity (e.g., MaCurdy 1981,
Altonji 1986). We repeat the Altonji (1986)-style estimation exercises in Bredemeier et al (2019) using data
from the PSID, but split the sample based on average hours of work. Consistent with our model, the esti-
mated Frisch elasticities display a U-shaped pattern with respect to average hours, with the smallest values
for those who have average weekly hours that are close to 40. However, this reflects reduced opportunities
for intertemporal substitution and not necessarily reduced willingness to do so. This may have important
implications for optimal tax policies since top earners tend to have hours that are above 40.
    Our paper relates to several strands of the literature on labor supply. Rosen (1976) and Moffitt (1984)
are early examples of empirical studies incorporating non-linear earnings functions and emphasizing its
role for labor supply responses.3 Their focus was the part-time wage penalty in the context of married
female labor supply. Michelacci and Pijoan-Mas (2012) allow current hours to affect both current and future
wages, though they focus on the dynamic effects. Because they focus on prime age males, their analysis
implicitly focuses on individuals with usual weekly hours of 40 and above. Yurdagul (2107) documents a
hump-shaped pattern for wages across the hours profile and studies a production structure in which workers
are complements, implying that wages decrease as hours move away from mean hours. Relative to these
studies we focus on non-linearities over the entire distribution of hours worked and allow the non-linearity
to change over the distribution. Most importantly, we also seek to account jointly for the distributions of
hours and wages, and thereby emphasize the role of selection. Although our estimation procedure uses very
different information, our results for the part-time wage penalty and the long hours wage penalty are fairly
consistent with these earlier estimates.
    Following Cogan (1981), many researchers have posited fixed costs or other non-convexities as a way
to account for the fact that the hours distribution has little mass at low hours and a mass of workers working
zero hours. (See, for example, French 2005, Rogerson and Wallenius 2009, Erosa et al 2016, Chang et al
2019a and Ameriks et al 2020.) Although these papers generate a distribution of hours among the employed,
none of them generates the large concentration of usual weekly hours around 40, nor do they address the
    3 See Barzel (1973) and Rosen (1978) regarding the general notion of wages that depend on hours. There is a large literature

starting with Hausmann (1985) on econometric estimation of models with nonlinear budget sets.




                                                               3
cross-sectional wage-hours profile that is a focal point of our analysis.
      Heathcote et al (2014) and Chang et al (2019b) study heterogeneous agent macro models that address
features of the cross-sectional distribution of wages and hours. But they focus on second moment properties
and do not account for either the concentration in the hours worked distribution or the non-monotonicity in
the cross-sectional wage-hours profile.
      An outline of the paper follows. Section 2 documents the two key facts that are the focal point of our
analysis. Section 3 shows that although a simple model of labor supply with linear earnings can match
second moments of the cross-sectional distribution of log hours and log wages, it fails to match the two
key facts from Section 2. This motivates us to develop our model with nonlinear earnings and estimate its
parameters. Section 4 presents the results from the estimation and Section 5 illustrates the implications of
our earnings function for labor supply responses. Section 6 concludes.


2      Cross-Sectional Facts About Hours and Wages

A common approach to characterizing the cross-sectional relationship between hours and wages is to present
the covariance matrix for log hours and log wages, which amounts to reporting three statistics: the variance
of log wages, the variance of log hours and the correlation between the two.
      In this section we document a broader set of cross-sectional facts. First, the distribution of usual weekly
hours across individuals features a heavy concentration around 40, while at the same time a large amount
of total hours are accounted for by those who work 50 or more hours per week. Second, we document
a striking fact about the profile of average hourly wages across the usual weekly hours distribution: it is
non-monotonic with a peak occurring at about 50 hours.


2.1     Data

The facts that we present in this section are derived from pooling the CPS outgoing rotation group (ORG)
surveys from September 1995 through August 2007. We pool multiple years to ensure sufficient sample
sizes when we stratify the data by various characteristics. We start in 1995 since this allows us to see whether
earnings are imputed. We stop in 2007 to avoid the potential concern that our results are impacted by the
Great Recession; in fact the patterns we document continue to hold in later years. As noted below, the pat-
terns that we document hold quantitatively in many other datasets (CPS ASEC, i.e., the March Supplement
of the CPS, the Census, the ACS, the PSID and NLSY79).4
    4 We   work with the IPUMS version of the CPS, Census and ASEC, see Flood et al (2018) and Ruggles et al (2019).



                                                                4
                                                          Figure 1: Facts on the Distribution of Usual Weekly Hours

                                                (a) Overall Distribution                               (b) Long Hours Distribution
  10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65




                                                                                          11
                                                                                          10
                                                                                          9
                                                                                          8
                                                                                          7
                                                                                          6
                 %




                                                                                         %
                                                                                          5
                                                                                          4
                                                                                          3
                                                                                          2
                                                                                          1
                     5
                     0




                                                                                          0
                                           35     35-39     40-44     45-49   50+              50-54   55-59   60-64   65-69   70-74   75-79   80+




                    The two key variables from the CPS ORG that we use in our analysis are usual weekly hours and usual
weekly earnings for an individual's main job. For the main results presented below we restrict attention to
males between the ages of 25 and 64 who hold a single job (roughly 95% of all workers), have usual weekly
hours of at least 10, are not enrolled in school and are not self-employed. We eliminate any observations
with imputed values for either usual weekly hours or earnings, or that have an implied wage (earnings/hours)
less than one half of the federal minimum wage. This leaves us with a sample of more than one million
observations.
                    Our focus on males is motivated by two considerations. First, to simplify the analysis we abstract from
the participation margin, and this is much less problematic for males. Second, females are much more likely
to work less than 35 hours and less likely to work more than 50 hours. This makes the female population
more relevant for studying the part-time wage penalty. Although our analysis includes part-time work, our
analysis of wages in the long hours region is more novel, thus making the male subsample more relevant.


2.2                                     The Hours Distribution

We start by examining the distribution of usual weekly hours across five hour bins (10 - 14, 15 - 19, etc....).
Figure 1 shows the distribution of male workers across these bins. We note three features. First, there is a
heavy concentration in the 40 - 44 hours bin, with over 60 percent of males reporting usual hours in this
range. The vast majority of these report usual hours of exactly 40. Second, long hours, which we define as
50 or more, are relatively common, accounting for more than 20 percent of observations, and 28% of the
total usual hours for men. As the right panel shows, most of these individuals have usual hours below 65.
Third, short hours, which we define as less than 35, are relatively uncommon, accounting for only about 4%

                                                                                     5
                                                                           Figure 2: Facts on the Distribution of Usual Weekly Hours

                                                                         (a) By Age                                                                                         (b) By Education
  0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75




                                                                                                                     0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75
                        %




                                                                                                                                           %
                                                       35        35-39         40-44       45-49           50+                                                       35    35-39        40-44          45-49           50+

                                                              25-34        35-44       45-54       55-64                                                                  LHS      HS           Bach           Bach+


                                                       Note: Less than high school (LHS): at most 11 years of schooling, HS: 12-15 years of schooling, Bach:
                                                       16 years of schooling, Bach+: more than 16 years of schooling


of observations.
                          Our structural estimation exercise later in the paper will stratify the data by age and education. For this
reason we examine how the distribution varies with these two observables in Figure 2. The left panel shows
that the three features noted above continue to hold when we stratify by age. The most notable difference
across these age groups is that individuals aged 55-64 are somewhat more likely to work short hours and
less likely to work 45 or more hours. The right panel of Figure 2 presents the distribution of usual weekly
hours by education.5 The dominant pattern here is that as educational attainment increases, we essentially
move mass from the 40 - 44 hours bin into the more than 50 hours bin. Nonetheless, it remains true even for
the bachelor plus group that there is a concentration in the 40 - 44 hours bin. And even for the high school
dropouts more than ten percent work long hours.


2.3                                               Wage-Hours Profiles

In this subsection we study the relationship between wages and hours across the hours distribution. We
again partition the range of weekly hours between 10 and 99 into a set of 5-hour bins: 10 - 14, 15 - 19,
..., 75 - 79, and 80 - 99.6 We denote the set of bins by H = {10, 15, ..., 80}, where h  H denotes the
minimum threshold of a particular hours bin, and define a set of individual hours dummies 1ih which equal
one if individual i's usual weekly hours lies in bin h. We begin our analysis by considering the following
       5 In                                       this and subsequent calculations, individuals with some college are included in the high school category.
       6 The                                        final bin runs from 80-99 hours because there are so few observations above 80 hours.




                                                                                                                 6
regression:

                                     wi = a0 +     h 1ih     +  Xi + i ,                                   (1)
                                                 hH

where i denotes an individual, and w denotes log hourly wages, defined as the log of usual weekly earnings
divided by usual weekly hours. For our first set of results X is a vector of controls including a quadratic
in age and dummies for education (less than high school, bachelor's degree, and graduate degree), marital
status (married vs. non-married), race (black or Hispanic), sector of employment (public vs. private), union
membership, metro area status, state of residence, interview month, and year. Later on we will also run the
regression separately for various subgroups. Because so much of our sample falls in the 40 hours bin, view
it as a natural reference point and so omit the 40 coefficient from the regression, i.e., we normalize 40 to
be zero.
   The coefficients of interest are the h . We emphasize that we do not attach any causal significance to this
estimated relationship­later in the paper we outline a strategy to estimate the underlying causal relationship
by using the h as moments to be matched in the context of a structural model of labor supply.
   This regression generalizes the analysis in Goldin (2014), Cortes and Pan (2016), and Denning et al
(2019). These papers use log weekly hours as a right hand side regressor, thereby implicitly estimating a
constant elasticity relationship between the dependent variable (wages in our case and earnings in theirs)
and hours. In contrast, our specification allows this elasticity to vary with hours non-parametrically. As we
show below, the assumption of a constant elasticity hides important non-linearities in the underlying data.
   Whether one uses log earnings or log wages as the dependent variable is of no substantive consequence.
In the constant elasticity regression, the implied regression coefficients feature a one to one mapping, as
would be the case for our non-parametric specification if we would use one hour bins. This one-to-one
mapping is independent of the well-known division bias coming from measurement error in hours first
discussed by Borjas (1980). Later on we will provide evidence that measurement error in hours as well as
other measurement issues are not the key driver behind our findings.
   The left panel of Figure 3 plots the estimates of h when wages are the left-hand side variable. As we
move from the 25 hours bin to the 40 hours bin, hourly wages increase; hourly wages in the 40 hours bin are
more than 20 log points higher than hourly wages in the 30 hours bin. Hourly wages continue to rise, albeit
at a slower pace until the 50 hours bin, after which they decrease at a roughly constant rate. Hourly wages
in the 55 hours bin are roughly the same as in the 40 hours bin, and hourly wages in the 65 hours bin are
about the same as in the 35 hours bin.
   The right panel of Figure 3 shows the results when we use usual weekly earnings as the left hand side



                                                      7
                                       Figure 3: Cross-Sectional Relationship between Wages/Earnings and Hours

                                        (a) log Hourly Wages                                                                                           (b) log Weekly Earnings
            .1




                                                                                                                      .6
                                                                                                                      .4
            0




                                                                                                           log of Weekly Earnings
                                                                                                                               .2
  log of Hourly Wages
                  -.1




                                                                                                         -.6 -.4 -.2 0
    -.3    -.2
            -.4




                                                                                                                      -.8
                                                                                                                      -1
            -.5




                        20   25   30    35      40    45     50   55     60   65     70    75   80                                  20   25      30     35     40    45     50   55     60   65    70    75    80
                                               Hours bin (usual weekly hours)                                                                                 Hours bin (usual weekly hours)

                                                  95% Confidence Interval                                                                     95% Confidence Interval            Earnings with constant wage




                             Figure 4: Cross-Sectional Relationship between Wages and Hours by Age and Education

                                                  (a) By Age                                                                                                 (b) By Education
            .1




                                                                                                                      .1
            0




                                                                                                                      0
  log of Hourly Wages




                                                                                                         log of Hourly Wages
                  -.1




                                                                                                                         -.1
           -.2




                                                                                                                  -.2
    -.3




                                                                                                           -.3
            -.4




                                                                                                                      -.4
            -.5




                                                                                                                      -.5




                        20   25   30      35      40      45    50     55     60    65     70   75                                  20   25       30     35      40      45    50     55     60   65    70     75
                                               Hours bin (usual weekly hours)                                                                                 Hours bin (usual weekly hours)

                                       25-34          35-44         45-54          55-64                                                                LHS           HS         Bach         Bach+




variable. The red line indicates how earnings at each level of hours would compare to the 40 hours bin if
there were a unitary elasticity, i.e., if wages were constant across the hours distribution. This figure clearly
shows why hourly wages decrease for hours above 50 in the left panel: earnings are close to flat above 50
hours.
            Once again we are interested in how the relationship varies across age and education subgroups. While
our previous analysis allowed for age and education controls to shift wages, it did not allow them to interact
with the shape of the wage-hours profile. To pursue this possibility we repeat the analysis when splitting the
sample by age and education. Results are in Figure 4. Note that the Figure does not provide any information
about wage differences across age or education groups since each curve shows wages relative to the 40 hours
bin for a given age or education, respectively. The left panel of Figure 4 presents the cross-sectional profile


                                                                                                     8
Figure 5: Cross-Sectional Relationship between Wages and Hours by Occupation (2010 Census Major
Categories)




                                         .2
                                         .1
                                         0
                              -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1
                                log of Hourly Wages
                                         -.6
                                         -.7
                                         -.8




                                                      20   25   30   35    40    45     50   55     60   65   70   75   80
                                                                          Hours bin (usual weekly hours)




of wages as a function of usual hours for each of several age groups, while the right panel does the same for
each of several educational attainment categories. The main message from this figure is that the same pattern
noted for the overall male population also holds for each age and education group. Some models of human
capital accumulation predict that young individuals work long hours at low wages because of the future
return to current hours. But significantly, Figure 4a shows that the cross-sectional patterns are effectively
the same for young and old workers. The overall shape of the wage-hours profile is also the same across all
education groups, but there is more hetereogeneity than by age. Although not shown, the main result also
holds when defining subgroups by both age and education.
    We note that results for the wage-hours profile are essentially identical when splitting the sample by
any of the covariates used in our baseline regression, as well as others such as number of children, or even
spousal hours. And although our analysis in this paper focuses on males, it is of interest to note that we find
very similar results for females as well.
    Although our subsequent analysis will not focus on occupational differences, it is also of interest to
explore this pattern within occupations. Figure 5 shows the results when we repeat the same exercise across
the census major occupation categories. While there is heterogeneity across occupations, the key point is
that for most occupations the slope of the wage-hours profiles is positive below 40 hours, and negative after
45 or 50 hours. Note that Figure 5 does not provide any information about occupational wage differences
since each curve shows wages relative to the 40 hours bin for a given occupation.




                                                                                    9
2.3.1   Variation Across Time and Data Sets

We mention two other exercises for which results are included in Appendix A. The first exercise concerns
the stability of the wage-hours profile over time. Fuentes and Leamer (2019) find that some quantitative
features of the earnings-hours profile have changed between the 1970s and the present. In particular, they
document that the additional earnings for working 50 rather than 40 hours has increased over this time
period. Appendix Figure A.1 shows that although the profile has changed between the 1970s and the present,
all of this change occurred prior to 1995; our estimated profile is very stable not only over the period 1995-
2007 but also when we extend the analysis to the present.7 Importantly, the fact that earnings flatten beyond
50 hours is a stable feature of the data over the entire post 1970 period. This is apparent in the figures in
Fuentes and Leamer (2019), and can also be seen in Appendix Figure A.1. That is, the decline in wages
beyond 50 hours is a robust feature of the data over the longer period covered by the data. Interestingly,
although Fuentes and Leamer (2019) present figures that clearly show the flattening of earnings beyond
50 hours, they do not highlight this feature of the data and so in particular do not draw attention to the
implication that wages decline beyond 50 hours.
    The second exercise is to repeat our basic analysis using several other data sets: the CPS ASEC (i.e.
the March Supplement), the 2000 Census, the ACS, the PSID, and the NLSY79. While various details
vary across these data sets in terms of the basic measures that we utilize, Appendix Figure A.2 shows that
each of these generate not only the same qualitative shape for the wage-hours profile but also very similar
quantitative properties.


2.3.2   Wage vs Salary Workers

The previous analysis has shown that the hump-shaped wage-hours profile depicted in Figure 3 is robust to
controlling for a variety of observable characteristics. In this subsection we discuss one dimension along
which the pattern is not robust: the distinction of wage versus salaried workers. Figure 6 shows the wage-
hours profiles for each of these two groups. For reasons that we discuss shortly, and differently than before,
we normalize wages for both wage and salary workers relative to the earnings of salaried workers in the
40 hours bin. This Figure shows very different patterns when we stratify the sample by wage versus salary
worker. In particular, whereas the curve for salaried workers exhibits the same non-monotonic pattern that
we have previously emphasized, with the decrease starting at the 50 hours bin, the curve for wage workers
is effectively flat over the entire range above 40 hours, increasing modestly until 50 and then decreasing
   7 Similarly, Cha and Weeden document that the return to working 50 hours or more relative to working 35-49 hours has gone up

between the 1970s and mid 1990s and has stabilized afterwards.


                                                              10
               Figure 6: Cross-Sectional Relationship between Wages and Hours by Job-Type




                                        .1
                                        0
                             log of Weekly Earnings
                              -.4   -.3   -.2
                                        -.5
                                        -.6     -.1



                                                      20   25   30   35    40    45     50   55     60   65   70    75   80
                                                                          Hours bin (usual weekly hours)

                                                                     Salaried Worker           Hourly Wage Worker



                                     Note: The shaded areas are the 95% confidence intervals.


modestly beyond 50. While these different patterns in the long hours region are striking, we argue that
they are of somewhat limited significance empirically. The first reason is that there are very few wage
workers who actually work long hours: whereas more than 30% of all salaried workers work long hours,
the comparable figure for wage workers is only about 10%. Equivalently, among workers who work long
hours, only one quarter of them are wage workers. Put somewhat differently, for workers who are assessing
their labor market opportunities conditional on working long hours, the vast majority of the opportunities
they would encounter would be salaried.
      A second reason concerns the fact that wage workers have lower average wages than salaried workers
at 40 hours. Hence, even though the average wage worker who works 65 hours has wages that are roughly
the same as the average wage earner who works 40 hours, this individual earns basically the same average
wage as salaried workers who work 65 hours. One possible interpretation of the fact that wage workers have
a lower wage in the 40 hours bin is that their compensation package implicitly takes into account that they
will occasionally work more than 40 hours and receive overtime. To the extent that wage workers with hours
above 40 are receiving overtime pay, the constant average wage above 40 hours reflects a declining level of
base wages.


2.4     Other Cross-Sectional Patterns

The previously documented non-monotonicity in the cross-sectional wage-hours profile will play a central
role in our subsequent analysis. But once we go beyond characterizing the cross-sectional relationship be-
tween wages and hours by just first and second moments, it is of potential interest to also consider other
profiles. In this subsection we report three other profiles: the profile for mean hours across the wage dis-


                                                                                   11
                                                                                   Figure 7: More Moments by Education

                                                        (a) Mean log Wages                                                                                              (b) S.D. log Wages
                   .2




                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                      .9
                   .1




                                                                                                                           .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8
    -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1 0




                                                                                                                         S.D. log of Hourly Wages
  log of Hourly Wages
                   -.5




                                                                                                                                      .2
                   -.6




                                                                                                                                      .1
                   -.7




                                                                                                                                      0
                                     20   25   30       35    40     45    50   55    60    65       70   75   80                                   20   25   30       35    40     45    50   55    60    65       70   75   80
                                                             Hours bin (usual weekly hours)                                                                                 Hours bin (usual weekly hours)

                                                        LHS         HS         Bach         Bach+                                                                      LHS         HS         Bach         Bach+


                                                             (c) Mean Hours                                                                                                  (d) S.D. Hours
  30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50




                                                                                                                           8 10 12 14 16 18 20
             Average Hours




                                                                                                                         Average Hours
                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                      0




                                     1     2        3          4      5      6        7          8        9    10                                   1     2        3          4      5      6        7          8        9    10
                                                                     Wage Decile                                                                                                    Wage Decile

                                                        LHS         HS         Bach         Bach+                                                                      LHS         HS         Bach         Bach+




tribution, the profile for the standard deviation of log hourly wages across the usual hours distribution,
and the standard deviation of usual hours across the hourly wage distribution. When considering the wage
distribution we split the sample by deciles of the wage distribution.
                   For some of these moments one cannot run regressions with controls, but we can stratify the sample
by characteristics. Because our earlier analysis suggested large differences in the hours distribution by
education, we stratify by this variable and so plot all four cross-sectional profiles by education in Figure 7.
Panel (a) is simply a version of our earlier fact, but for consistency without any controls. It displays the same
pattern as in Figure 3 and Figure 4b. The remaining panels show the three additional cross-sectional profiles.
Both the mean and the standard deviation of hours are relatively constant across the wage distribution for
all education groups, with the lone exception of the very lowest wage decile. The standard deviation of log
wages exhibits a modest increasing pattern for hours above 40 for all education groups. Below 40 hours the



                                                                                                                    12
patterns differ somewhat between the lower and higher education groups.
      While we will not explicitly use these moments in our estimation exercise, we will assess the model's fit
along these dimensions.


2.5     Measurement Issues

One of the striking patterns that we documented in the preceding subsections is that in the cross-section
wages tend to fall with usual hours worked beyond 50 hours, reflecting the fact that earnings were relatively
flat beyond 50 hours. One concern is that this decline in wages may be an artifact of measurement issues.
In this subsection we summarize the results from several robustness checks and conclude that the decline in
wages above 50 hours is not solely the result of measurement issues. More details can be found in Appendix
B.
      The first possibility we consider is that the comparatively flat earnings coefficients above 50 hours shown
in Figure 3b are driven by top-coding. Top coding is of very minor importance for those with usual weekly
hours below 45 hours, but does increase in importance with the level of usual weekly hours, increasing
from just under 6 percent for those in the 50 - 54 hours bin to about 10 percent for those in the 60 - 64
and 65 - 69 hours bins. Nonetheless, we argue in Appendix B that top-coding does not appear to be of
first order importance. For those with graduate degrees the incidence of top-coding is more substantial
and it appears that top-coding can potentially shift the estimated wage-hours profile somewhat, and hence
modestly dampen the rate at which wages decrease in the long hours region.
      A second possibility is that individuals in the long hours region are salaried workers who face temporary
variation in hours but have a fixed salary. In this sense, salary reflects expected hours rather than actual hours.
If long hours individuals are disproportionately those with temporarily high hours, this would tend to flatten
the earnings profile.8 We assess this explanation using the small panel component of the CPS ORG to create
a sample in which we have two observations per individual. If we average across the two observations we
should dampen the effect of temporary variation in usual hours in the face of fixed compensation. However,
when we run this alternative specification we find the same pattern quantitatively. We have also pursued
this using the NLSY79, which allows us to average over more years. Our main finding remains when we
average over a five year period.
      The third and related possibility that we consider is measurement error in hours. If people with high
hours tend to be people who have over-reported their hours then this will show up as a negative effect of
hours on wages. Our structural analysis later in the paper will incorporate measurement error in hours, so
     8 Denning   et al (2019) suggest that this explanation accounts for the low elasticity of wages to hours when using actual hours.


                                                                   13
our inference will take this into account. But here we note that if classical measurement error was driving the
results then we would expect the averaging exercise just described above to produce very different patterns,
which it does not.
    The previous exercise does not rule out some measurement error stories that rely on non-classical mea-
surement error. For example, perhaps many long hours individuals tend to over-report hours. To assess
this we use the linked observations between the CPS ORG and the American Time Use Survey (ATUS)
from IPUMS, see Hofferth et al (2018), which feature information on usual weekly hours with a single
observation on hours actually worked for a particular day. By pooling across individuals we can compute
a synthetic measure of average weekly hours from the ATUS for individuals whose reported usual hours in
the CPS ORG within a particular hours bin.
    We find that the two values track each other very closely up to usual hours of 70. While our measure of
synthetic weekly hours computed from the ATUS is systematically lower than the reported measure in the
CPS ORG and the gap grows as hours increase above 40, the difference remains relatively small, reaching
around 5 hours per week in the 65 - 69 hours bin. While not insignificant, this discrepancy is much less
than what would be required if overstated hours were to explain the relatively constancy of earnings from
50 hours onward. Beyond 70 hours, the differences become larger, reaching about ten hours. Appendix C
reports these details as well as an analysis by age and education level. Taking reported hours from the ATUS
time diaries at face value, our analysis of linked CPS ORG-ATUS data leads us to conclude that systematic
over-reporting of usual weekly hours is not the dominant explanation for the relatively flat earnings beyond
50 hours.
    Lastly, we have used the long panel feature of the NLSY to further cast doubt on the possibility that
reported hours above 50 largely represent measurement error. As noted earlier, using the cross-section
component of the NLSY we get essentially the same results that we found in the CPS ORG. We then use the
panel component of the NLSY and find that individuals with high reported hours tend to have higher future
wage growth, consistent with the evidence presented in Imai and Keane (2004) and Michelacci and Pijoan-
Mas (2012).9 If long hours were simply the result of individuals over-reporting their hours in a persistent
fashion then we would not expect to see that high hours are predictive of future wage growth.
    In summary, while we think that measurement error plays some role in shaping the observed profile of
mean wages versus usual weekly hours, and will include it in our later analysis, we do not think that the rel-
atively flat earnings in the long hours region and the resulting decline in wage rates is purely a measurement
  9 See aslo Gicheva (2013) and Barlevy and Neal (2019) for evidence on dynamic effects in the context of professional labor

markets.




                                                            14
artifact.


3      A Structural Model of Hours and Wages in the Cross-Section

In this section we develop a static model of labor supply featuring workers that are heterogeneous in pro-
ductivity and tastes for work and show that it can account for the cross-sectional patterns that we have
documented. The key novel feature of the model is that earnings are a non-linear function of hours and the
nature of this non-linearity varies over the hours distribution. Because our model is static, we estimate it
using data on workers aged 50-54, for whom dynamic considerations such as human capital accumulation
are likely to be less important. We view this as an important first step to developing a richer analysis that
also includes dynamic effects and includes data for younger workers.


3.1     A Linear Earnings Benchmark

We begin by analyzing a benchmark model in which earnings are linear in hours. This static model closely
resembles the labor supply problem in the model of Heathcote et al (2014). We show that while it can
account for the covariance between log hours and log wages in the cross-section, it is not able to account for
the key features documented in Sections 2.2-2.3. This will motivate the extension to non-linear earnings.
      There is a unit mass of individuals with preferences over consumption and hours of work given by:


                                            1     1- 1    i       1+ 1
                                                 ci  -           hi 
                                       1 - (1/ )       1 + (1/ )

Individuals are heterogeneous in terms of preferences for work, captured by the parameter i , and produc-
tivity, which is denoted by zi . The two preference parameters  and  are the same for all individuals.
      We assume that  and z are jointly log normally distributed. This joint distribution is characterized by
five values: the mean and standard deviation of log z, the mean and standard deviation of log  , and the
correlation between log z and log  , which we denote by µz , z , µ ,  , and z respectively.
      All individuals face a wage per efficiency unit equal to w, so that normalizing the price of consumption
to unity the budget equation for individual i is given by:


                                                  ci = wzi hi .

At this point we abstract from taxes, though we include them later on in a sensitivity exercise. As a practical
matter the value of w can be subsumed into the mean of zi and so in what follows we will normalize it to


                                                      15
                                   Table 1: Calibration of Linear Earnings Model

                                         Data Moment                Model Parameter
                                     mean(log h) = 3.740             µ = -11.228
                                     mean(log w) = 2.804                µz = 0
                                      std (log h) = 0.122              = 0.369
                                      std (log w) = 0.460             z = 0.468
                                   corr(log w, log h) = 0.067        z = -0.064


unity. Importantly, the budget equation that a given individual faces is linear in hours.
    Each individual maximizes their utility subject to this budget equation. The optimal choice of hours for
an individual with idiosyncratic values i and zi is given by:


                                                  1             -1
                                   log hi =                        log zi + log i
                                              (1/ + 1/ )        

    Given values for  and  , and values for the mean of log hours, the mean of log wages and the covariance
matrix between log hours and log wages, there is a unique set of the five distributional parameters that can
match these five values. For now we abstract from measurement error, as it does not impact the main
message of this exercise, but we will introduce it in the next subsection when we extend this model. Table
1 displays the values of these five moments from the data are given in the first column of Table 1, and the
second column shows the implied values for the model parameters for the case in which  = 1 and  = .50.10
    While this linear earnings model can account for some basic properties of the cross-sectional distribution
of hours and wages, it is unable to account for the key features of the hours distribution and the wage-hours
profile documented in Sections 2.2-2.3. Figure 8 shows the model predictions versus their counterparts in
the data for our sample. Two key issues stand out. First, the model fails to generate the heavy concentration
of individuals in the 40 hours bin, has too many individuals working part-time, and not enough individuals
working long hours. Second, wages are monotonic across the hours distribution, exhibiting a mild upward
slope.
    Adding classical measurement error in hours and assuming that hourly wages are computed as the ratio
of earnings to hours would induce a negative slope to the wage-hours profile, but importantly would still not
generate the non-monotonicity found in the data. If measurement error were present, the negative correlation
between hours and wages that it induces would be undone in the calibration procedure by the choice of z
  10 As noted previously, the values of the five moments differ based on gender, age and education. The values reported here
correspond to the subsample of males aged 50-54 with a high school education with usual hours worked between 30 and 70. We
choose this subsample here because it is the subsample we will use for our main exercise later on. Reasons for choosing this
subsample are explained later.




                                                            16
                                          Figure 8: Fit of Linear Earnings Model

                     (a) Wage-Hours Profile                                   (b) Share of Workers by 5-Hour Bins
    0.4                                                                0.7
                                                          Data                                                        Data
                                                          Model                                                       Model
                                                                       0.6
    0.2
                                                                       0.5
    0.0                                                                0.4

    0.2                                                                0.3
                                                                       0.2
    0.4
                                                                       0.1
    0.6                                                                0.0
           30   35      40       45      50     55   60     65               30        40              50        60
                             Usual Weekly Hours                                             Usual Weekly Hours


so as to still yield the target level for this correlation. Similarly, deviating from  = 1 (i.e., not imposing
that income and substitution effects are offsetting) would affect this correlation holding all else constant, but
this effect would again be undone by the calibration of z .
    It is important to note the significant role that parametric assumptions on the distribution of individual
heterogeneity play in these findings. Absent such restrictions, the linear earnings model with two dimensions
of heterogeneity at the individual level can perfectly account for any cross-sectional pattern of hours and
wages. To see why, note that we could use the wage data to pin down the individual values of the zi and then
use the hours data to pin down the individual values of the i . This second step can be done for any values
of  and  .
    Importantly, this non-parametric analysis places no restrictions on the joint distribution of the zi and the
i . This motivates us to examine what the implied joint distribution of z and  would look like if we used
the data on hours and earnings to infer the distribution non-parametrically. Here we briefly summarize two
results.
    First, with  = 1, matching the concentration of workers in the 40 hours bin requires a spike in the
distribution of  . If  is not equal to unity, there must be a spike in the conditional density for  for each
value of z, and the position of this spike varies systematically with the value of z. To us this seems a very
unappealing assumption. Second, matching the non-monotonicity in the relation between wages and hours
requires that the correlation between  and z changes sign across the hours distribution. We think that this
is also an unappealing assumption.
    These implications suggest that it is of interest to explore specifications in which we can account for
the cross-sectional patterns when imposing more standard distributional assumptions. With this in mind, we


                                                                  17
will continue to assume that the zi and i are jointly log normally distributed going forward.


3.2     Nonlinear Earnings

Normalizing the wage per efficiency unit of labor to unity as above, we generalize the previous model along
one dimension by assuming that individuals face a nonlinear schedule for earnings as a function of hours,
so that the budget equation for individual i is now given by:


                                                             (hi )
                                             ci = zi A(hi )hi        = zi E (hi )

We assume that the function E (h) is continuous in h but do not require that  (h) is continuous. We include
the A(h) term as a way to maintain continuity of the earnings function at a point of discontinuity in the
 (h) function. That is, the function A(h) is constant in any interval in which  (h) is continuous, and as a
normalization we impose A(0) = 1. The appeal of this functional form is that the function  (h) provides a
clear and flexible mapping from hours into the marginal effect of hours on earnings. In what follows we will
refer to E (h) as the earnings function. We also define the wage function, W (h), defined by:


                                                      E (h)
                                            W (h) =         = A(h)h (h)-1
                                                        h

which gives the average earnings per hour for an individual with zi = 1 who works h hours. Our specification
generalizes the one first used by French (2005) in which  (h) was constant.
      It is intuitive that this extension might help to account for the properties of the cross-sectional distribution
of hours and wages that the linear earnings model could not explain. First, non-linearities in the earnings
function will necessarily impact the shape of the wage profile across the hours distribution. Second, a kink
in the earnings function associated with a downward jump in  (h) will tend to generate bunching in the
hours worked distribution. In what follows our goal is to assess the extent to which this extension helps us
to account for the patterns in the data, and if so, what it implies for the shape of the  (h) function.


3.3     Measurement Error

As noted in Section 2.5, measurement error in hours is potentially important because it induces a negative
correlation between measured hours and measured wages when wages are derived as the ratio of earnings to
hours. Although we previously argued that the non-monotonic wage-hours profile is not purely a reflection
of measurement error, we do want to allow for the possibility that measurement error plays some role.
      In our benchmark exercise we allow for measurement error in log hours that is classical subject to one

                                                           18
qualification. The qualification is that if an individual has true hours equal to 40 we assume that they do not
report with measurement error. The rationale for this is intuitive­it is virtually impossible to generate a large
spike at 40 hours if we assume that everyone reports hours with classical measurement error. In fact, there
is good reason to believe that measurement error more likely serves to increase the spike at 40 rather than
diminish it, since another feature of the reported usual hours distribution is that there is heaping at all values
ending in either a zero or a five. A natural interpretation is that individuals tend to round to a multiple of
five when reporting usual weekly hours. We do not attempt to incorporate this type of measurement error,
but this partly motivates our decision to focus on hours bins when we connect our model to the data.
      For those who do not work exactly 40 hours we assume that log hours are reported with normally
distributed measurement error that is iid across individuals with mean zero and standard deviation m . In
contrast to measurement error in hours, classical measurement error in log earnings has relatively little
impact on our findings. Within an hours bin, this type of measurement error has no impact on the average
log earnings in the bin and little impact on average log wages. Classical measurement error in earnings does
impact the overall correlation between wages and hours, but for reasonable values of measurement error this
effect is small. For this reason we abstract from measurement error in earnings in what follows.11


3.4     Moment Matching Exercise

We now describe our main quantitative exercise. The goal is to choose values for our model parameters
so that the model matches a large set of key empirical moments for hours worked and wages. The result-
ing parameterized model will generate a relationship between hours and wages that reflects a combination
of heterogeneity across workers, measurement error, and the causal effect of hours on wages. From this
exercise we can infer both the extent to which the observed cross-sectional moments reflect selection of
heterogeneous individuals and the extent to which hours of work influence wages.
      We emphasize that our approach is focused on understanding the patterns in the data from a pure labor
supply perspective. That is, we assume that each individual is free to choose their hours of work, taking as
given the trade-off in terms of hours and wages reflected by the wage function W (h). We thus abstract from
the possibility that an individual who works 40 hours did not have the option to work a different number of
hours. Instead, we assume that the wages being offered for other levels of hours were such that the individual
preferred to work 40 hours. To the extent that firms do not desire to hire workers for a particular level of
hours, this will manifest itself by having low wages associated with that level of hours. That is, our earnings
   11 Heathcote et al (2014) estimated no measurement error in earnings, which they argued was consistent with other results in the

literature.



                                                               19
function embeds factors that operate on the firm side and affect the demand for different workweeks. We
emphasize that our earnings function should be interpreted as the opportunities that the worker faces in the
market more broadly and not necessarily the options available at a given firm. We also abstract from any
search frictions a worker might face in finding a job with a particular bundle of hours and wages.12
    The choice of a functional form for  (h) in our benchmark specification reflects a minimal departure
from the specification previously used by French (2005) and others. In particular, rather than assuming
that  (h) is constant, we instead assume that  (h) is a step function, assuming one value s for h below
40, and a different value l for h greater than or equal to 40. The choice of 40 hours for the position of
the step is empirically motivated, since workers will tend to concentrate their hours at a kink in the earnings
function. This specification has the appealing feature of allowing different hours-wage trade-offs for workers
desiring part-time work schedules and workers desiring longer work schedules. While our specification of
 (h) imposes quite a bit of structure we will see that it is sufficiently flexible to account quite well for the
features of the data that we target.13 As discussed later, we found that several generalizations did not have a
significant impact on the results.
    Our specification for  (h) implies that all individuals will work positive hours, so there is no selection
of individuals into employment. Introducing fixed costs as in Cogan (1981) or altering the shape of the
earnings function at low hours as in Prescott et al (2009) would allow us to generate an active extensive
margin. Given our application to male workers we do not believe this is a first order issue and so do not
pursue it in this paper.
    In all cases we fix the values of  and  . Our exercise can be implemented for any values of these
parameters, but in what follows our benchmark results consider the case in which  tends to one, implying
offsetting income and substitution effects, and  = 0.50. We discuss later how alternative choices for 
would affect our findings. The value of  is not important for our exercise because changes in  will be
undone by changes in the standard deviation of the preference shocks.
    Our choices up to this point leave seven parameters whose values are not yet assigned: the four parame-
ters for the joint distribution of z and  (µ ,  , z , and  z , recalling that we normalized µz to equal 0), the
two  j values that define the earnings function and m , the standard deviation of classical measurement error
in log hours. Our moment matching exercise is a natural extension of the moment matching exercise used
to calibrate the parameters of the simple model. In that case we matched the mean of the hours distribution,
   12 Altonji and Paxson (1988) emphasized workers seeking to change their usual weekly hours as a source of turnover at the firm

level.
   13 The wage profile actually suggests that one might want to include a separate region for hours below 30. It would be relatively

simple to do this. But given that our current application is based on data for males and there are so few males in that region, we
have chosen to not focus on that region and reduce the set of parameters.


                                                                20
the standard deviation of log hours, the standard deviation of log wages and the correlation between log
hours and log wages. We showed that although the model could perfectly replicate these moments, it could
not account for salient features of the hours distribution and the empirical wage-hours profile. We now in-
clude these additional moments in our moment matching exercise. Specifically, we include the distribution
of workers across ten hour bins between 30 and 70, and the empirical wage profile across five hour bins
between 30 and 70.14 , 15 Because we are adding moments of the hours distribution we do not include the
mean and standard deviation of log hours as explicit moments. We choose parameter values that minimize
the sum of squared deviations from the target moments.
    Before proceeding to the results we provide some heuristic discussion to indicate how both the hours
distribution and the wage profile play a role in shaping the identification of the model parameters. In our
benchmark specification with  = 1, the choice of hours is independent of z and as a result the hours
distribution depends only on the four parameters µ ,  , s and l . Our estimation procedure has four
targets relating to the hours distribution (the share of workers in each of the four ten hours bins between
30 and 69) and so one could think of these four parameters as being determined by the hours distribution.
Importantly, this procedure would estimate the values of s and l without using any data on wages. With
s and l fixed, the issue of matching the wage-hours profile effectively becomes one of generating an
appropriate pattern of selection, since the difference between the wage function E (h)/h and the wage-hours
profile reflects how worker productivity varies across hours bins.
    However, if µ ,  , s and l are targeted using only data on the hours distribution, there are only
two remaining parameters, z and z , that can be varied to affect the selection of workers across hours
bins. These two parameters clearly have a direct effect on selection, but selection is also influenced by the
other four parameters. Intuitively, if z and  are correlated and we know the distribution of  then this has
implications for the distribution of z, thus explaining why  will influence selection. But equally important,
the values of s and l influence the amount of selection needed to fit the wage-hours profile, so changing
these values can affect the ability of the model to generate the amount of selection that is needed.
    It thus turns out that there is a tradeoff between matching the hours distribution and the wage-hours
profile; i.e., the values of µ ,  , s and l are also influenced by the wage-hours profile. Our estimated
parameters are chosen to balance the tradeoff between matching the hours distribution and the wage-hours
  14 We use the share of workers in ten hour bins instead of five hours bins for reasons related to our earlier discussion of measure-

ment error. Specifically, the data suggests that there is more heaping at multiples of ten rather than at the intermediate values. With
5 hour bins and only classical measurement error our model will not be able to account for this feature.
  15 For our current sample of males aged 50 - 54 only 3 percent of the observations lie outside of the 30 - 70 hours range, which is

why we do not seek to include wages for those workers in the moment matching exercise. As noted earlier, if we wanted to match
wages for those with hours below 30 we would need to include a third region for the step function  (h).



                                                                 21
profile using our loss function.


4      Results

The procedure that we describe above could be applied to data for any subsample. In this section we report
the results from implementing it on a sample of males aged 50 - 54 with a high school education (including
some college). A few issues motivate our choice of this particular subsample. One reason for focusing on
a sample of males rather than females at this point is that we have abstracted away from the participation
margin, and this margin is arguably less important for a male sample. Our choice of age group balances the
desire to have an age group for which extensive margin considerations due to early retirement are not too
important at the same time that the potential dynamic returns to working additional hours are less relevant. It
is common in the human capital literature to assume that individuals in the 50 - 54 age group face very low
returns to additional human capital accumulation, see for example, Heckman et al (1998). We stratify by
education since it is plausible that earnings functions may vary with education. We have also implemented
our exercise on the sample of males aged 50 - 54 with at least a college education and found very similar
results, both in terms of implied values for the  j and the fit of the model, so in the interests of space we
focus on the results for the high school sample.
      We note that the distribution of worker level characteristics  and z in this exercise should be interpreted
as potentially reflecting any history dependent evolutions. In particular, our specification is fully consistent
with the possibility that choices about hours of work when young had effects on both future productivity
and tastes for work when old. What we assume is that for individuals aged 50-54 these dynamic effects are
no longer relevant.
      Table 2 displays the parameter values generated from our moment matching exercise.

                                      Table 2: Estimated Parameter Value

                             µ                    z        ,z       s       l      m
                           -12.936     1.127    0.510    -0.375    1.40    0.11   0.04



4.1     First and Second Moments for Hours and Wages

As a first step in evaluating the model's ability to fit the moments of interest from the data, Table 3 shows
that the estimated model also does an excellent job in matching the moments that the simple linear earnings
model was able to perfectly replicate.


                                                        22
                                             Table 3: Fit of Estimated Model

                                                                    Data       Model
                                             mean (log h)           3.744      3.744
                                             mean (log w)           2.804      2.804
                                              std (log h)           0.122      0.126
                                              std (log w)           0.460      0.460
                                           corr (log h, log w)      0.067      0.067


4.2     The Wage-Hours Profile

Next we examine how well our model accounts for the properties that the linear earnings model could not
account for. We begin with the wage-hours profile. The left panel of Figure 9 shows that the profile in the
estimated model does a good job of tracking the empirical profile, though its peak occurs a bit before the
peak in the data. The profile generated by the model reflects both the sorting of individuals across the hours
profile, the non-linearities of the wage function and measurement error. One of our goals is to ascertain
the quantitative significance of each component. To pursue this, the right panel of Figure 9 plots the model
generated wage-hours profile, the model generated wage-hours profile assuming no measurement error, the
wage function (i.e., E (h)/h) and the mean value of productivity z across the hours bins. The figure shows
that measurement error does not play a large role in shaping the model generated wage-hours profile.16 The
hump-shaped pattern for the wage function reflects the estimated values of the two  j parameters. Recalling
that a value of  j > 1 implies that hourly wages are increasing in the number of hours worked, s = 1.40
implies a substantial wage gain associated with moving from part-time to full time work. The value of
l = 0.10 is not only much lower than s but is also much less than unity, implying that although earnings
continue to increase, wages per hour worked actually decrease as hours increase beyond 40 hours.
      The gaps between the wage function and the wage-hours profile reflect the role of selection. Note that
these gaps are of different sign on either side of the 40 hour bin. This reflects that our estimated value of
z is -0.375, indicating that individuals with low disutility for working tend to be more productive. To
see why, note that our benchmark specification with  = 1 implies that hours of work are independent of z,
depending solely on  . It follows that if z and  were uncorrelated and there were no measurement error,
the wage-hours profile generated by the model would be identical to the wage function. However, a negative
  16 There  is no definitive value for the extent of measurement error in hours. Assuming that measurement error is classical and
iid over time then transitory variation in hours provides some information about plausible values. Our estimate of m = 0.04 is
somewhat small relative to the estimates in Heathcote et al (2014) regarding the variance of the transitory component of hours. But
not all transitory variation in hours need be measurement error. Duncan and Hill (1985) and Bound et al (1994) are two examples
of small scale studies documenting discrepancy between adminsitrative data and survey responses. They find even larger estimates
of measurement error in hours. But administrative data may provide a poor measure of usual hours for salaried workers. See also
the survey article by Bound et al (2001).


                                                               23
                            Figure 9: The Wage-Hours Profile in our Benchmark Estimation

                 (a) Fit of Wage-Hours Profile to Data                          (b) Determinants of the Wage-Hours Profile
      0.4                                                                 0.4
                                                             Data
                                                             Model
      0.2                                                                 0.2

      0.0                                                                 0.0

      0.2                                                                 0.2
                                                                                                   Mean Wages
      0.4                                                                 0.4                      Mean Wages, no m.e.
                                                                                                   Wage Function
                                                                                                   Mean Productivity
      0.6                                                                 0.6
            30       35    40       45      50     55   60     65               30     35    40       45      50     55   60   65
                                Usual Weekly Hours                                                Usual Weekly Hours


value for z implies that high hours individuals tend to have higher productivity, and low hours individuals
tend to have lower productivity, thereby explaining why the gaps are of different signs on either side of the
40 hours bin.
      The size of the selection effects are large. For example, the wage penalty associated with working 30
rather than 40 hours is roughly eleven percent, whereas the cross-sectional wage-hours profile indicates that
average wages for individuals in the 30 hours bin are more than 40 percent lower than those in the 40 hours
bin. We note that our estimated penalty for part-time work is similar to the estimates in Aaronson and French
(2004) that leveraged features of Social Security to isolate plausibly exogenous movements from full-time
work to part-time work.
      We summarize by noting four implications from our estimated model. First, there is a large kink in
the earnings function at h = 40. Second, there is a significant part-time wage penalty. Third, the ability
individuals to generate higher current earnings by working hours beyond 40 is very limited compared to
the textbook model in which earnings increase linearly with hours. It follows that our analysis implies that
individuals who work long hours are doing it not because the reward for long hours is high, but rather because
they experience relative low disutility from working.17 And fourth, selection effects are quantitatively large.


4.3     The Hours Distribution

Figure 10 shows the distribution by five and ten hour bins from both the model and the data, for both true
hours and hours that include measurement error. The model does a good job of accounting for the hours
  17 We emphasize that our analysis here focuses only on the static effect of working longer hours. For our current sample of 50-54
old high school graduates dynamic considerations are likely unimportant, but for other groups the dynamic effects estimated by
Imai and Keane (2004) and Michelacci and Pijoan-Mas (2012) would serve to generate opposing effects. An important goal for
future work is to extend the analysis to include younger workers and to consider both effects simultaneously.


                                                                     24
                                                       Figure 10: Fit of Hours Distribution

                                 (a) 10-Hour Bins                                                            (b) 5-Hour Bins
                     0.8                                    Data                                  0.7                                  Data
                     0.7                                    Model, Reported                                                            Model, Reported
                                                            Model, True                           0.6                                  Model, True
                     0.6
                                                                                                  0.5
  Share of Workers




                                                                               Share of Workers
                     0.5
                                                                                                  0.4
                     0.4
                                                                                                  0.3
                     0.3
                     0.2                                                                          0.2

                     0.1                                                                          0.1
                     0.0                                                                          0.0
                            30          40            50          60                                    30   40              50           60
                                       Usual Weekly Hours                                                         Usual Weekly Hours


distribution. In particular, although the estimation procedure used information on hours across ten-hour bins
the model still does a good job of accounting for the distribution by five-hour bins. The figure shows that the
hours distribution generated by the estimated model mostly reflects the distribution of true hours, as opposed
to measurement error.
           Importantly, the distributions of individual characteristics are normally distributed and do not display
the same degree of concentration found in the distribution of hours worked. Two properties of the earnings
function E (h) are critical in allowing the model to generate this concentration. First, the fact that s exceeds
one creates an incentive for individuals to not work less than 40 hours. Second, the fact that l < s creates
an incentive for individuals to choose h = 40 rather than to increase h above 40. The individuals who choose
to work long hours are those who have a low disutility for work; they are willing to work additional hours
for only a minimal increase in consumption.


4.4                   Other Profiles

In Section 2 we presented evidence on three other profiles: the standard deviation of wages across the hours
distribution, and the mean and standard deviation of hours across the wage distribution. We did not use these
moments in our estimation exercise but here we report on how well the estimated model fits the empirical
moments. Results are in Figure 11. The model profile for the standard deviation of hours across the wage
distribution is relatively flat in both the data and the model, but the level is uniformly higher in the model
than in the data, suggesting that we have a bit too much hours variation within each wage cell. But overall
we feel that the model does a good job of replicating these profiles despite the fact that they were not targeted
as part of the estimation.



                                                                              25
                                            Figure 11: Fit of Other Wage and Hour Profiles

                            (a) Mean log Wages                                                                 (b) S.D. log Wages
        0.4
                                                                   Data                    0.7                                                        Data
                                                                   Model                                                                              Model
        0.2                                                                                0.6
                                                                                           0.5




                                                                            SD log Wages
        0.0
                                                                                           0.4

        0.2                                                                                0.3
                                                                                           0.2
        0.4                                                                                0.1
                                                                                           0.0
        0.6                                                                                      30       35    40       45      50     55       60     65
                  30   35    40       45      50     55       60     65
                                  Usual Weekly Hours                                                                 Usual Weekly Hours
                             (c) Mean Hours                                                                      (d) S.D. Hours

             50                                                    Data                    14                                                         Data
             48                                                    Model                                                                              Model
                                                                                           12
             46
                                                                                           10
             44
                                                                            SD log Hours
Mean Hours




             42                                                                             8

             40                                                                             6
             38                                                                             4
             36                                                                             2
             34                                                                             0
                       2          4          6            8          10                               2              4          6            8          10
                                      Wage Decile                                                                        Wage Decile



4.5               Interpreting the Kink in the Earnings Function

Having estimated a sharply kinked earnings function we think it is important to have some discussion on
how we interpret this function. We think that our earnings function reflects two distinct but related forces.
The first force reflects the extent to which average labor services (or efficiency units) per hour are affected
by the length of the workweek. For example, if there are some set-up costs involved, then labor services
may be convex in hours at low levels of hours, and if individuals become fatigued at long hours then there
may be a concave region at higher levels of hours. Barzel (1973) and Rosen (1978) both emphasized this
source of nonlinearities. See Pencavel (2015) for a discussion of this issue and evidence in one particular
setting.
             The second force reflects coordination. The issue of coordination exists both within and across produc-
tion units. The assembly line is the classic example of a production process that requires workers within
a given business to coordinate their work schedules. But more generally, any business that has frequent


                                                                           26
interactions with other businesses has a desire to coordinate work hours with other businesses. The need to
coordinate will necessarily lead to firms placing different value on workweeks of different lengths. Yurdagul
(2017) posits an aggregate production function in which inputs of different workers are complements, im-
plying that workweeks for a particular worker are less valued as they move further from mean hours across
other workers.
      We view our estimated earnings function as reflecting both of these forces and we do not attempt to
separately identify them. To the extent that the kink at 40 hours reflects coordination, we do not think there
is necessarily anything fundamental about the position of the kink that we estimate. In a different setting
the kink may well happen at a different level. Alternatively, if the kink reflects set-up costs and fatigue, then
a kink in the area around 40 hours might be viewed as something fundamental to the technology of effort
provision, though of course this technology might vary across different tasks or occupations. Finally, the
two channels could be complementary in the sense that a moderate increase in fatigue beginning around 40
hours might induce coordination around that point, exacerbating the kink in the earnings technology.


4.6     Sensitivity

In this subsection we consider four sensitivity exercises: alternative values of  , progressive taxation, alter-
native specifications for E (h), and fat tailed distributions.


4.6.1    Alternative Values of 

Our benchmark specification had  = 1, implying offsetting income and substitution effects. One might
conjecture that this would play a significant role, since deviating from this case would necessarily influence
the cross-sectional correlation between hours and wages. However, considering empirically plausible alter-
native values for  has virtually no impact on our estimated earnings function. The reason is the same as
mentioned in our estimation of the linear earnings model: as we vary  the estimated value of z changes
so as to basically offset the cross-sectional correlation between hours and wages that is induced by  . The
net effect is that the estimated values of s and l barely change.
      Loosely speaking, when income effects dominate substitution effects (which is the more interesting case
empirically), low productivity individuals tend to work longer hours, leading to negative selection of high
hours individuals on productivity. But this selection effect can be undone by changes in z , and this is what
happens in our estimation.




                                                        27
4.6.2     Progressive Taxation

Our benchmark model abstracts from taxes when estimating the non-linearities in the earnings function.
Because progressive taxes generate non-linearities between hours and after-tax income it is of interest to
examine how including them affects our estimates. We adopt the specification from Heathcote et al (2014)
in which the average tax rate facing an individual is given by:


                                                          ~) = 1 - 
                                                         (y           ~-1
                                                                   ~0 y

where y
      ~ is an individual's income relative to mean income, 1 determines the extent of progressivity and
~0 is a constant that influences the overall average tax rate. Simple algebra shows that this generates the

following budget equation:
                                                           c = 0 y1-1

where 0 is a constant depending on mean income and ~0 .18 The value of 0 is irrelevant for our exercise
as its impact will be undone by the calibration of mean tastes for work. The literature suggests a range of
empirically plausible estimates for 1 ; Guner et al (2014) estimate 1 = 0.060 using IRS tax returns while
Heathcote et al (2014) estimate 1 = 0.185 using NBER TAXsim for their sample of CPS households.
    We have repeated our estimation exercise with this extension for each of the two values of 1 reported
above. In both cases the impact on the results is minimal.
    To see why progressive taxation has only a minor impact on our estimates, first note that progressive
taxes have no direct effect on targeted wage moments, which are pre-tax. But they do potentially have a
direct effect on the choice of hours. To assess this, we focus on the  = 1 case which implies the following
first order condition for h for any individual away from the kink:

                                                      log  j + log(1 - 1 ) - log( )
                                            log h =
                                                                 1 + (1/ )

where  j corresponds to the relevant region. It follows that by adjusting the mean of log  one can com-
pletely offset the effect of progressive taxes in this expression. However, even with this adjustment, progres-
sive taxes will affect the choice of individuals to locate at the kink since increasing h above 40 becomes less
attractive at the margin. But as a practical matter this effect is relatively small so that there is little change
in estimated parameters beyond the change in the mean of log  .
  18 We   note that Benabou (2002) simply started with this expression to capture a progressive tax system.




                                                                 28
4.6.3     Alternative Specification for E (h)

Our benchmark model imposed that E (h) was a step function with two values. It is of interest to gauge the
extent to which other specifications might affect our results.
    We note that imposing a kink at 40 is essentially dictated by the data; absent a kink at this position there
is no way to both get a significant mass of workers working long hours and the concentration around 40
hours. For this reason we do not consider departures from this feature. We originally tried a specification
that allows for steps at both 40 and 50 hours, motivated by the shape of the wage-hours profile. But we
found that the two elasticities were very similar, leading us to assume a single elasticity in the over 40 hours
region.
    More generally, we also considered the following smooth alternative for the variation of  above 40:


                                            (h) = a + b for h  40

where we now estimate the two parameters a and b. Perhaps not too surprisingly given the previous result,
we find that this specification yields a very similar fit to the data and that the parameter b is estimated to be
very close to zero.


4.6.4     Fat Tailed Distributions

We previously commented on the role of parametric assumptions on heterogeneity. Assuming log-normality
we found that the linear earnings model could not generate a large concentration around 40 hours at the same
time that there was substantial mass above 50 hours. This raises the possibility that considering distributions
with a fatter tail might affect model estimates. To pursue this we follow Badel et al (2019) and consider a
Pareto log normal distribution over tastes for work so that holding all else fixed there would be more mass
in the right tail of the hours distribution. We find that a specification with this alternative distribution can
provide a slightly better fit to the data in terms of our sum of squared errors measure, but that the resulting
implications for the  j and the correlation between tastes for work and productivity are virtually unchanged.


5    Implications for Labor Supply Responses

Our estimated earnings function featured a kink at 40 hours, with both short and long hour penalties. In this
section we explore the consequences of our estimated earnings function in two different contexts. In the
first context we study labor supply in a benchmark heterogenous agent-incomplete markets model. To the


                                                       29
extent that there may also be significant dynamic effects of current hours on future wages that our analysis
abstracted from, this exercise should be understood as only illustrating the impact of one component. We
nonetheless think that this is a useful and important exercise precisely because this static component has not
previously been studied.
      The second context is the use of life cycle labor supply profiles to elicit information about individual
willingness to engage in intertemporal substitution of market work. Imai and Keane (2004) have previously
shown how dynamic effects of hours on earnings can matter for this inference, and our goal is show that
static effects may similarly matter.


5.1     Labor Supply in Incomplete Markets Models

In this section we generalize the analysis in Pijoan-Mas (2006). We consider an infinitely lived individual
with preferences given by:

                                                                       1+ 1
                                                 1     1- 1     
                                    t       1 - (1/ )
                                                      ct  -
                                                            1 + (1/ )
                                                                      ht 
                                  t =0

The individual faces idiosyncratic productivity shocks which we denote by zt . An individual with idiosyn-
cratic productivity z that works h units of time will supply zE (h) efficiency units of labor.
      To best illustrate the implication of our earnings function for the behavior of labor supply we focus on
a partial equilibrium analysis and take all prices as given: there is a constant wage per efficiency unit of
labor services denoted by w and a constant return on assets denoted by r. The individual faces the following
period budget equation:


                                         ct + at +1 = zt E (ht )w + (1 + r)at .

We assume that assets must be non-negative, at  0 and that log zt follows an AR(1) process:


                                              log zt +1 = z log zt + t

where t is normally distributed with mean µ and standard deviation  .
      We are interested in assessing the importance of our estimated earnings function for the role of labor
supply in this setting. To do this we compare three different specifications. The first specification assumes
that hours are exogenously fixed. In this case, the process for labor income is the same as the exogenous
shock process, and the individual uses savings to smooth consumption. The second specification is the



                                                          30
one studied by Pijoan-Mas (2006) and corresponds to the assumption that E (h) = h. In this setting, the
individual can reallocate hours of work from periods of low productivity to periods of high productivity
and so generate higher earnings per hour. In this case labor supply amplifies the volatility in labor earnings
relative to the exogenous shocks, but the individual again uses savings to transfer purchasing power across
time in order to help smooth consumption. The third specification replaces the assumption of E (h) = h
with the specification estimated in the previous section. Intuitively, the role of variable labor supply in this
context is likely to depend on where an individual lies in the hours distribution and so in what follows we
will consider three different settings for average hours.
    To proceed with the comparison we normalize w to unity and consider the following parameterization,
drawn from Pijoan-Mas (2006):  = 0.69,  = 0.50, z = 0.92, z = 0.20,  = .94, and r = .05. Interpreting
a period to be a year these parameters are all quite standard. We approximate the AR(1) process for log z
using a Tauchen procedure with seven grid points and solve for the ergodic distribution that characterizes
the behavior of this individual.19 We choose the value of  so as to target average hours in the ergodic
distribution. As noted above, we consider three different targets for average hours: 30, 40, and 50. The
rationale for these three values is that they correspond to different regions in the non-linear earnings speci-
fication: a region with convex earnings (30 hours), a region with concave earnings (50 hours) and a point at
which earnings have a kink (40 hours). Note that the values of  will differ across the linear and non-linear
specifications.20
    Our goal is to assess the role of the endogenous labor supply decision in the linear and non-linear con-
texts. In particular, in each case we compute the benefit of allowing for endogenous labor supply responses
starting from the specification in which we restrict the individual to have constant hours equal to the mean in
the ergodic distribution. When doing this calculation we solve for the resulting transition from the initial er-
godic distribution to the new ergodic distribution and compute two statistics: the variation in log hours in the
final ergodic distribution and the welfare gain measured in consumption equivalent variation. Importantly,
our welfare gain includes the transition path. Note that there is necessarily a welfare gain when allowing
for endogenous labor supply since the individual can always choose fixed hours and so replicate the original
allocation.
    Table 4 shows the results. With linear earnings the value of mean hours does not affect the results given
that our preferences feature constant elasticities, so we only report results for the h = 40 case.
  19 Equivalently, this is the stationary distribution for an economy consisting of a large number of individuals that each solve this

same maximization problem with the shocks iid across individuals.
  20 Given the kink in the earnings function at 40 hours in the non-linear specification there is an interval of  values that are

consistent with hours being equal to 40. We choose a value of  in the middle of this interval.



                                                                 31
                                   Table 4: Effects of Endogenizing Hours

                                                        mean h    std h   CEV
                                  linear earnings        40       0.17    1.4%
                                non-linear earnings      40       0.01    0.0%
                                non-linear earnings      30       0.20    3.4%
                                non-linear earnings      50       0.12    0.2%


    The first row confirms one of the messages in Pijoan-Mas (2006)­given the opportunity to vary labor
supply we see that hours vary substantially, and this is associated with a significant increase in welfare. In
contrast, the second row shows that these results effectively disappear completely if we consider the non-
linear earnings specification and an individual who on average is located at the kink of the earnings function.
That is, the variation in hours almost vanishes, and so not surprisingly, the welfare gains also vanish. Note
that while the calibration of  was based on mean hours in the ergodic distribution, the fact that the variation
in hours is so small implies that the individual is not just at the kink on average but is virtually always at
the kink. Two intuitive forces are at work here. First, given that the individual is at a kink, it takes large
movements in productivity to generate a change in optimal hours. And second, even in the presence of
a large positive productivity shock, the benefit of working more hours is dampened considerably by the
concavity of the earnings function.
    The final two rows show that the impact of endogenous hours is quite different if we consider an indi-
vidual away from the kink. Interestingly, these impacts differ depending on which direction we move away
from the kink. Consider first the case of an individual who on average works 30 hours. In this situation the
impact of allowing for variable hours is larger than in the linear case. The reason is that in this region, work-
ing more hours when productivity is high is even more powerful in terms of generating additional income
given that the individual is in a region where earnings are convex in hours. As a result we see not only that
hours are a little bit more volatile than in the linear earnings case, but that the welfare improvement is more
than twice as large.
    Consider next the case of an individual who on average works 50 hours. Although there is significant
variation in hours, the associated welfare improvement is minimal. The intuition for this result is that moving
hours to periods of high productivity is no longer very powerful in terms of generating higher income per
hour. Because the individual is not at a kink, movements in productivity will generate movement in hours,
but from a welfare perspective these movements are of relatively little consequence.
    The key message to take away from this exercise is that inserting our non-linear earnings technology into
an otherwise standard incomplete markets economy has first order implications for the role of labor supply,


                                                       32
but that these effects are very non-uniform across the hours distribution. While the majority of individuals in
reality are at the kink and so might well be approximated by an indivisible labor model, this approximation
does not apply to the still significant mass of individuals who are away from the kink.


5.2     Intertemporal Substitution and Life Cycle Labor Supply

A large literature has used life cycle variation in hours to estimate the individual elasticity of intertemporal
substitution (IES). (See for example, MaCurdy (1981), Browning et al (1985) and Altonji (1986).) The
standard assumption in these analyses is that earnings are linear in hours worked. The results in the previous
subsection highlight why the non-linearities that we estimate might have a large effect on these estimation
exercises. Individuals located at the kink in the earnings function require very large changes in wages in
order to generate changes in hours, and this will tend to dampen the estimated IES. But this dampening
reflects reduced opportunities for intertemporal substitution and not necessarily reduced willingness to do
so. In this subsection we provide a simple quantitative example to illustrate the key message and then
examine the extent to which the key message is supported by the data.


5.2.1    Illustrative Example

Differently from the previous subsection we now consider an individual labor supply problem in a deter-
ministic life cycle setting. In particular, we assume a period utility function of:


                                               1     1- 1            1+ 1
                                                    ct  -           ht 
                                          1 - (1/ )       1 + (1/ )

and assume that the individual discounts utility at rate  . We assume that the individual starts life at age 20,
retires at age 65 and dies at age 80. The individual faces an exogenous life cycle productivity profile that is
quadratic. We normalize productivity at age 20 to unity, and assume that peak productivity occurs at age 55
at a value that is twice its value at age 20. The individual is free to borrow or save at the constant interest
              1
rate of r =       - 1 subject only to a lifetime present value budget constraint.
      In what follows we assume that  = 0.50, and impose the non-linear earnings function estimated earlier.
We consider three different types of individuals, distinguished by their values of  . Similar to the previous
subsection, we consider one type with average lifetime hours when working equal to 30, a second with
average lifetime hours when working equal to 40, and the third with average lifetime hours of work when
working equal to 50. This is assumed to be the only source of heterogeneity, so that in particular, the
lifecycle productivity profile is the same for all types.


                                                          33
    We solve for the optimal life cycle labor supply profile for all three types, generating data for hours and
labor earnings in each period, and computing a profile for life cycle wages as the ratio of labor earnings to
hours. To illustrate the effect on estimates of the IES we run the following standard regression using the
model generated data:


                                                    log ht = a + b log wt

    If the model featured linear earnings, then the estimated value of b would be an estimate of the preference
parameter  . When we run this regression for the three different types of workers, we do obtain b = 0.5 for
the types with low (30) and high (50) hours.21 But for the type who works 40 hours on average the estimated
value of b is only 0.13. The significance of this illustrative example is that the type that works 40 hours on
average is the most common type in the overall population, so that estimating b on the overall sample is
likely to exert a large downward bias in estimates of  .
    The above results assumed that individuals faced a present value budget constraint with no restrictions
on borrowing. Similar to the incomplete markets model studied in the previous subsection, one could also
introduce borrowing constraints into this analysis. Domeij and Floden (2006) argue that this also creates a
downward bias in estimates of the IES. While we do not incorporate borrowing constraints into the illustra-
tive examples of this subsection we will allow for them in the empirical work in the next subsection.


5.2.2    Evidence

The key message from the previous subsection was that estimates of b in the above equation are expected to
vary with the level of average hours worked. In this subsection we implement a standard estimation exercise
using data from the PSID to examine whether this prediction is borne out in the data. In particular, we use
the data and codes from Bredemeier et al (2019) to evaluate how the estimates of  vary with the level of
average hours worked. A key contribution of Bredemeier et al (2019) is to develop an estimation procedure
that generalizes Altonji (1986) to allow for borrowing constraints. Consistent with the work of Domeij and
Floden (2006), they find that borrowing constraints do lead to a substantial downward bias in the estimated
IES. For completeness we present results for both the Altonji (1986) procedure as well as the Bredemeier
et al (2019) procedure. The key finding is that in both cases we find smaller estimates of  for the group of
workers who work around 40 hours.
  21 Erosa et al (2016) show that estimates of are not biased when earnings are globally of the form Ah for some  . Although our
earnings function does not feature a constant value of  over the entire hours range, our low and high hours workers do not move
between the under and over 40 hours regions, so that form a practical perspective they face an earnings schedule with a constant  .




                                                               34
                           Table 5: IES Estimates (standard errors in parentheses)

                                    Altonji (1986)                     Bredemeier et al (2019)
                            All     < 35 37 - 43        > 50       All    < 35 37 - 43 > 50
              IES          0.30     0.47      0.27      0.88      0.52     0.66     0.51       1.07
                          (0.11)   (0.67) (0.15)       (0.30)    (0.23) (1.35) (0.32) (0.64)

         Observations     12043     553       5417      1845     12043     553       5417      1845
          Individuals      1415      71       598       235      1415      71        598       235


    The data in Bredemeier et al is the PSID for the years 1972-1997. For our main sample we restrict
attention to males and require that they supply at least four first differences observations such that we have
at least five observations to construct average hours. Our sample is thus a bit smaller than the original sampe
in Bredemeier et al. We refer the reader to the Bredemeier et al (2019) paper for more details, and here focus
on the estimation results, as shown in Table 5.
    Comparing the two columns labelled "All" we see the result from Bredemeier et al (2019) that allowing
for borrowing constraints leads to substantially larger point estimates of the IES. The result of interest for
us is the comparison across the different hours bins. We sort workers into weekly hours bins based on
taking the average value of annual hours worked divided by 52. To the extent that most males work full
year this assumption is not unreasonable. We sort workers based on whether this average level of weekly
hours is below 35, between 37 and 43, or greater than 50. Whether we use the Altonji specification or
the Bredemeier et al specification we find a U-shaped pattern for the estimates of the IES across the hours
worked distribution, with the lowest value for those working in the 37 - 43 hours interval. Although the
point estimates follow the pattern predicted by our theory, it of course should be noted that several of the
point estimates are not significant at conventional levels. Related to this, it should be noted that the sample
size is quite small for the low hours worked group, and that for the other two groups results are significant
at least at the 10 percent level. In all cases the point estimates are higher when allowing for the effect of
borrowing constraints.


6    Conclusion

This paper focuses on understanding how features of the cross-sectional distribution of hours and wages
matter for our inference regarding the features of labor supply problems solved by individual workers. Two
observations play a key role in our analysis. The first is the well known fact that the distribution of usual
weekly hours features a large concentration of individuals who work around 40 hours. At the same time,


                                                      35
almost 30 percent of total hours supplied by males are accounted for by males that work 50 or more hours.
The second observation is that the profile of mean wages versus usual hours is non-monotonic­increasing
below 50 hours and decreasing above 50 hours.
   We argue that simple textbook models of labor supply cannot account for these facts jointly. This
motivates us to extend these models to feature a non-linear earnings function, which can intuitively generate
both the above patterns. Our estimated model does a good job of quantitatively capturing the two key
features of the cross-sectional data that we highlight. It also does well in terms of standard second moment
comparisons.
   The striking finding is that we uncover not only a sizeable part-time wage penalty but also a large penalty
for workers who choose to work long hours. That is, we estimate that the earnings function facing workers
features a prominent kink around 40 hours per week. In particular this implies that, although workers who
choose to work beyond 40 hours will generate additional earnings, the increase is muted by the fact that the
hourly wage will be lower. Our estimates also imply that selection plays an important role in shaping the
cross-sectional profile of wages across the hours distribution, implying that the menu of hours and wages
available to workers cannot be directly inferred from the cross-section data.
   Our estimated earnings function has important implications for labor supply. In contrast to the analysis
of Pijoan-Mas (2006) that assumed a linear earnings function, we find that for workers who average around
40 hours per week, labor supply responses in the face of temporary productivity shocks are virtually elim-
inated, as are the welfare gains from allowing for an endogenous responses in hours. Put differently, these
workers mostly rely on savings to insure against such income fluctuations. In a separate exercise we find
that estimates of the IES are likely to be biased downward when using samples in which a large share of
workers work around 40 hours per week. We present evidence for this prediction using data from the PSID.
This may have important implications for optimal tax policies since top earners tend to have hours that are
above 40. The basic intuition behind both these results is that the kinked earnings technology predicts that
workers who usually work around 40 hours will be less likely to adjust their labor supply, because doing so
in either direction implies lower average hourly wages. Alternatively, individuals who work either below or
above the kink are much more willing to adjust their labor supply.
   We close by emphasizing some important directions for extensions and future work. As noted several
times, our analysis has focused entirely on static effects. For this reason, we estimate our model on a sample
of older males for whom dynamic considerations such as human capital accumulation are less likely to be
important. An important priority for future work is to extend the analysis to a dynamic setting in which
we can assess both the static and dynamic aspects of earnings functions. It is also of interest to extend our


                                                     36
estimation to females, for whom the participation margin is more relevant, and to consider differences across
occupations.


References
Aaronson, D. and E. French. 2004. "The Effect of Part Time Work on Wages: Evidence from Social Security
Rules." Journal of Labor Economics 22, 329-352.
Altonji, J., 1986. "Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from Micro Data." Journal of
Political Economy 94, S176-S215.
Altonji, J., and C. Paxson. 1988. "Labor Supply Preferences, Hours Constraints, and Hours-wage Trade-
offs," Journal of Labor Economics, 6, 254­276.
Ameriks, J., J. Briggs, A. Caplin, M. Lee, M. D. Shapiro and C. Tonetti. 2020. "Older Americans Would
Work Longer If Jobs Were Flexible." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 12, 174-209.
Badel, A., M. Huggett, and W. Luo. 2019. "Taxing Top Earners: A Human Capital Perspective." Working
Paper.
Barlevy, G. and D. Neal. 2019. "Allocating Effort and Talent in Professional Labor Markets." Journal of
Labor Economics 37, 187-246.
Barzel, Y. 1973. "The Determination of Daily Hours and Wages." Quarterly Journal of Economics 87,
220-238.
Bredemeier, C., J. Gravert, and F. Juessen. 2019. "Estimating Labor Supply Elasticities with Joint Borrow-
ing Constraints of Couples." Journal of Labor Economics 37, 1215-1265.
Benabou, R., 2002. "Tax and Education Policy in a Heterogeneous Agent Economy: What Level of Redis-
tribution Maximizes Growth and Efficiency?" Econometrica 70, 481-517.
Borjas, G. 1980. "The Relationship Between Wages and Weekly Hours of Work: The Role of Division
Bias."Journal of Human Resources, 15, 409-423.
Bound, J., C. Brown, G. J. Duncan, and W. L. Rodgers. 1994. "Evidence on the Validity of Cross-Sectional
and Longitudinal Labor Market Data." Journal of Labor Economics 12, 345­368.
Bound, J., C. Brown, and N. Matheowetz. 2001. Handbook of Econometrics, Elsevier, vol. 5, chap.
Measurement Error in Survey Data, 3705­3843.
Browning, M., A. Deaton, and M. Irish. 1985. "A Profitable Approach to Labor Supply and Commodity
Demands Over the Life Cycle."Econometrica 53, 503-544.
Cha, Y. and K. Weeden. 2014. "Overwork and the Slow Convergence in the Gender Gap in Wages."
American Sociological Review 79, 457-484.
Chang, Y., and S. Kim. 2006. "From Individual to Aggregate Labor Supply: A Quantitative Analysis Based
on a Heterogeneous Agent Macroeconomy." International Economic Review, 47, 1-27.
Chang, Y., and S. Kim. 2007. "Heterogeneity and Aggregation: Implications for Labor-Market Fluctua-
tions." American Economic Review 97, 1939-1956.
Chang, Y., S. Kim, K. Kwon, and R. Rogerson. 2019a. "Individual and Aggregate Labor Supply in Het-
erogeneous Agent Economies with Intensive and Extensive Margins." International Economic Review, 60,
1-21.
Chang, Y., S. Kim, K. Kwon, and R. Rogerson. 2019b. "Cross-Sectional and Aggregate Labor Supply."
Manuscript.


                                                     37
Cogan, John. 1981. "Fixed Costs and Labor Supply." Econometrica 49, 945-963.
Denning, J., L. Lefgren, B. Jacob and C. vom Lehn. 2019. "The Return to Hours Worked Within and Across
Occupations: The Implications for the Gender Wage Gap." NBER Working Paper #25739.
Domeij, D. and C. M. Floden. 2006. "The Labor Supply Elasticity and Borrowing Constraints: Why
Estimates are Biased." Review of Economic Dynamics 9, 242-262.
Duncan, G. J. and D. H. Hill. 1985. "An Investigation of the Extent and Consequences of Measurement
Error in Labor-Economic Survey Data," Journal of Labor Economics, 3.
Erosa, A., L. Fuster and G. Kambourov. 2016. "Towards a Micro-Founded Theory of Aggregate Labor
Supply." Review of Economic Studies 83, 1001-1039.
Flood, S., M. King, R. Rodgers, S. Ruggles, and J. Warren. 2018 "Integrated Public Use Microdata Series,
Current Population Survey: Version 6.0 [dataset]. " Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS.
French, E. 2005. "The Effects of Health, Wealth, and Wages on Labor Supply and Retirement Behavior."
Review of Economic Studies 72, 395-427.
Fuentes, J., and E. Leamer. 2019. "Effort: The Unrecognized Contributor to US Income Inequality." NBER
Working Paper #26421.
Gicheva, D. 2013. "Working Long Hours and Early Career Outcomes in the High-End Labor Market."
Journal of Labor Economics 31, 785-824.
Gicheva, D. 2019. "Occupational Social Value and Returns to Long Hours." Working Paper 19-05, UNC
Greensboro.
Goldin, C. 2014. "A Grand Gender Convergence: Its Last Chapter." American Economic Review 104,
1091-1119.
Guner, N., R. Kaygusuz, and G. Ventura. 2014. "Income Taxation of US Households: Facts and Parametric
Estimates." Review of Economic Dynamics 17, 559-581.
Heathcote, J., K. Storesletten, and G. L. Violante. 2014. "Consumption and Labor Supply With Partial
Insurance: An Analytical Framework," American Economic Review 104, 2075­2126.
Heckman, J., L. Lochner and C. Taber. 1998. "Explaining Rising Wage Inequality: Explorations With a
Dynamic General Equilibrium Model of Labor Earnings with Heterogeneous Agents." Review of Economic
Dynamics 1, 1-58.
Hofferth, S., S. Flood, and M. 2018. "American Time Use Survey Data Extract Builder: Version 2.7
[dataset]." College Park, MD: University of Maryland and Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS.
Kuhn, P. and F. Lozano. 2008. "The Expanding Workweek? Understanding Trends in Long Work Hours
Among Men." Journal of Labor Economics 26, 311-343.
Imai, S. and M. P. Keane. 2004. "Intertemporal Labor Supply and Human Capital Accumulation." Interna-
tional Economic Review 45, 601-641.
Krueger, D., F. Perri, and L. Pistaferri. 2010. "Cross-sectional Facts for Macroeconomists." Review of
Economic Dynamics 13, 1-14.
MaCurdy, T. 1981. "An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life Cycle Setting." Journal of Political
Economy 89, 1059-1085.
Michelacci, C., and J. Pijoan-Mas. 2012. "Intertemporal Labor Supply With Search Frictions." Review of
Econonic Studies 79, 899-931.
Moffitt, R. 1984. "The Estimation of a Joint Wage-Hours Labor Supply Model." Journal of Labor Economics
2, 550-566.
Pencavel, J. 2015. "The Productivity of Working Hours." The Economic Journal, 125 (589), 2052-20776.


                                                  38
Pijoan-Mas, Josep. 2006. "Precautionary Savings or Working Longer Hours." Review of Economic Dy-
namics 9, 326-352.
Rogerson, R., and J. Wallenius. 2009. "Micro and Macro Elasticities in a Life Cycle Model with Taxes."
Journal of Economic Theory 144, 2277-2293.
Rosen, H. 1976. "Taxes in a Labor Supply Model with Joint Wage-Hours Determination." Econometrica 44,
485-507.
Rosen, S. 1978. "The Supply of Work Schedules and Employment." in Work Time and Employment (Wash-
ington, DC: National Commission for Manpower Policy).
Ruggles, S., S. Flood, R. Goeken, J. Grover, E. Meyer, J. Pacas, and M. Sobek. 2019. "IPUMS USA:
Version 9.0 [dataset]." Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS.
Weeden, K., Y. Cha and M. Bucca. 2016. "Long Work Hours, Part-Time Work, and Trends in the Gender
Gap in Pay, the Motherhood Wage Penalty, and the Fatherhood Wage Premium." Russell Sage Foundation
Journal of the Social Sciences 4, 71-102.
Yurdagul, E. 2017. "Production Complementarities and Flexibility in a Model of Entrepreneurship." Journal
of Monetary Economics 86, 36-51.




                                                   39
A                            Appendix Figures

                                                                                                       Figure A.1: Time-Series

                                                   (a) CPS ORG                                                                                                                   (b) CPS ASEC
               .1




                                                                                                                                         .1
               0




                                                                                                                                         0
    -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1




                                                                                                                              -.5 -.4 -.3 -.2 -.1
       log of Hourly Wages




                                                                                                                                 log of Hourly Wages
               -.6




                                                                                                                                         -.6
               -.7




                                                                                                                                         -.7
                             20    25   30   35    40    45     50   55     60   65                      70   75    80                                 20    25     30      35    40    45     50   55     60   65    70   75   80
                                                  Hours bin (usual weekly hours)                                                                                                 Hours bin (usual weekly hours)

                                                  96/97          06/07                           16/17                                                           76/77           86/87         96/97          06/07         16/17


                                    Note: For the ASEC the years refer to the year for which hours and earnings are reported and not the
                                    survey year.


                                  Figure A.2: Cross-Sectional Relationship between Wages and Hours in Different Data Sets
                                                                       .1
                                                                       0
                                                                log of Hourly Wages
                                                                  -.3    -.2
                                                                       -.4
                                                                       -.5      -.1




                                                                                      20    25    30     35   40    45      50     55                       60     65      70    75      80
                                                                                                                         Hours bin

                                                                                           CPS ORG       CPS ASEC    2000 Census                            ACS          PSID    NLSY79


                                    Note: The sample period for the CPS ASEC, PSID and NLSY is 1996 through 2008 since hours and
                                    earnings are reported for the previous year. The ACS only starts in 2000 and is also used through 2008.
                                    In addition, for each dataset we use the set of control variables which is available in all datasets (a dummy
                                    for being black, being married, and a set of education and year dummies).



B                            The Role of Top-Coding
Figure 3b of the main text showed that, for our sample of men in the ORG, mean earnings were relatively
flat in usual weekly hours beyond 50 hours per week. In this section we attempt to analyze the quantitative
role of top-coding for this pattern. To see why top-coding could potentially be relevant, consider an extreme
case where no one working less than 50 hours is top coded, everyone from 50 hours on is top-coded, and


                                                                                                                         40
                 Figure B.1: Probability of being Top-Coded by Usual Weekly Hours bin for Men




                              7 10 11 12 13
                                9
                                8
                             %
                                6
                                5
                                4
                                3
                                2
                                1
                                0




                                              20   25    30   35   40   45    50   55   60   65   70   75   80

                                                        Sample Period: Sep 1995-August 2007


all top-coded earnings are replaced with a single value. In this case, even if true earnings were increasing in
hours, observed earnings would be completely flat beyond 50. The following paragraphs provide suggestive
evidence against this possiblity, i.e. we conclude that top-coding is not the major driver of the relatively flat
earnings-hours relationship beyond 50 hours
     The sample for our analysis starts in September 1995, the first months from which onwards IPUMS
provide information whether earnings have been imputed or not in the ORG. Between September 1995 and
December 1996 earnings were top-coded at $1,923 per week (corresponding to $100,000 per year assuming
52 weeks of work) in nominal terms. Since January 1998, earnings have been toop-coded at $2,885.61 per
week (corresponding to $150,000 per year assuming 52 weeks of work) in nominal terms. Figure B.1 shows
results for our sample of men age 25-64. Below 45 hours, top-coding is negligible and even in the 45-49
hours bin the earnings of only 2% of men are subject to top-coding. From 50 hours onwards, the probability
of earnings being top-coded becomes more prevalent and increases in usual hours worked, although not
monotonically.
     Our first step is to compare results in the CPS ORG and ASEC, using the same years and sample criteria
for the ASEC as in our ORG sample.22 In contrast to the ORG, the nominal top-codes in the ASEC are
regularly adjusted and are generally higher. As one might expect, this leads to a lower probability of being
top-coded in ASEC than in ORG, as seen in Figure B.2a. In addition to different top-code thresholds,
ORG and ASEC also differ in how earnings are assigned to top-coded individuals. In the ORG, top-coded
individuals are assigned the top-code. In contrast, until 2011 in the ASEC top-coded individuals were
assigned the mean earnings of the top-coded. Specifically, the means earnings were calculated and assigned
by cells defined by gender, race (black vs. hispanic vs. rest) and labor supply (full-year-full-time workers,
i.e. weeks worked  50 and weekly hours  35, vs. rest). Figure B.2b shows that despite the different
top-coding procedures, the aggregate wage-hours relationship is virtually identical. This is consistent with
the notion that top-coding is not a major issue in the aggregate.
     Next, we analyze the role of top-coding among specific groups of workers. Figure B.3 shows the prob-
ability of being top-coded in ORG by age and education. The probability of top-coding is increasing in
  22 To   be precise, the sample period for the ASEC is 1996 through 2008 since hours and earnings are reported for the previous
year.



                                                                         41
                        Figure B.2: Different Top Codes in CPS ORG and ASEC for Men (1995-2007)

                        (a) Top-Coding Probability                                                                              (b) Wages-Hours Relationship




                                                                                                          .1
   9 10 11 12 13




                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                log of Hourly Wages
                                                                                                                -.1
   8




                                                                                                         -.2
   7
  %
   6




                                                                                                  -.3
   5
   4




                                                                                                          -.4
   3
   2




                                                                                                          -.5
   1




                                                                                                                      20   25   30    35        40    45      50     55    60   65    70   75   80
   0




                   10   20           30         40          50           60    70     80                                                                   Hours bin

                                               ORG               ASEC                                                                                 ORG           ASEC




                                     Figure B.3: Top-Coding Probabilities in ORG for Men (1995-2007)

                                          (a) By Age                                                                                        (b) By Education
   18




                                                                                                          30
   16




                                                                                                          25
   14
   12




                                                                                                          20
   10
  %




                                                                                                 %
                                                                                                15
   8




                                                                                                          10
   6
   4




                                                                                                          5
   2
   0




                                                                                                          0




                   20    30               40           50          60         70      80                                   20        30          40           50          60     70        80

                             25-34             35-44             45-54        55-64                                                       LHS         HS           Bach         Bach+




age up to the 60 hours bin, although the differences are relatively small beyond age 34. The probability of
top-coding is strongly increasing in education, and peaks around 25% of workers with a graduate degree
working at least 60 hours.
    Figure B.4 plots the cross-sectional wage-hours relationship for the ORG and ASEC for the age and
education group with the overall highest probability of being top-coded: men aged 55-64, and men with a
graduate degree. In addition, we also analyze the following counterfactual top-coding procedures using the
ASEC:
CF 1. Impose ORG top-code threshold, replace top-coded with average earnings of top-coded by race and
      labor supply.
CF 2. Keep ASEC top-code threshold, replace top-coded with ASEC top-code
CF 3. Impose ORG top-code threshold, replace top-coded with ORG top-code
   Counterfactual 1 is informative about how important a more binding top-code is, holding fixed the top-
coding replacement strategy in ASEC. Counterfactual 2 is informative about how important the replacement

                                                                                           42
                                             Figure B.4: Comparing Top-Coding Procedures: ORG vs. ASEC

                                        (a) Age Group 55-64                                                                                                 (b) Bach+
            .1




                                                                                                                    .1
                                                                                                                    0
            0




                                                                                                                            -.1
  log of Hourly Wages




                                                                                                           log of Hourly Wages
                  -.1




                                                                                                                       -.2
           -.2




                                                                                                                -.3
    -.3




                                                                                                         -.4
            -.4




                                                                                                                    -.5
            -.5




                        20   25   30    35   40   45      50     55   60      65   70     75   80                                 20   25   30    35   40     45      50     55   60      65   70     75   80
                                                       Hours bin                                                                                                   Hours bin

                                  ORG        ASEC          CF 1        CF 2        CF 3                                                     ORG        ASEC            CF 1        CF 2        CF 3




strategy of top-coded values is, holding fixed the top-code in ASEC. Countefactual 3 is informative about
the combination of Counterfactuals 1-2 together.
    Figure B.4a shows that for the age group 55-64 all wage-hours profiles look very similar. This suggests,
similar to the aggregate pattern, that the more restricted top-coding in the ORG does not have important
effects when distinguishing between age groups.
    By contrast, in Figure B.4b, we observe noticeably different wage-hours profiles for men with a graduate
degree in the ORG vs. the ASEC. Specifically, in the 50 hour bin the average hourly wage in the ORG is
5 log points below the ASEC; in the 60 hour bin this difference has increased to 9 log points. When we
replace both the ASEC top-code threshold with the ORG threshold, and the ASEC top-coding replacement
procedure with the ORG replacement procedure (this can be seen by comparing CF 3 and the ORG profile),
we find nearly identical results to the actual ORG results. The main reason for the difference between the
ASEC profile and the ORG profile is thus not the lower top-coding threshold (this can be seen by comparing
CF 1 with the ASEC profile). Instead, the major source of the difference is the difference in the replacement
strategies (this can be seen by comparing CF 2 and the ASEC profile).
    Figure B.5a shows again the patterns by education in the ORG from the main text, from which one
can see that the profile is more depressed for those with a Bachelor and a graduate degree (Bach+). Figure
B.4b suggests that some of this pattern might be related to top-coding. Figure B.5b shows the patterns
by education for the ASEC, where the profiles lie mostly on top of each other. Hence, while the gaps by
education in the ORG may partly reflect top-coding, the ASEC results are in line with our main interpretation
on the role of top-coding, namely that top-coding is not the main driver of our finding.
    We conclude this section by addressing a final potential issue, which is that if true earnings above the
top-code are increasing in hours worked, then replacing the top-coded earnings of all long hours workers
with the same value could flatten the earnings profile among these workers. (Recall that the replacement
values for the top-coded in the ASEC did account for whether workers worked at least 35 hours per week,
but did not distinguish between, for example, workers who worked 50 hours per week and those who worked
60 hours per week). To address this, we turn to the PSID. Since the mid-nineties, the PSID's top-code for
wage earnings of the household head is $10 million. In fact, this threshold is so high that no one in the PSID
satisfying our sample selection criteria is top-coded. Given the small sample size in the PSID, the following
exercise will be for the years 1996-2018. Similar to the previous counterfactuals, we know impose the




                                                                                                    43
                                 Figure B.5: Cross-Sectional Relationship between Wages and Hours: ORG vs. ASEC

                                                        (a) ORG                                                                                               (b) ASEC
              .1




                                                                                                                     .1
              0




                                                                                                                     0
    log of Hourly Wages




                                                                                                           log of Hourly Wages
                    -.1




                                                                                                                           -.1
             -.2




                                                                                                                    -.2
      -.3




                                                                                                             -.3
              -.4




                                                                                                                     -.4
              -.5




                                                                                                                     -.5
                           20   25   30      35      40      45    50     55     60    65   70   75                               20   25   30     35    40    45     50   55     60   65    70   75   80
                                                  Hours bin (usual weekly hours)                                                                        Hours bin (usual weekly hours)

                                            LHS           HS          Bach        Bach+                                                            LHS          HS          Bach        Bach+




                                      Figure B.6: Comparing Top-Coding Procedures: PSID vs. ASEC (1995-2018)

                                                   (a) Aggregate                                                                                    (b) College Degree
              .2




                                                                                                                     .2
              .1




                                                                                                                     .1
                       0




                                                                                                                              0
     log of Hourly Wages




                                                                                                            log of Hourly Wages
                 -.1




                                                                                                                        -.1
           -.2




                                                                                                                  -.2
    -.3




                                                                                                           -.3
              -.4




                                                                                                                     -.4
              -.5




                                                                                                                     -.5




                           20   25   30     35     40    45      50     55   60   65   70   75   80                               20   25   30     35    40    45      50     55   60   65   70   75   80
                                                              Hours bin                                                                                             Hours bin

                                     PSID          PSID with ASEC TC Stragety           ASEC                                                PSID         PSID with ASEC TC Stragety          ASEC




ASEC top-coding strategy on the PSID and compare this to the actual PSID withou no top-coding.23 Figure
B.6 shows results for the aggregate as well as for those with a college degree (for sample size reasons we do
not distinguish between a bachelor and graduate degree). While the PSID shows slightly different patterns
than ASEC, the main take-away is that imposing the ASEC top coding strategy yields very similar results to
the actual PSID which effectively had no top-coding. This is consistent with the notion that earnings among
top-coded workers do not vary strongly with hours worked above 50.


C                          The Role of Measurement Error in Hours
In Figure 3b of the main text, mean earnings were relatively flat in usual weekly hours beyond 50 hours
per week. If people with high hours tend to be people who have over-reported their hours, then this will
   23 When implementing this strategy, we focus on the top-codes for inclongj in ASEC which is the dominant income measure for

wage and salary earners. For sample size reasons, we also group top-coded individuals only by whether someone is a full-year-full-
time worker but not on race.



                                                                                                      44
                                                               Figure C.1: Average Time Use Hours

                                                                                                                        (b) Avg. Weekly Time Use Hours

                              (a) Avg. Daily Time Use Hours




                                                                                                          80
       9 10 11 12




                                                                                                                  70
                                                                                                Avg. Weekly Hours
                                                                                                            60
   5 6 7 8
  Daily Hours




                                                                                                      50
       4




                                                                                                40
       3
       2
       1




                                                                                                          30
       0




                    20   25   30   35    40    45     50   55     60   65   70   75   80
                                        Hours bin (usual weekly hours)




                                                                                                          20
                                         Weekday            Weekend Day
                                                                                                                       20   30    40     50     60    70      80
                                                                                                                             Hours bin (usual weekly hours)
Note: Shaded areas are 95% Confidence Intervals.
                                                                                                                            Time Use Hours          Usual Hours




artificially lead to a flatter pattern even if true earnings are increasing in hours. In this section we attempt to
analyze the quantitative role of measurement error in hours for this pattern.
    To assess the impact of measurement error we link observations between the CPS ORG and the Amer-
ican Time Use Survey (ATUS). Since 2003 the ATUS collects a time diary for a sample of individuals (not
households) 2 to 5 months after their 8th CPS interview. The diary records all activities between 4am of
the day preceding the ATUS interview and 4am of the interview day. It records the type of activity, starting
and end point as well the location it took place. IPUMS provides a variable that aggregates these activities
into "hours spent working on the main job". Importantly, this variable does not include commuting or social
activities around work like a lunch break or dinner. From the last CPS interview, we also know usual hours
worked, which maybe updated by the respondent at the time of the ATUS interview.
    For our analysis we use the same sample restrictions as laid out in Section 2.1, but impose two further
restrictions. First, the ATUS provides a variable about the interviewer's perception of data quality indicating
whether or not interviewers believe the data from a particular interview should be used. Reasons for why an
interview should not be used are if the interviewer thinks that the respondent intentionally provided a wrong
answer, could not correctly remember activities, deliberately reported very long durations, or some other
reason. We only use interviews which the interviewers suggest to use. Second, because we are interested in
usual hours worked, we drop all individuals who did not work at all in the last 7 days. For example, consider
someone who was an entire week on vacation and therefore reports zero hours in the time use diary. This
zero is simply not informative about the person's usual hours worked, or more precisely for the usual hours
worked of people with similar characteristics. Finally, to ensure a sufficiently large sample size we use all
years for which the ATUS is available, i.e. 2003 through 2018.
    Given our sample, our analysis proceeds as follows. We group individuals by their usual hours bin as
reported in the CPS ORG. Next, we calculate the average ATUS hours worked on a weekday and on a
weekend day, respectively, for each ORG hours bin. We report these reults in Figure C.1a. Average daily
time use hours on a week day increase monotonically up to the up the 65-69 usual hours bin and flatten
out subsequently. Individuals reporting usual hours in the 40-44 hours bin report slightly more than 7 hours


                                                                                           45
                                                    Figure C.2: Average Weekly Time Use Hours

                                         (a) By Age                                                           (b) By Education
                 80




                                                                                         80
                          70




                                                                                                  70
      Difference in Hours




                                                                              Difference in Hours
                    60




                                                                                            60
              50




                                                                                     50
       40




                                                                               40
                 30




                                                                                         30
                 20




                                                                                         20
                               20   30   40     50    60     70    80                                  20   30   40     50    60     70    80
                                    Hours bin (usual weekly hours)                                          Hours bin (usual weekly hours)

                                       25-34      35-44                                                       LHS        HS
                                       45-54      55-64      Avg                                              Bach       Bach+       Avg




of work on a week day based on the time use data. Individuals reporting usual hours in the 65-69 hours
bin report more than 10 hours of work on a week day based on the time use data. Average daily time use
hours on a weekend day are slightly above 1 hour for workers whose usual weekly hours are less than 50,
and increase to close to 4 hours in the 70-74 usual hours bin. Taking the time use hours at face value, this
provides clear evidence that actual hours worked are increasing in reported usual hours worked.
    We conclude by computing a synthetic measure of weekly hours worked using the ATUS data, which
we then compare to the reported usual weekly hours in the ORG. To do so, for each usual weekly hours bin
we mulitply the average daily time use hours on a weekday by 5 and on a weekend day by 2, then sum the
two numbers. We contrast this with the average usual hours reported in each hours bin in Figure C.1b. On
average, long hours workers tend to slightly overreport their usual hours compared to what they report based
on time diaries but up to the 65-69 hours bin the differnce is relatively small, amounting to 5 hours or less.
Beyond 70 hours, the gap increases. However, we note that (i) earnings are essentially flat from the 50-54
usual hours bin onwards, and (ii) less than 3% of individuals report more than 70 hours. Nevetheless, based
on these results our estimation exercise only uses information up to 69 hours per week. Finally, Figure C.2
shows that there is little variation in average weekly time use hours by age and education, and there is even
less in average usual hours (not shown here). We therefore conclude that systematic overreporting of usual
weekly hours is not the dominant explanation for the empirical pattern in Figure 3 of the main text.




                                                                        46
