                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       NOT ALL SCHOOL SHOOTINGS ARE THE SAME AND THE DIFFERENCES
                                MATTER

                                        Phillip B. Levine
                                        Robin McKnight

                                      Working Paper 26728
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26728


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




The authors are grateful to participants at an Economics Department lunch talk at Wellesley
College along with helpful conversations with Kristin Butcher and Dan Sichel. Hilal Yildirim
provided valuable research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.¸

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Phillip B. Levine and Robin McKnight. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Not All School Shootings are the Same and the Differences Matter
Phillip B. Levine and Robin McKnight
NBER Working Paper No. 26728
February 2020
JEL No. I18,I20

                                          ABSTRACT

This paper examines student exposure to school shootings in the United States since the 1999
shooting at Columbine High School. We analyze shootings that occurred during school hours on
a school day and resulted in a death. These shootings are likely to be uniformly reported and have
a greater potential to cause harm ­ either directly or indirectly ­ to enrolled students. We measure
the number and characteristics of children who were exposed to them, along with measures of the
economic and social environment in which these shootings occur. We distinguish between
indiscriminate shootings, suicides, personal attacks and crime-related shootings. The primary
finding of our analysis is the importance of separating these types of shootings. Indiscriminate
shootings and suicides more commonly affect white students, schools in more rural locations, and
those in locations where incomes are higher. The opposite geographic and socioeconomic
patterns are apparent for personal attacks and crime-related shootings. Analyses that ignore these
distinctions or focus on a particular type may provide a misleading impression of the nature of
school shootings. Policy discussions regarding approaches to reducing school shootings should
take these distinctions into account.


Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
plevine@wellesley.edu

Robin McKnight
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
106 Central Street
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
rmcknigh@wellesley.edu
                Not All School Shootings are the Same and the Differences Matter


         School shootings are a distinctly American social problem that matters far beyond the

tragic loss of life. Every student that experienced the shooting at that school carries the baggage

of the event with them for the rest of their lives. Recent reports in the media document some of

the difficulties that survivors experience (cf. Gaudiano, 2019; and Fetters, 2019). 1 The startling

statistic reported by the Washington Post that 228,000 students (as of May 8, 2019) have lived

through this experience since the 1999 shooting at Columbine High School highlights the

magnitude of the problem (Cox, et al., 2019).

         Yet we document that it is difficult to accurately capture the data on school shootings,

making it hard to draw definitive conclusions regarding their frequency, who is affected, and

where they occur. The conclusions provided by prior analyses about the frequency of shootings

are invariably shocking, but they are also all over the map, literally (Beauchamp, 2014). For

instance, Everytown for Gun Safety (2019) reports that 465 shootings have taken place since

2013 with 181 deaths (77 shootings and 30 deaths per year). CNN (2019), however, reports that

180 shootings occurred since 2009 with 114 deaths (18 shootings and 11 deaths per year,

respectively). The New York Times indicates that 111 shootings and 202 deaths have taken place

since 1970 (2.3 shootings and 4.2 deaths per year; Cai and Patel 2019). Even the lower values are

alarming, but the discrepancy across data sources is extensive.

         Reports regarding patterns in school shootings also present a confusing picture.

Depending on the source, school shootings are said to be increasing in frequency or not or

perhaps we cannot tell (Katsiyannis, Whitford, and Ennis, 2018; Kaste, 2018; and Harper,

Ryberg and Temkin, 2018). School shootings are also said to affect black students more, even

1
 In an academic context, Rossin-Slater, et al. (2019) find greater use of anti-depressants among students who
survived school shootings.
                                                                        Levine and McKnight, p. 2


though the majority of shooters are said to be white (Everytown for Gun Safety, 2019; and Cai

and Patel, 2019), which is implausible based on the extent of racial segregation in America's

schools (Frankenberg, et al. 2019).

       We argue in this paper that a critical contributor to these discrepancies is what gets

counted as a school shooting. A fundamental problem in tracking school shootings is "reporting

bias." Whether a shooting gets reported may differ dramatically by when and where the event

took place. It is impossible to credibly identify any patterns in school shootings unless the

shootings are counted in a consistent manner. Prior analyses have not addressed this issue.

       After addressing reporting bias, one must then determine what types of shootings should

be counted. We group shootings in the following categories: suicides, crime-related events,

personal attacks, indiscriminate shootings, and other shootings. Should all categories be included

or not? Should we count all shootings that take place on school grounds regardless of the extent

of injuries or the day and time they occur? Prior analyses have relied on different definitions of

school shootings, contributing to seemingly contradictory findings.

       The purpose of our analysis is to resolve these data problems, make clear assumptions

about which shootings are included in our analysis and why, fully evaluate these data, and draw

conclusions regarding the nature of school shootings in the United States. Specifically, we

include all categories of school shootings, but focus our analysis on only those that occurred

during the school day during school hours and resulted in a death. Shootings that satisfy these

conditions are likely to be uniformly reported. These criteria also focus the analysis on shootings

that have the potential to cause external harm to students enrolled in a school where one

occurred.
                                                                        Levine and McKnight, p. 3


       We rely on the recently released, exhaustive data collection effort conducted by the

Center for Homeland Defense and Security (CHDS). We augment these data with other publicly

available data sources that provide context regarding the school and community environment in

which these shootings take place. Our analysis examines overall patterns in the data as well as

difference in those patterns by the nature of the shooting.

       The primary finding of our analysis is that school shootings that fall into different

categories affect very different populations. Suicides are the most common category of school

shooting and, therefore, students are much more likely to be exposed to them than to other types

of school shootings. Indiscriminate shootings lead to the most fatalities, but fewer students are

exposed to them. White students are more likely to be exposed to indiscriminate shootings and

suicides; black and Hispanic students are disproportionately exposed to personally-targeted and

crime-related shootings. The socioeconomic status (SES) of the students exposed to the different

types of shootings also differs; high SES students are more likely to be exposed to indiscriminate

shootings and suicides. These types of shootings are also more likely to occur outside of urban

areas and in areas where gun sales are high and gun laws are less restrictive.

       These findings can help inform public discussions of school shootings. First,

indiscriminate shootings draw the most media attention, but even with their higher death rate,

they represent a minority of deaths and an even smaller share of events, and fewer students are

directly exposed to them. Failure to focus on other types of school shootings provides less

attention to the experiences of under-represented minorities and students from a lower SES

background. Second, aggregating all forms of school-shootings into a single group can generate

misleading conclusions about the appropriate policy responses. Reducing the incidence of

different types of school shootings almost certainly requires different policy responses. Third,
                                                                                 Levine and McKnight, p. 4


our results contribute to our understanding of the potential impacts of gun control legislation,

even though we do not attempt to establish a causal relationship between shootings and these

laws. The fact that crime-related school shootings tend to occur in locations where stricter gun

control laws are already in place suggests that other policy responses may be required to reduce

the incidence of these shootings. On the other hand, indiscriminate shootings tend to occur in

locations where gun laws are weaker, so gun control legislation may be a viable approach to

preventing these shootings.

I. DESCRIPTION OF THE DATA

A. Data Sources

        We rely heavily on a recently released, comprehensive database of school shootings

provided by the Center for Homeland Defense and Security (CHDS) at the Naval Postgraduate

School. These data seek to catalog "each and every instance a gun is brandished on school

property for any reason, regardless of the number of victims (including zero), time, day of week,

or category (e.g. planned attack, accidental, domestic violence, gang-related)" since 1970

(Riedman and O'Neill, 2018). News reports from the mainstream media are a key source of

initial information for most of the shootings in this database. The CHDS endeavors to verify all

of this information with police reports and court records, although most reports have not yet

completed this process. The data provide extensive information regarding each shooting, as we

detail in the Data Appendix, but for our purposes we primarily rely on the school location,

number of fatalities (if any), and the time and day the shooting occurred. 2

        We also take advantage of the categories that CHDS creates for these shootings. They

separate shootings into 19 categories, including accidental discharge of a firearm, bullying, gang-

2
 The CHDS data contain only limited information about the demographic characteristics of shooters and victims.
As a result, we do not attempt to analyze this information, although we do analyze information about the
demographics of the schools where shootings occur.
                                                                                     Levine and McKnight, p. 5


related shootings, self-defense, and others. Although this detail is valuable, for our analytical

purposes we believe it is useful to aggregate these categories into a smaller number of broader

categories. We filter their categories to five:

    (1) indiscriminate shootings (with primarily random targets) 3

    (2) suicide (which may also include a murder, in some cases)

    (3) personal attacks (including bullying, escalation of a dispute, and others)

    (4) crime-related (including gang-related, robbery, drug-related and others)

    (5) other (various, less frequent incidents, like self-defense, accidental shootings, and others).

         We augment these data with additional information from several alternative sources to

describe the environment in which the shooting occurred. 4 These additional data include: (1)

school-level data on levels of enrollment and characteristics of enrolled students (including

race/ethnicity and recipients of free/reduced price lunches) and school zip code from the

National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core Data, (2) population density in the zip

code and county in which the school is located based on data from the U.S. Census Bureau, (3)

labor market characteristics of the county in the year in which the shooting took place from the

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, (4) measures of the economic and social environment in the

county and zip code of the school, available at opportunityinsights.org 5, (5) measures of gun

sales proxied by background check data from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and (6)

measures of the strength of gun control laws from the Brady Campaign.




3
  In their report of the count of school shootings in the New York Times, the Cai and Patel (2019) were clear that
they were focusing on only indiscriminate shootings. This distinction, though, is easily lost on the reader, who may
not recognize the different types that can and do occur and the impact of this distinction on the conclusions drawn.
4
  See the data appendix for a complete description of the data we used.
5
  As detailed in the data appendix, we created zip code-level data from this source starting with its census tract
information and calculating population-weighted averages at the zip code-level.
                                                                                        Levine and McKnight, p. 6


B. Reporting Bias

         Any analysis of patterns of school shootings needs to rely on a consistent measure of

their incidence. If those shootings are more likely to be captured in the data at certain times or

certain places, the reported patterns may not be an accurate reflection of experience. Despite the

incredible strength of the CHDS data, it is subject to this problem because it relies heavily on

media reports.

         Over time, the media may be more focused on school shootings ­ and, therefore, more

likely to report an occurrence of one ­ if it occurs at a time of heightened sensitivity, such as

after a high-profile shooting. Our analysis of the CHDS data supports this concern. In Table 1,

we examine reports of school shootings since 1999, distinguishing the 12 months following a

high-victimization shooting (10 or more deaths), and specifically focusing on the 2018 Parkland,

Florida shooting, from other months. The months following a high victimization event include

more reported shootings, more shootings reported with no fatalities, fewer fatalities per shooting,

and a lower percentage of shootings with any fatalities. These findings are consistent with the

possibility that shootings with no injuries are considered more newsworthy in the aftermath of a

high-victimization event. This pattern is particularly striking following Parkland. 6

         An alternative explanation for this pattern is that copycat shootings are more common in

those months, but those events would need to have fewer fatalities to generate this pattern in the

data. Regardless, the fact that reporting bias is a plausible explanation for these patterns should

cause concern about ignoring this potential bias.

         Across locations, school shootings may be more likely to be reported in places with a

greater local media presence, overlooking incidents in more rural locations. The collapse of local


6
 Parkland is included in the category of all high victimization shootings, but it does not drive all of the differences
between this broader group and the other months.
                                                                                      Levine and McKnight, p. 7


newspapers in recent years in those locations exacerbates the problem (Hagey, Alpert and

Serkez, 2019). Indeed, we see patterns in the data consistent with this form of bias as well.

Distinguishing counties by population density, we see that 31 percent of reported school

shootings in urban counties (defined here to be in the top quartile of schools based on county

population density in 2000) result in at least one death, whereas 49 percent of reported school

shootings in rural counties (bottom quartile of schools based on county population density in

2000) do so. Perhaps school shootings in rural areas really are more lethal than those in urban

areas, but reporting bias due to differential media coverage certainly is a plausible alternative

that cannot be easily dismissed.

C. Sample Restrictions

         Although we have no definitive solution to the potential problem of reporting bias, we

impose data restrictions that we believe will minimize its likelihood. In our analysis, we restrict

the sample of shootings to those that led to at least one fatality, under the assumption that

reporting bias is more likely to occur among shootings with no fatalities.

         We also limit the sample to those shootings that occur on school grounds during school

hours and on school days. This additional restriction also is likely to reduce the likelihood of

reporting bias, since a shooting that results in a death while school is in session almost certainly

would receive some form of media coverage. It also focuses our analysis on shootings that are

most likely to have an impact on children attending the school. 7 Schools should always be a safe

zone, but considerably more students are exposed to the violence if a shooting occurs when

school is in session.


7
 We also recognize that students beyond the school may be affected when a shooting occurs, perhaps even
nationally due to media coverage, increased active shooter drills, and the like. Yet the localized impact of the
shooting is almost certainly greater.
                                                                         Levine and McKnight, p. 8


       These restrictions are not always necessary depending on the focus of the exercise and we

commend the CHDS researchers for their exhaustive research. For the purposes of comparing

patterns over time and location and to focus on exposure of other students, we believe our

restrictions are appropriate. We also recognize that our sample limitations may understate

exposure to shootings among other students. Our sample almost certainly excludes some events

that are traumatic and harmful to students but, since we do not observe these events consistently

over time and across locations, it would be misleading to include them. We take our approach

because we view the need to overcome the limitations of reporting bias to be greater than this

potential undercount for our purposes.

       We also implement two additional minor restrictions. First, we limit the sample to

shootings that occurred between 1999 and 2019, representing each complete year in the post-

Columbine world. While there were unquestionably school shootings ­ including some that

resulted in multiple fatalities ­ prior to the Columbine shooting, much attention has been focused

on the two decades since that shooting. Second, we limit the sample to shootings that occurred

in traditional public schools. This restriction is necessary for us to accurately describe the

characteristics of schools where school shootings occur. In the end, we focus our attention on

143 school shootings that satisfy all of these conditions.

D. Comparison to Washington Post Data

       The time period we investigate corresponds closely to the one used by the Washington

Post (Cox, et al., 2019) in their analysis of student exposure to school shootings. Their analysis is

based on their own data collection effort. Over essentially the same time period, their analysis

focuses on 238 shootings compared to the 143 that we consider. When we compare the two sets

of shootings, it turns out that only 66 are included in both.
                                                                                   Levine and McKnight, p. 9


        A detailed comparison of the two sets of shootings illustrates some of the issues raised in

constructing an appropriate school shooting data set. Starting from the 238 in their database, we

find no fatalities in 158 of them and therefore we exclude them from our data set. Again, we

focus on those with fatalities to reduce the likelihood of reporting bias. Another 14 shootings are

omitted for a variety of unrelated issues (we cannot merge a few shootings with the outside data

sources we use, primarily because they occurred in private schools, for instance). On the other

hand, of our 143 shootings, they exclude 92, because they were the result of a suicide. We

believe suicides are important; exposure to one certainly could be traumatic for a student.

Another five school shootings in our sample occurred after April 2019, the end of the

Washington Post's sample period. Finally, 26 of the shootings in our data set are missing in their

data for unknown reasons.

        In the end, we believe that our data set is well-constructed to accurately evaluate patterns

in ­ and assess student exposure to ­ school shootings over time, across locations, and across a

variety of categories. Other assumptions/restrictions are plausible, but we believe the ones we

use are best-suited to accomplish our goals.

II. RESULTS

A. Incidence

        Figure 1 presents the trend over time in the number of shootings that occur, along with

the trend in the number of fatalities. 8 The most notable feature of this figure is the spikes in

fatalities that occur in 1999, 2005, 2012, and 2018. It is not surprising that these are the years in

which one or two high-victimization school shootings took place (Columbine in 1999, Red Lake




8
 Following the CHDS' approach, we include the shooter in the count of fatalities when the shooter dies during the
incident. Other analyses, such as the one conducted by the Washington Post, do not count the shooter's death.
                                                                                      Levine and McKnight, p. 10


in 2005, Sandy Hook in 2012, and Parkland and Santa Fe in 2018). 9 Most shootings result in a

single or perhaps two fatalities. When one occurs with several victims, it is noticeable in the

data. The spike in 2012 is so large because of the large number of casualties at Sandy Hook and

the even larger spike in 2018 is because two high victimization shootings took place that year.

Aside from those spikes, there is no obvious trend in the number of fatalities over time.

         There is no apparent trend in the number of shootings either. Indeed, more shootings did

occur in 2018 relative to prior years ­ 16 occurred that year when that level never topped 10

before that ­ but the incidence of these events returned to more typical levels in 2019.

         It is noteworthy that indiscriminate shootings account for much of the increase in 2018.

Before then, no more than two of these events occurred in a single year. In 2018, we observe

five, even after addressing the issues of reporting bias as we described earlier. Indeed,

indiscriminate shootings are becoming more common. Between 1999 and 2011, five of these

types of shootings occurred (0.4 per year, on average). Between 2012 and 2019, 15 of them

occurred (1.9 per year). 10 Yet, since they account for a small share of the total number of school

shootings that occur, as documented below, this trend had little impact on overall patterns.

         Note that these patterns contradict some media reports about patterns over time in the

incidence of school shootings. For instance, CNN (2019) reports a steady rise in shootings.

These discrepancies are likely attributable to the reporting bias phenomenon that we described

earlier and our efforts to reduce its impact, especially by focusing on shootings that resulted in a

fatality. Alternatively, it is possible that non-fatal shootings have truly increased and our sample




9
  Note that the West Nickel Mines school shooting in which five students were killed is not included in these data
because it is a private school, which is omitted because of the inconsistent availability of data on private schools in
the NCES Common Core data.
10
   This difference is statistically significant.
                                                                                     Levine and McKnight, p. 11


restrictions overlook them. If so, we would need to also conclude that shootings are becoming

more common and less lethal.

B. Types of Shootings

         We extend this analysis to consider the relative frequency of the different types of school

shootings. 11 Figure 2 shows that suicides are the most common by a large margin. Fifty five of

them occurred between 1999 and 2019, almost twice the number of the next most frequent

category, personally targeted shootings (32). Indiscriminate shootings typically receive the most

public attention, but they are relatively uncommon among school shootings. Of course, any is too

many, but 20 of the 143 shootings (14 percent) were categorized as indiscriminate.

         Indiscriminate shootings likely receive the most attention, though, because they are the

most deadly. Over 100 people died as the result of an individual entering a school and randomly

shooting victims. Suicides generate the next most deaths: suicides are the most common type of

shooting and, as a result, account for a substantial share of deaths. Personally-targeted shootings

and those that are crime-related account for a moderate share of shooting events and fatalities.

C. Student Exposure

         We calculate the number of students exposed to a school shooting by merging NCES data

on school enrollment to our school shooting data set (incorporating the restrictions described

above). The results of this exercise are reported in Table 2. Overall, we find that 180,000

students were exposed to a school shooting that resulted in a fatality between 1999 and 2019.

Although this figure is below the 228,000 estimate that the Washington Post provided, it is

roughly the same order of magnitude. Much of the difference between our estimate and the

11
   Accidental shootings are rare in our sample and are therefore included with other uncommon categories in the
"Other" category. It is worth noting, however, that accidental shootings that are included in the CHDS have
relatively low fatality rates so, if we did not exclude shootings with no fatalities, accidental shootings would be
considerably more common.
                                                                        Levine and McKnight, p. 12


Washington Post's is likely attributable to their inclusion of reported shootings with no fatalities.

Either way, a lot of students have had the misfortune of experiencing such an event.

       When we disaggregate the shootings by category, we see some striking patterns.

Although indiscriminate shootings generate the greatest number of direct victims, they generate

the smallest number of indirect victims. Consistent with their lower incidence, around 25,000 of

the 180,000 students (13.9 percent) who were exposed to a school shooting faced one that was

indiscriminate in nature. Almost three times that level (69,000) attended schools in which a

suicide using a firearm took place. Another 63,000 attended schools where personal attacks and

crime-related events led to a school shooting.

       Table 2 shows that substantial racial and ethnic differences exist as well. White students

are far more likely to attend schools where an indiscriminate shooting or gun-related suicide

occurs, relative to black and Hispanic students. The exact opposite pattern is true for personal

attacks and crime-related shootings. Indeed, the two patterns offset: if we compare the

racial/ethnic composition of students facing any type of shooting, it is comparable to the overall

student population (shown in the first column). If we do not disaggregate the shootings, we

would overlook these important differences.

       A similar pattern occurs when we consider the percentage of students at a school

receiving free or reduced-price lunches. These services are provided to students with household

incomes below 130 percent and 185 percent of the federal poverty line, respectively. In the full

sample of shootings, 36.4 percent of students enrolled in those schools receive free or reduced-

price lunches, a level that is approximately representative of all school students (38.2 percent).

Yet examining shootings separately by category reveals that suicides and indiscriminate

shootings tend to affect schools with fewer students receiving subsidized lunches. The opposite
                                                                         Levine and McKnight, p. 13


is true for personal attacks and crime-related shootings, which tend to affect schools where more

students receive subsidized lunches. That is, socioeconomic status among those who are exposed

to a school shooting varies with the nature of the shooting.

D. Geographic Variation

       The simplest way to see the geographic variation in the incidence of school shootings is

with a map. Figure 3 reports the locations of each category of school shooting between 1999 and

2019. Again, important differences are apparent when we compare geographic patterns in

indiscriminate shootings and suicides from crime-related shootings and personal attacks. The

latter two categories are much more likely to occur in more densely populated areas, like

California, Southern Florida, and the District of Columbia. Fewer of them occur in the less-

densely populated middle of the country. But suicides and indiscriminate shootings are more

likely to occur in those locations. The line of suicides in Texas ­ seemingly along the I-35

corridor ­ is particularly striking. This geographic variation would not be apparent in maps that

represent all school shootings; combining categories of shootings makes them appear more like a

uniform national problem (Beauchamp, 2014). That assessment is too simplistic.

       Of course, these locational differences are also correlated with other differences

regarding the social and economic environment of these locations. Table 3 documents these

patterns. The first column indicates the national school average of each statistic and the second

column indicates the value of the same statistic at those schools where a shooting has occurred.

The remainder of the table breaks down those schools by the category of shooting and reports the

same statistics. Statistics are reported at the state, county, and/or zip code of the school,

depending on availability.
                                                                       Levine and McKnight, p. 14


       These data confirm the visual impressions observed in the maps ­ school shootings as a

whole are largely uniformly distributed across the country, but separating them by type reveals

clear differences. The population density (population per square mile, measured in 2000) of the

counties and zip codes in which school shootings occurred roughly matches the national

averages. This is not true once we disaggregate the shootings into categories. Those counties/zip

codes in which indiscriminate shootings or suicides took place in a school have population

densities that are less than half the national average. These are more rural locations. Personal

attacks and crime-related school shootings, in contrast, occurred in locations with population

density that is well above the national average. These are more urban locations.

       The next three panels of the table present differences across locations in racial

composition, poverty rates, and the percentage of single parent households in the county and zip

code of the school (all measured in 2000). The conclusions of the analysis are comparable,

regardless of the geographic level at which we measure these characteristics. Indiscriminate

shootings and suicides are more likely to occur in locations with a lower percentage of under-

represented minorities, lower poverty rates, and lower rates of single parenthood relative to

national averages. Personal attacks and crime-related shootings display the exact opposite

pattern; all these rates are higher than the national average. However, if we aggregate these

shootings, they appear to be roughly nationally representative.

       Indeed, when we compare these results between county-level and zip code-level

measures, we see that the differences are even more extreme at the zip code level. The third line

in the reported results for each factor is the ratio between the zip code level value and the county

level value. The fact that these ratios are greater than one for personal attacks and crime-related
                                                                               Levine and McKnight, p. 15


shootings and less than one for suicides and indiscriminate shootings support that point. The

more localized the measure, the greater the disparity.

        The remainder of the table provides statistics about other social and economic

characteristics of these locations. The Gini Coefficient is a measure of income inequality (higher

values indicate greater inequality). 12 Interestingly, the personal attacks and crime-related

shootings occurred in counties with greater income inequality. Labor market conditions

(measured at the time the shooting occurred) tend to be weaker, in those area where crime-

related shootings took place.

        Communities where these shootings occurred also differ meaningfully in terms of their

gun culture. Indiscriminate shootings and suicides are more likely to occur in locations with

weaker gun control laws, as measured by the state's "Brady Score" (higher scores reflect more

restrictive laws, measured as the average of 2007 through 2011 values). Gun sales (measured as

the average number of guns sold per capita in the state between 1999 and 2019) are also 34

percent higher than the national average in states where indiscriminate shootings occur. Personal

attacks and crime-related shootings, however, take place in states with at least the national-level

average on the Brady score.

III. DISCUSSION

        This analysis presents a number of findings that are relevant for public discussions

regarding the incidence of school shootings and the students who are exposed to them. We focus

our methods on identifying those shootings that are less likely to be subject to reporting bias and

more likely to have affected students enrolled in the school. These goals limit our attention to




12
 These data reflect adult incomes of individuals born between 1980 and 1982 contained in the "core sample" from
Chetty et al. (2014).
                                                                                    Levine and McKnight, p. 16


those shootings that resulted in at least one death and that took place during school hours on a

school day.

         The incidence of these shootings and the number of fatalities associated with them have

not changed much over time. The most notable pattern in these data is that fatalities spike in the

handful of years when high-victimization events occurred. These high-profile shootings occur

infrequently enough that it would be inappropriate to draw any conclusions regarding a trend.

This pattern appears to differ from the general trend towards more frequent mass shootings (not

restricted to a school environment), as documented elsewhere (Follman, Aronsen, and Pan, 2019;

and U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2019). 13 Since those events are

defined by the large number of deaths that occur in each one, the likelihood of reporting bias

seems considerably lower.

         A key finding from our analysis is the importance of taking into account the category in

which each school shooting falls. The different types affect very different populations. Ignoring

these distinctions makes it appear that school shootings roughly equally affect different

population subgroups. That is not true. Indiscriminate shootings and suicides more commonly

affect white students, schools in more rural locations, and those where incomes are higher. The

opposite patterns are apparent for personal attacks and crime-related shootings. On net, they

balance, but conclusions drawn from analyses of aggregated data are likely to be misleading.

         This also means that limiting the types of shootings that analysts consider has the

potential to provide a skewed impression of the nature of school shootings. The New York Times'

examination of school shooting data (Cai and Patel, 2019), for instance, restricted its attention to

indiscriminate shootings. Perhaps that is the form of shooting that draws the greatest public

13
  Perhaps the increase in indiscriminate school shootings in the past several years is consistent with the overall
increase in mass shootings, but the frequency of this type of school shooting is small relative to the broader category
of mass shootings.
                                                                        Levine and McKnight, p. 17


attention, but it also means that the results presented are more likely to pertain to higher income

whites outside of cities. Overlooking the impact on other population subgroups is problematic.

Other children are just as likely to attend a school in which a shooting fatality occurs, but those

shootings are overlooked because they fall into a different category.

       Our findings can help inform public policy discussions. It is important to recognize that

our analysis is not intended to identify factors that have a causal effect on the likelihood of a

school shooting. An important goal of public policy should be to reduce the occurrence of school

shootings, but we do not directly address potential approaches to achieving that goal.

       Nonetheless, there are lessons that are suggested by our results. First, it is unlikely that a

single policy response can help reduce the occurrence of school shootings. The existence of

multiple types of school shootings makes this virtually impossible. Perhaps community policing,

stricter enforcement of drug laws or some other policy that is directed at reducing crime in and

around schools would help reduce crime-related shootings, but those policies would be unlikely

to affect indiscriminate shootings. Perhaps improved provision of mental health services could

help reduce indiscriminate shootings, but it is less likely to have an impact on crime-related

shootings. Without taking a stand on what the correct policies are to address these problems, it is

nevertheless clear that a multi-pronged approach is necessary.

       Second, our results suggest that stricter gun control laws are unlikely to uniformly

address the problem. If school shootings were more likely to take place in locations where gun

control laws were particularly lax, then strengthening them would have the potential to reduce

the shootings (although, again, we are only raising the possibility of a causal effect ­ we do not

provide sufficient evidence to definitely support that conclusion). This is true in locations where

indiscriminate shootings and suicides take place. Alternatively, if locations in which shootings
                                                                             Levine and McKnight, p. 18


occur already have more substantive restrictions in place, additional restrictions are less likely to

be effective. This is the case in locations in which personal attacks and crime-related shootings

occur. Background check laws, for instance, may already be in place in those locations, reducing

the number of potential gun policy levers.

        It is also important to put in perspective the magnitudes of the numbers presented here.

For instance, we report 143 school shootings in which one fatality occurred over the past 21

years. Mass shootings, more generally, are considerably more common and deadly. Only seven

of the school shootings we include in our analysis qualify as mass shootings by the Mother Jones
                                                                                 14
definition (4 or more fatalities ­ see Follman, Aronsen, and Pan, 2019).              Mother Jones

identifies 73 other mass shootings that occurred in the same time frame. Moreover, teen suicide

is a vastly bigger problem than those that occur in a school as the result of a discharged firearm.

We identify 55 such suicides between 1999 and 2019, but 28,707 suicides took place among

those between the ages of 12 and 18 between 1999 and 2017, with 12,466 of them using a

firearm (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, multiple years)

        Schools are a special place, though, and our children deserve a safe location to learn and

grow. We need to find ways to enable that to happen free from the threat of gun violence. An

important first step is a better understanding of the nature of the problem, as we have tried to

provide in this analysis. In future research, we will also explore the impact on the subsequent

well-being of children who are exposed to school shootings. 15




14
   Mother Jones also includes two mass shootings that we excluded (West Nickel Mines and Rancho Tehama)
because of difficulties associated with merging these shootings with other databases.
15
   Rossin-Slater, et al. (2019) have examined this issue in the context of anti-depressant use.
         Table 1: Reports of School Shootings following High Victimization Shootings
                                      and at Other Times
                                       12 months
                                       following          12 months
                                  high victimization      following         Other Months
                                        Shooting           Parkland          (since 1999)
Reported shootings per month               5.3                9.7                 3.4

Reported shootings per month             3.8                 7.0                2.3
with no fatalities

Average number of fatalities            0.31                0.37                0.40
per reported shooting

Percentage of reported shootings          28%                28%                  33%
with any fatalities
Note: High victimization shootings include Columbine High School (4/1999), Red Lake Senior
High School (3/2005), Sandy Hook Elementary School (12/2012), Marjory Stoneman Douglas
High School, Parkland (2/2018), and Santa Fe High School (5/2018). All high victimization
shootings include Parkland.
                 Table 2: Students Exposed to School Shootings During the School Day that Result in a Fatality

                              All          Total                                       Personal         Crime-
                            Students      Exposed     Indiscriminate     Suicide        Attack          Related   Other
Number Exposed                 ---        179,917         24,781         69,314         35,434          27,535    22,853

                                                                  Characteristics of Exposed Students
White                        55.7%         47.5%          68.5%           60.2%          40.7%          20.8%     28.1%
Black                        16.2%         19.5%           3.5%           13.5%          35.1%          30.2%     18.3%
Hispanic                     20.6%         25.4%          16.9%           18.7%          19.6%          44.0%     42.0%
Free/Reduced Price Lunch     38.3%         36.8%          25.5%           28.1%          39.8%          50.4%     55.9%
                    Table 3: Characteristics of Communities where School Shootings Have Occurred, by Category
                                                       all schools
                                                           with         Indis-              crime- Personally
                                           all schools shootings      criminate suicide     related    targeted           Other
population density (county)                   1,482       1,218          536        637      2,238      1,708             1,809
population density (zip)                      1,450       1,617          705        883      3,223      1,902             2,556

percent non-white (county)                   26.8%         30.5%          21.0%       26.4%       43.5%       28.5%       44.1%
percent non-white (zip)                      27.3%         34.6%          12.6%       22.7%       60.9%       40.5%       55.9%
percent non-white (zip/county ratio)          1.02          1.13           0.60        0.86        1.40        1.42        1.27

poverty rate (county)                        12.4%         12.7%          10.8%       12.1%       15.0%       11.9%       16.0%
poverty rate (zip)                           12.8%         14.4%           8.0%       11.5%       18.2%       16.6%       21.9%
poverty rate (zip/county ratio)               1.3           1.13           0.75        0.95        1.21        1.40        1.37

percent single parent (county)               27.5%         28.7%          26.6%       27.0%       30.2%       30.9%       30.8%
percent single parent (zip)                  28.3%         31.4%          21.3%       26.3%       37.6%       39.3%       36.8%
percent single parent (zip/county ratio)      1.03          1.09           0.80        0.97        1.25        1.27        1.20

Gini coefficient (county)                       0.435        0.460           0.433      0.436      0.512        0.474        0.485
unemployment rate (county)                        5.8          5.6             5.1        5.2        6.1          5.6          6.7
Brady Score (state)                              23.7         22.6            16.5       19.1       41.9         21.4         20.8
Gun Sales per 1,000 pop (state)                  53.8         56.0            71.9       48.8       45.1         69.5         48.5
Note: shootings are restricted to those that took place during school hours on a school day and resulted in a fatality. Population
density, percent non-white, poverty rate, and percent single parent reflect 2000 values. The unemployment rate and gun sales are
measured in the year of the shooting. The Brady Score reflects the average values between 2007 and 2011. The Gini coefficient
represents individuals born between 1980 and 1982 contained in the "core sample" from Chetty, et al. (2014).
Figure 3: Locations of School Shootings with Fatalities in the United States, 1999-2019
                Indiscriminate                                  Suicide




                Crime-Related                              Personally Targeted
                                          References

Beauchamp, Zack (2014). "This map shows every school shooting since Sandy Hook." Vox. June
15th (available at: https://www.vox.com/2014/6/10/5797306/map-school-shooting-sandy-hook,
accessed 10/6/2019).

Cai, Weiyi and Jugal K. Patel (2019). A Half-Century of School Shootings Like Columbine,
Sandy Hook and Parkland." New York Times, May 11th (available at:
https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/05/11/us/school-shootings-united-states.html,
accessed 10/6/2019).

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez (2014). "Where is the Land of
Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States." Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1553-1623.

CNN (2019). "10 Years. 180 School Shootings. 356 Victims." (available at:
https://www.cnn.com/interactive/2019/07/us/ten-years-of-school-shootings-trnd/, accessed
10/6/2019).

Cox, John Woodrow, Steven Rich, Allyson Chiu, John Muyskens and Monica Ulmanu (2019).
"More Than 228,000 Students Have Experienced Gun Violence at School Since Columbine."
Washington Post. May 8th (available at:
https://www.washingtonpost.com/graphics/2018/local/school-shootings-database/, accessed
10/6/2019).

Every Town for Gun Safety (2019). "Gunfire on School Grounds in the United States."
(available at: https://everytownresearch.org/gunfire-in-school/12420/#12420, accessed
10/6/2019).

Fetters, Ashley (2019). "Lasting Grief after a Mass Shooting." The Atlantic (available at:
https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2019/03/grief-school-shootings-suicide/585865/,
accessed 10/10/2019).

Follman, Mark, Gavin Aronsen, and Deanna Pan (2019), "US Mass Shootings, 1982-2019: Data
from Mother Jones' Investigation," Mother Jones, August 31, 2019. (available at
https://www.motherjones.com/politics/2012/12/mass-shootings-mother-jones-full-data/, accessed
9/22/2019).

Frankenberg, Erica, Jongyeon Ee, Jennifer B. Ayscue, Gary Orfield (2019). Harming our
Common Future: America's Segregated Schools 65 Years after Brown. Los Angeles: UCLA
Civil Rights Project (available at: https://www.civilrightsproject.ucla.edu/research/k-12-
education/integration-and-diversity/harming-our-common-future-americas-segregated-schools-
65-years-after-brown/Brown-65-050919v4-final.pdf, accessed 10/13/2019).

Gaudiano, Nicole (2019). "Parkland and Santa Fe Schools Disclose Devastating After-Effects of
Shootings." Politico (available at: https://www.politico.com/news/2019/10/10/parkland-santa-fe-
school-shootings-effects-students-043687, accessed 10/10/2019).
Hagey, Keach, Lukas I. Alpert and Yaryna Serkez (2019). "In News Industry, a Stark Divide
Between Haves and Have-Nots." Wall Street Journal. May 4th (available at:
https://www.wsj.com/graphics/local-newspapers-stark-divide/, accessed 10/6/2019).

Harper, Kristin Renee Ryberg, Deborah Temkin (2018). Data Sources Make It Difficult To Know
How Many School Shootings Happen Each Year. (available at:
https://www.childtrends.org/data-sources-make-it-difficult-to-know-whether-school-shootings-
are-happening-more-often, accessed 10/6/2019).

Kaste, Martin (2018). "Despite Heightened Fear Of School Shootings, It's Not A Growing
Epidemic." National Public Radio, Morning Edition, March 15th (available at:
https://www.npr.org/2018/03/15/593831564/the-disconnect-between-perceived-danger-in-u-s-
schools-and-reality, accessed 10/6/2019).

Katsiyannis, Antonis, Denise K. Whitford, Robin Parks Ennis (2018). "Historical Examination of
United States Intentional Mass School Shootings in the 20th and 21st Centuries: Implications for
Students, Schools, and Society." Journal of Child and Family Studies 27(8): 2562­2573

Riedman, David and Desmond O'Neill (2018). K-12 School Shooting Database: Research
Methodology. Naval Postgraduate School, Center for Homeland Defense and Security,
Homeland Security Advanced Thinking Program (HSx). https://www.chds.us/ssdb/methods/

Rossin-Slater, Maya, Molly Schnell, Hannes Schwandt, Sam Trejo, and Lindsey Uniat (2019).
"Exposure to School Shootings Raises Youth Antidepressant Use." Unpublished manuscript,
Stanford University.

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Underlying Cause of Death 1999-2017 on CDC WONDER Online Database, released 2018.
Accessed at http://wonder.cdc.gov/ucd-icd10.html on September 20, 2019.


U.S. Department of Justice, Federal Bureau of Investigation (2019), "Active Shooter Incidents in
the United States from 2000-2018." (available at: https://www.fbi.gov/file-repository/active-
shooter-incidents-2000-2018.pdf, accessed 9/22/2019).
                                          Data Appendix

The CHDS Database

       Our primary data source is the K-12 School Shooting Database created by the Naval

Postgraduate School's Center for Homeland Defense and Security (CHDS). This database is

intended to be a publicly-available resource that systematically and comprehensively catalogs

"each and every instance a gun is brandished on school property for any reason, regardless of the

number of victims (including zero), time, day of the week, or category (e.g. planned attack,

accidental, domestic violence, gang-related)" (Riedman and O'Neill, 2018).

       To create the database, the researchers aggregated pre-existing lists of school shootings

created by entities ranging from government agencies (e.g., the FBI) to the news media (e.g. the

Washington Post) to Wikipedia. They also searched newspaper archives and conducted web

searches. All shootings included in the database include a reference to a source that describes the

incident, usually a news account. The researchers are in the process of validating all the

information in the database with police reports or court records.

       While there are many potential definitions of a "school shooting," the CHDS database

relies on a broad definition, basely solely on the location of the shooting. Because the database

aims to be comprehensive, it includes shootings that range from mass-casualty events such as the

1999 shooting at Columbine High School to shootings with no injuries, such as a 2011 incident

in Crown Point, Indiana in which a school bus window was damaged by a bb gun around 6:00

a.m. As discussed in the main text, we rely on a narrower definition of a school shooting in

order to ensure that the shootings are consistently reported across locations and over time and to

highlight those shootings that are the most likely to affect students attending the affected school.
       The CHDS separates shootings into 19 separate categories, including accidental

discharge of a firearm. The most common of these 19 categories over the twenty-one-year

period of our focus are Escalation of Dispute (224), Unknown (149), Accidental (103), Gang-

related (90), and Suicide/Attempted (80). Although this detail is incredibly valuable, for our

analytical purposes, we choose to consolidate these categories into a smaller number. We

aggregate their categories to five, which are related to the CHDS' categories as follows:

       (1) indiscriminate shootings: indiscriminate shootings

       (2) suicide: Murder/Suicide, Suicide/Attempted

       (3) personal attacks: Escalation of Dispute, Anger Over Grade/Suspension/ Discipline,

           Bullying, Domestic w/ Targeted Victim, Murder.

       (4) crime-related: Gang-related, Hostage Standoff, Illegal Drug Related, Robbery

       (5) other: Mental Health, Intentional Property Damage, Officer Involved Shooting,

           Racial, Self Defense, Accidental, Unknown.

Reporting Bias

       As noted in the text, any analysis of patterns of school shootings needs to rely on a

consistent measure of their incidence. If shootings are more likely to be captured in the data at

certain times or certain places, the reported patterns may not be representative of the actual

experience. Despite the incredible strength of the CHDS data, it is subject to this problem

because it relies heavily ­ and necessarily ­ on media reports. Indeed, the CHDS researchers

point out an example of this concern, observing that their database captures a smaller proportion

of shootings in the years before on-line news stories became prevalent. They write:

       Preliminary analysis of the compiled information from the existing databases

       showed a small number of school shootings organized by year in the 1970's and
       1980's compared to years after 1990. After 1990, the increased popularity of the

       Internet resulted in the widespread availability of online news stories which

       remain accessible without a need to archive the files. Print newspapers from prior

       to 1990 were not retroactively archived for online users by most publishers.

       (Riedman and O'Neill, 2018).

They are describing a form of reporting bias, in which the reduced access to archival news

reports prior to the 1990s implies that the number of school shootings that appear in the database

may be artificially low for these years. This bias is one reason that we focus our analysis on data

beginning in 1999.

       Another form of reporting bias over time may occur, if the news media are more focused

on school shootings ­ and, therefore, likely to report an occurrence of one ­ at times of

heightened public sensitivity, such as after a high-profile shooting. As discussed in the main text,

we find evidence consistent with this concern. As shown in Table 1, the months following a

high victimization event include more reported shootings, more shootings reported with no

fatalities, fewer fatalities per shooting, and a lower percentage of shootings with any fatalities.

These findings are consistent with the possibility that shootings with no injuries are considered

more newsworthy in the aftermath of a high-victimization event.

       We have similar concerns about the possibility of reporting bias in the cross-section.

Across locations, school shootings may be more likely to be reported in some places than others.

As the CHDS researchers note,

       "Even after the widespread adoption of online media reporting, our research

       found that in some cases, local newspapers continued to have the sole accounts of

       school shooting incidents into the 2000's" (Riedman and O'Neill, 2018).
       Therefore, locations with a greater local media presence are more likely to have written

accounts of school shootings, while incidents in more rural locations with less media presence

may be overlooked. The collapse of local newspapers in recent years in those locations

exacerbates the problem (Hagey, Alpert and Serkez, 2019). Indeed, as discussed in the main text,

we see patterns in the data consistent with this form of reporting bias as well, with a higher

relative frequency of reported non-fatal shootings in urban areas than in rural areas. Perhaps

school shootings in rural areas really are more lethal than those in urban areas, but reporting bias

due to differential media coverage is a plausible alternative that cannot be easily dismissed.

       Concerns about such reporting bias dictate most of our choices in modifying the CHDS

database for our analysis.

Sample Restrictions

       The CHDS database documents over 1,400 shootings from 1970 to the present. We focus

on the most recent 21 years in the database, limiting our analysis to 859 shootings that occurred

between 1999 and 2019. Among these shootings, 5% have been validated by official records,

such as police reports.

       Because the decision about whether to write a news article about a shooting with no

fatalities may vary across locations or over time, we exclude 584 shootings that did not result in

a fatality. This exclusion does not affect all categories of shootings equally. Only 7.8% of the

accidental shootings ­ out of the initial 103 reported accidental shootings since 1999­ resulted in

a fatality, so most accidental shootings are excluded from our database. Likewise, 16.8% of

shootings of "unknown" category resulted in a fatality, so many of these are excluded as well. In

contrast, 86.7% of the shootings that were classified as "Murder/Suicide", and 82.5% of those
classified as "Suicide/Attempted" included a fatality, so this restriction affects fewer of these

types of shootings.

         One of the goals of our analysis is to provide estimates of how many students have been

exposed to school shootings that can be compared over time, across locations, and across

demographic groups. Students are unlikely, however, to be directly exposed to shootings that

occur outside of school hours. We therefore exclude an additional 117 shootings that occurred

outside of school hours. This restriction is also likely to reduce the likelihood of reporting bias,

since a school shooting that results in a death while school is in session almost certainly would

receive some form of media coverage. Personally-targeted shootings and shootings in the

"other" category occur disproportionately outside of school hours, so 76 of the 117 fall into these

two categories. On the other hand, indiscriminate shootings never occur outside of school hours

and suicides are more likely to occur during school hours, so these types of shootings are less

affected.

         After making these exclusions, our database includes 158 shootings. Another 15 are

ultimately excluded because they cannot be matched to our other data sources, as described

below.

Additional Data Sources

         Our next step is to merge this database to a panel of Common Core data on the universe

of public schools from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES). The NCES data

provide a variety of useful information for our purposes. They include the county and mailing

zip code for every school, which we use to merge additional information about the school's local

environment to our data set. In addition, we analyze NCES data on school enrollment, broken

down by race and by free- and reduced-price lunch status.
        While the NCES data has many advantages, there are two disadvantages. First, we must

eliminate 15 shootings from our database, because they did not occur at traditional, public

schools. These 15 shootings occurred at private, special education, and vocational schools and

pre-schools, which cannot be uniformly matched to the NCES data.

        Second, NCES data are available only through the 2017-18 school year. To address this

issue, we assign values for each school for the 2018-19, and 2019-20 school years based on the

values that existed in 2017-18. Since school characteristics are unlikely to change dramatically

over such a short period of time, this assignment is unlikely to substantially affect the statistics

we report.

        To better describe the social and economic environment in schools that experience

shootings, we merge information about the share of the local population that is non-white, that is

living at incomes below the poverty rate, and the share of single-family households in the area.

These data are publicly available from Opportunity Insights (at

https://opportunityinsights.org/data/) which provides them at the county and Census tract level;

Chetty, et al. (2014) describe the generation of these data. We compute weighted means of the

Census tract level data to create zip code level measures that can be merged to our data, in

addition to the county-level measures. We use both county- and zip code-level data about the

economic and social environment. These merges do not require any additional changes to our

database. Zip code level data constructed in this way do not match data from Opportunity

Insights for three of the shootings; those schools are dropped when calculating zip-code level

characteristics.
       We also merge our shooting data to data on population density from the Census Bureau,

measured at the county- and zipcode-level in 2000, and data on the unemployment rate, which

vary by county and year, from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

       In order to better understand the "gun culture" in areas that have experienced school

shootings, we add information about average annual gun sales per capita in each state between

1999 and 2019. These data reflect the annual number of background checks, as measured by the

FBI's National Instant Criminal Background Check System, for individuals seeking to purchase

a gun through a licensed dealer. The number of background checks measures the number of gun

sales with error: some background checks may not lead to a gun sale, others lead to the sale of

multiple firearms, and some transactions are not through licensed dealers. However, the number

of background checks is highly correlated with other measures of firearm sales and is routinely

used as a proxy for gun sales (Depetris-Chauvin 2015; Lang 2013; Lang 2016; Levine and

McKnight 2017).

       As another measure of the gun environment, we add a state-level measure of the strength

of gun control laws that is compiled as "scorecards" by the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun

Violence. They provide a score for every state in each year between 2007 and 2011, which

ranges from 0 to 100, with 100 reflecting the strongest gun laws. Since the measures are highly

correlated over time, with California always earning the highest score and the same group of

states typically earning the lowest scores, we simply take a state-level average of the five annual

scores and merge it to our database as a time-invariant assessment of gun laws in each state.

Our Final Database

       Our final database includes 143 shootings that occurred during school hours at traditional

public schools and resulted in at least one fatality over the two decades between 1999 to 2019.
Among the school shootings in our sample, the information for17% of the shootings has been

validated with official records such as police reports. In addition, our final data set includes a

wealth of information about the economic and social environment in which the shootings

occurred.
                                   Appendix References:

Brady Campaign (2008-2012). State Gun Laws: Find Out Where Your State Ranks in Strong
      Gun Laws and Learn About Those Laws. Washington, DC: Brady Campaign to Prevent
      Gun Violence. Available at: https://www.gunpolicy.org/firearms/citation/quotes/1372,
      https://www.gunpolicy.org/firearms/citation/quotes/7053,
      https://www.gunpolicy.org/firearms/citation/quotes/7052,
      https://www.gunpolicy.org/firearms/citation/quotes/7051,
      https://www.gunpolicy.org/firearms/citation/quotes/6893, Accessed 10/15/2019.

Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez (2014). "Where is the Land of
       Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States."
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(4): 1553-1623.

Depetris-Chauvin, Emilio (2015). "Fear of Obama: An Empirical Study of the
       Demand for Guns and the U.S. 2008 Presidential Election," Journal of Public Economics
       130: pp. 66-79.

Lang, Matthew (2013). "Firearm Background Checks and Suicide," The Economic
       Journal 123: pp. 1085-1089.

Lang, Matthew (2016). "State Firearm Sales and Criminal Activity: Evidence from
       Firearm Background Checks," Southern Economic Journal 83: pp. 45-68.

Levine, Phillip B. and Robin McKnight (2017). "Firearms and Accidental Deaths:
       Evidence from the Aftermath of the Sandy Hook School Shooting," Science 358(6368):
       pp. 1324-1328.

Riedman, David and Desmond O'Neill (2018). K-12 School Shooting Database: Research
      Methodology. Naval Postgraduate School, Center for Homeland Defense and Security,
      Homeland Security Advanced Thinking Program (HSx).
      https://www.chds.us/ssdb/resources/uploads/2018/10/Intro-and-Methodology-K-12-
      SSDB.pdf. Accessed 10/15/2019.
 Appendix Table 1: Schools that Experienced a Shooting that Occurred on a School Day during
                    School Hours and Resulted in a Fatality, 1999-2019.

Name                                        City                   State    Date

                                   Indiscriminate
Columbine High School                     Littleton                CO          4/20/1999
Rock L Butler Middle School               Wellsboro                PA           6/4/2003
Red Lake Senior High School               Red Lake                 MN          3/21/2005
Weston High School                        Cazenovia                WI          9/29/2006
Larose-Cut Off Middle School              Cut Off                  LA          5/18/2009
Chardon High School                       Chardon                  OH          2/27/2012
Sandy Hook Elementary School              Sandy Hook               CT         12/14/2012
Sparks Middle School                      Sparks                   NV         10/21/2013
Arapahoe High School                      Centennial               CO         12/13/2013
Reynolds High School                      Troutdale                OR          6/10/2014
Townville Elementary                      Townville                SC          9/28/2016
Freeman High School                       Rockford                 WA          9/13/2017
Aztec High School                         Aztec                    NM          12/7/2017
Marshall County High School               Benton                   KY          1/23/2018
Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School      Parkland                 FL          2/14/2018
Jackson Memorial Middle School            Massillon                OH          2/20/2018
Santa Fe High School                      Santa Fe                 TX          5/18/2018
Dennis Intermediate School                Richmond                 IN         12/13/2018
STEM School                               Highlands Ranch          CO           5/7/2019
Saugus High School                        Saugus                   CA         11/14/2019

                                         Suicide
Central High School                         Carrollton             GA           1/8/1999
Richland High School                        North Richland Hills   TX          1/21/1999
Jasper County High School                   Monticello             GA          8/25/1999
Santa Teresa High School                    San Jose               CA           9/9/1999
Carmichael Elementary School                Sierra Vista           AZ          5/10/2000
Hoover Senior High School                   San Diego              CA           3/2/2001
Kleb Intermediate School                    Klein                  TX           4/2/2001
Ennis High School                           Ennis                  TX          5/15/2001
Taylorsville High School                    Salt Lake City         UT         10/12/2001
Page Middle School                          San Antonio            TX          10/4/2002
Northeast Lauderdale High School            Meridian               MS          3/21/2003
Forest Hills High School                    Sidman                 PA          5/13/2003
Crescent School                             Joyce                  WA          3/17/2004
Lakeside High School                        Nine Mile Falls        WA          12/9/2004
Highland Elementary School                  Camp Hill              PA          5/17/2005
C M Russell High School                 Great Falls      MT    1/30/2006
Castle High School                      Newburgh         IN    8/21/2006
Springfield Township High School        Erdenheim        PA   12/12/2006
Crook County High School                Prineville       OR     2/8/2007
H.H. Dow High School                    Midland          MI     3/7/2007
Greenville High School                  Greenville       TX     3/7/2007
North Mecklenburg High School           Huntersville     NC    4/18/2007
Tidehaven High School                   El Maton         TX     5/4/2007
Wp Davidson High School                 Mobile           AL     3/6/2008
Madison High School                     Tallulah         LA    5/16/2008
Mira Loma High School                   Sacramento       CA    9/15/2008
Vasquez High School                     Acton            CA   10/20/2008
Sheboygan North High School             Sheboygan        WI     5/1/2009
Canandaigua Academy                     Canandaigua      NY     5/5/2009
Banks County High School                Homer            GA    8/24/2012
Stillwater Junior High School           Stillwater       OK    9/26/2012
Davidson Middle School                  Southgate        MI    3/21/2013
Temple High School                      Temple           TX    4/16/2013
Lanier High School                      Austin           TX   10/15/2013
Bend Senior High School                 Bend             OR     2/7/2014
Greenwood Lakes Middle School           Lake Mary        FL    9/10/2014
Benton Elementary School                Benton           ME   12/17/2014
Seguin High School                      Seguin           TX    4/17/2015
Corona Del Sol High School              Tempe            AZ    5/12/2015
Robinson High School                    Robinson         TX    5/20/2015
Thomas Jefferson High School            Cedar Rapids     IA     9/9/2016
Grand Junction High School              Grand Junction   CO    11/2/2016
North Park Elementary School            San Bernardino   CA    4/10/2017
Lee's Summit North High School          Lee's Summit     MO    9/29/2017
Lake Minneola High School               Minneola         FL   11/14/2017
Salem High School                       Virginia Beach   VA   11/30/2017
Coronado Elementary School              Hereford         AZ     1/9/2018
Kingston High School                    Cadet            MO     3/5/2018
Great Mills High School                 Great Mills      MD    3/20/2018
McKinney North High School              McKinney         TX     6/1/2018
Appling County High School              Baxley           GA    9/24/2018
Jefferson High School                   Jefferson        NY   12/10/2018
Lake Mary High School                   Lake Mary        FL    3/13/2019
Washington Middle School                Lyons            IL    4/17/2019
Concord High School                     Concord          AR    4/24/2019

                                   Crime-Related
Richmond High School                     Richmond        CA    12/7/2000
Norland Elementary School                   Miami             FL   12/21/2000
Hueneme High School                         Oxnard            CA    1/10/2001
John Mcdonogh Senior High School            New Orleans       LA    4/14/2003
TM Peirce Elementary School                 Philadelphia      PA    2/11/2004
Proviso East High School                    Maywood           IL    8/30/2004
Locke (Alain Leroy) Senior High School      Los Angeles       CA    3/17/2005
Birney Elementary School                    Fresno            CA   10/27/2005
Campbell County Comp. High School           Jacksboro         TN    11/8/2005
Venice Senior High School                   Los Angeles       CA     6/5/2006
Platte Canyon High School                   Bailey            CO    9/27/2006
Barnard-White Middle School                 Union City        CA   12/21/2007
Lakota Middle School                        Federal Way       WA    8/14/2008
Discovery Middle School                     Madison           AL     2/5/2010
Sullivan Central High School                Blountville       TN    8/30/2010
Alisal High School                          Salinas           CA    10/1/2010
Marinette High School                       Marinette         WI   11/29/2010
Miami Carol City Senior High School         Miami Gardens     FL   11/20/2014
Jeremiah E Burke High School                Dorchester        MA     6/8/2016
Rancho Tehama Elementary School             Corning           CA   11/14/2017

                                  Personally-Targeted
Martin Luther King High School              Philadelphia      PA   10/26/1999
Buell Elementary School                     Flint             MI    2/29/2000
Lake Worth Community Middle School          Lake Worth        FL    5/26/2000
Timken High School                          Canton            OH    7/26/2000
Lake Clifton-Eastern High School            Baltimore         MD    1/17/2001
Santana High School                         Santee            CA     3/5/2001
Latonia Elementary School                   Covington         KY    9/12/2001
Red Lion Area Junior High School            Red Lion          PA    4/24/2003
Vicksburg High School                       Vicksburg         MS    9/10/2003
Rocori Senior High School                   Cold Spring       MN    9/24/2003
Ballou High School                          Washington        DC     2/2/2004
Carrick High School                         Pittsburgh        PA    3/16/2005
Weequahic High School                       Newark            NJ    7/18/2005
Milwee Middle School                        Longwood          FL    1/13/2006
Essex Elementary School                     Essex Junction    VT    8/24/2006
SuccessTech Academy School                  Cleveland         OH   10/10/2007
E. O. Green Junior High School              Oxnard            CA    2/12/2008
Central High School                         Knoxville         TN    8/21/2008
Dillard High School                         Fort Lauderdale   FL   11/12/2008
Birney Elementary School                    Tacoma            WA    2/26/2010
Millard South High School                   Omaha             NE     1/5/2011
Louisiana Schnell Elementary School         Placerville       CA     2/2/2011
West View High School                 Avondale        AZ    5/25/2012
Mary Scroggs Elementary School        Chapel Hill     NC    5/25/2012
Raytown Success Academy               Kansas City     MO    2/20/2014
Marysville Pilchuck High School       Marysville      WA   10/24/2014
Independence High School              Glendale        AZ    2/12/2016
Alpine High School                    Alpine          TX     9/8/2016
John Hardin High School               Elizabethtown   KY    3/29/2018
Butler High School                    Matthews        NC   10/29/2018
Cascade Middle School                 Eugene          OR    1/11/2019
Sarah J. Anderson Elementary School   Vancouver       WA   11/26/2019
                                    Other
Deming Middle School                  Deming            NM   11/19/1999
Ridgewood High School                 New Port Richey   FL    1/19/2000
Irving Middle School                  San Antonio       TX   11/16/2005
Seven Lakes High School               Katy              TX   10/17/2006
Foss High School                      Tacoma            WA     1/3/2007
Roosevelt High School                 Fresno            CA    4/16/2008
Aplington-Parkersburg High School     Aplington         IA    6/24/2009
Carolina Forest High School           Myrtle Beach      SC   10/16/2009
Cummings Middle School                Brownsville       TX     1/4/2012
Jay High School                       San Antonio       TX    6/29/2015
McNair Elementary School              Chicago           IL    6/16/2016
Montpelier High School                Montpelier        VT    1/16/2018
Huffman High School                   Birmingham        AL     3/7/2018
Central High School                   Philadelphia      PA    9/24/2018
Phoebus High School                   Hampton           VA    9/16/2019
Esteban Torres High School            Los Angeles       CA   11/13/2019
