                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       STRUCTURAL REFORMS AND ELECTIONS:
                    EVIDENCE FROM A WORLD-WIDE NEW DATASET

                                       Alberto F. Alesina
                                         Davide Furceri
                                       Jonathan D. Ostry
                                       Chris Papageorgiou
                                        Dennis P. Quinn

                                       Working Paper 26720
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26720


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We thank participants and discussants in various conference and universities for their valuable
comments and suggestions. We are grateful to Hites Ahir, Gabriele Ciminelli, Jun Ge, and Du
Huancheng for superb research assistance, and Karina Chavez for excellent editorial assistance.
We also thank Haillie Lee, Amy Pond, Maria Toyoda, and Ke Wang for their superb work on the
project. This paper is part of a research project on macroeconomic policy in low-income countries
supported by the U.K.'s Department for International Development. Quinn gratefully
acknowledges support from the National Science Foundation. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26720.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Alberto F. Alesina, Davide Furceri, Jonathan D. Ostry, Chris Papageorgiou, and
Dennis P. Quinn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Structural Reforms and Elections: Evidence from a World-Wide New Dataset
Alberto F. Alesina, Davide Furceri, Jonathan D. Ostry, Chris Papageorgiou, and Dennis P.
Quinn
NBER Working Paper No. 26720
January 2020
JEL No. D72,J65,L43,L51,O43,O47,P16

                                          ABSTRACT

We assemble two unique databases. One is on reforms in domestic finance, external finance,
trade, product markets and labor markets, which covers 90 advanced and developing economies
from 1973 to 2014. The other is on electoral results and timing of elections. In the 66
democracies considered in the paper, we show that liberalizing reforms engender benefits for the
economy, but they materialize only gradually over time. Partly because of this delayed effect, and
possibly because voters are impatient or do not anticipate future benefits, liberalizing reforms are
costly to incumbents when implemented close to elections. We also find that the electoral effects
depend on the state of the economy at the time of reform: reforms are penalized during
contractions; liberalizing reforms undertaken in expansions are often rewarded. Voters seem to
attribute current economic conditions to the reforms without fully internalizing the delay that it
takes for reforms to bear fruit.

Alberto F. Alesina                               Chris Papageorgiou
Department of Economics                          International Monetary Fund
Harvard University                               700 19th St. N.W.
Littauer Center 210                              Washington, DC 20431
Cambridge, MA 02138                              cpapageorgiou@imf.org
and IGIER
and also NBER                                    Dennis P. Quinn
aalesina@harvard.edu                             McDonough School of Business
                                                 Georgetown University
Davide Furceri                                   Washington, DC 20057
International Monetary Fund                      quinnd@georgetown.edu
700 19th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20431
dfurceri@imf.org

Jonathan D. Ostry
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
HQ1-10-700
700 19th Street, N.W.
Washington DC, 20431
and CEPR
jostry@imf.org
"It ought to be remembered that there is nothing more difficult to take in hand, more perilous
to conduct, or more uncertain in its success, than to take the lead in the introduction of a new
order of things. Because the innovator has for enemies all those who have done well under
the old conditions, and lukewarm defenders in those who may do well under the new."

                                                                Niccolò Machiavelli, 1505.


                                    I. INTRODUCTION

       This paper has three goals. First is to introduce two new datasets. Our "Structural
Reform Database (SRD)" assembles and describes what is, as far as we know, the most
comprehensive data set on economic reforms for 90 countries for the period 1973 to
2014. These reforms include both domestic ones, such as goods and labor market
reforms, and international ones such as trade and external financial liberalization. The
reforms we document measure either a liberalization or a tightening of regulation. For
brevity we label "reform" a move toward liberalization; we make it clear where relevant
to distinguish between liberalizations and reversals or `tightening'. We construct an index
which summarizes all the reforms--the arithmetical average of all reform indicators--but
we also explore separately specific types of reform. Our second dataset includes the
precise timing and detailed electoral results in 66 democracies over the period from 1960
to 2018. The dataset also includes detailed institutional information on the electoral
systems used. Our second goal is to analyze the consequences for economic growth of
these reforms, which may vary depending upon when during the business cycle they are
implemented. The third goal is to examine the electoral consequences of reform using our
dataset on electoral outcomes for 66 democratic countries.
       We begin by documenting the evolution of reforms around the world. Since the
late 1980s, there has been a broad tendency toward liberalization across advanced and
developing economies, but the pace has declined since the Global Financial Crisis. This
has been especially notable for reforms covering domestic finance (mainly banking
reforms), and the external current and capital accounts, where there has been a (modest)
reversal of reform in some countries. The pattern of reform has been heterogeneous
across regions. Liberalizing reforms have been more aggressive in Europe, much less so
in the Middle East, Central Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. By 2014, the level of regulation


                                               2
in these latter regions remains significantly tighter than in Europe. We describe the
dataset and the reform patterns below and in more detail in the online appendix,
Appendix 1 "The Structural Reform Dataset."
       Our second set of results concerns the economic effects of reforms. We show that
liberalizing reforms are followed by an increase in growth, but with a lag of almost four
years. Regulatory tightening has immediate negative consequences for growth, but these
tend to dissipate over the medium term. The positive effects of liberalization and the
negative effects of tightening are similar in size. We also show that reforms implemented
in good times (i.e., in business cycle booms) generate additional growth compared to
reforms implemented in bad times (i.e., in recessions).
       The third set of results is on the electoral effects of reforms. We show that timing
is crucial along two dimensions: when the reform occurs relative to the electoral cycle
and when it occurs relative to the business cycle. Voters do not seem to fully internalize
the time that it takes for a reform to generate its effects on the economy. A liberalization
taken in the year ahead of an election is punished by the voters, who may not see any
immediate economic benefit on average, with certain sectors even experiencing economic
losses. The vote share of the main governing party (or coalition) declines following
reforms implemented in an election year, while the political cost disappears when
reforms are implemented earlier in the electoral cycle. The state of the business cycle also
shapes electoral consequences. We show that when economies are in contraction,
liberalizations (and tightening) are penalized at the ballot box. In contrast, reforms
undertaken during an expansion are not punished, and in some cases, are even rewarded.
Voters seem to have a hard time distinguishing between the effects of the business cycle
(with its manifold causes) and the reform itself, penalizing a government electorally for
reforms implemented during weak economic conditions. This result is quite reasonable
given the non-trivial delay in the realization of the positive effects of reforms, which we
have documented.
       Obviously, the choice of whether and when to implement reforms is endogenous.
Nevertheless, we find that most reforms are implemented during recessions, which seems
counterproductive from an electoral point of view. This suggests that often reforms are
imposed by the events during recessions or crises, thus when the timing may not be

                                                3
optimal from a political standpoint. In any event, one must consider the endogeneity of
the reform effort. For instance, a government may choose to adopt reforms when it knows
it can be reelected despite the reform due to its popularity across other dimensions. This
endogeneity may make the negative electoral effects of reforms look smaller (in absolute
terms). Another possible concern with endogeneity is that in some countries the
government has (some) discretion on when to call elections, while in others the discretion
does not exist.
        We try to address endogeneity in three ways. First, we consider reforms imposed
from abroad: those mandated because of an IMF-supported program. Second, we use an
instrumental variable (IV) approach, with the instrument based upon improvements in
democracy in trading partners (Giuliano et al., 2013; Acemoglu et al., 2019). Third, we
investigate the sub-sample of countries in which the timing of elections is exogenous--
that is, those countries in which the government has no discretion in calling new
elections. In each of these three approaches, the results point to stronger negative effects
of reforms on vote shares for the incumbent engaged in reform. This is consistent with
the OLS-baseline coefficient estimates being biased downward.
        Finally, we investigate whether our results differ across different types of political
systems, and country income groups: majoritarian versus proportional; coalitions versus
single-party government; new versus established democracies; and advanced versus
developing economies. We find that single party governments are punished more than the
party leader of a coalition government for election-year reforms, which seems consistent
with an attribution of responsibility, full for a single party government, shared in a
coalition government. Financial sector liberalizations are particularly costly to
incumbents. Electoral effects do not seem to vary significantly between majoritarian and
proportional systems or between new versus established democracies. The negative
effects of election-year reforms are larger in developing countries, although the
differences with developed economies are not statistically significant at standard
statistical levels.
        The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a brief
review of the literature on the economic and political effects of structural reforms.
Section III describes in some detail the structural reform indicators and introduces the

                                                4
electoral outcome dataset. Section IV describes the evolution of the reform process in the
last decades. Section V presents estimates of the growth effects of reforms. Section VI
examines the electoral impact of reforms. Section VII discusses endogeneity issues with
respect to the timing of reforms. Section VIII presents various extensions and the last
section concludes.


                              II. REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

       This section presents a selected survey of the literature on the economic and
political effects of reforms. For more extensive surveys, we refer to Ostry et al. (2009),
Henry (2007), Abiad and Mody (2005), Bekaert et al. (2005), Sturtzenegger and
Tommasi (1998), Haggard and Webb (1994), and Giuliano et al. (2013).


                            A. The economic effects of reforms

       Prati, Onorato, and Papageorgiou (2013) find that, on average, both trade and
financial sector reforms boost growth. Tressel and Detragiache (2008) show that domestic
financial reforms are associated with growth in countries with good institutions, and Quinn
and Toyoda (2008) show that capital account liberalization is positively associated with
medium-term growth. Finally, recent empirical work provides evidence that structural
reforms improve economic performance in advanced economies. Duval and Furceri (2018)
show that reforms in product and labor markets in 26 OECD countries raise growth, although
with significant lags.
       The timing of reform's growth benefits is unlikely to be immediate, however.
Blanchard and Giavazzi (2003) model labor and product market deregulations in the context
of frictions, and find that short-term decreases in wages and employment, especially for those
employed in "incumbent industries," are likely from liberalizations. Bassinini and Cingano
(2018), using the OECD labor markets database, find "transitory" increases in
unemployment, especially in recessionary periods, from liberalizations.




                                               5
                                      B. Electoral effects

       Economic conditions. Starting with Kramer (1977), Fair (1978), and Tufte (1978), for
the US, many studies show that voters are more likely to support incumbents and their parties
during good economic times, and to vote for the opposition when economic conditions
deteriorate (see Lewis-Beck and Tien (2008) for a review of this literature). Quinn and Woolley
(2001) show that increasing economic volatility reduces the vote shares of incumbent
candidates and parties in a comparative, cross-national setting. Increased international
economic exposure, which follows from reforms in trade and capital account, also appears to
affect incumbent electoral outcomes. Margalit (2011), Feigenbaum and Hall (2015), Autor et
al. (2016), and Che et al. (2016) find that trade exposure in import-competing industries has
electoral effects: politicians who advocate free trade receive fewer votes in constituencies with
high manufacturing trade exposure, especially to Chinese imports. Jensen, Quinn, and
Weymouth (2017) show a strong electoral effect from both the winners and losers of trade
exposure: high-skilled tradable service industry employment and low-skilled tradable
manufacturing employment is associated with increasing and decreasing incumbent vote
shares, respectively.
       Political Budget Cycles. A related literature studies whether policy actions taken
to eliminate structural deficits (and reduce inflation) are electorally costly. The literature
on this point is vast but a few recent pieces of work summarize the findings well. In an
influential study, Brender and Drazen (2008) find that voters are likely to punish rather
than reward persistent budget deficit over the leader's term in office, especially in
developed economies. Alesina et al. (2019a) show that, on average, governments that
drastically reduce budget deficits are not systematically punished at the polls. Alesina et
al. (2019b) find evidence that tax-based fiscal adjustments are punished by voters, but
expenditure-based ones are not.
       The Direct Electoral Costs of Reforms. While there has been theoretical work
rationalizing the electoral outcomes of enacting reforms, empirical evidence is typically
scant, based on a limited set of countries and with mixed results. Pacek (1994) finds that
almost all post-communist reform governments were penalized at the polls. Weyland
(1998) finds mixed electoral fates for reforming governments in Latin America. Buti et
al. (2010) examine the effects of a de facto measure of structural reforms--indices of
                                                 6
types of "market rigidities" for 21 OECD countries--and they report that changes in the
overall market rigidity indicator have no electoral effect on incumbents.
       Imposed or chosen reforms. Dreher (2004) tests whether IMF program participation
affects incumbents' re-election prospects and shows that governments tended to avoid Fund
program participation in advance of elections. When crises are severe, entering a Fund
program increases the likelihood of reelection; in better economic times, entering a Fund
program decreased the likelihood of reelection. These results, however, only hold in less
democratic countries (those with a POLITY score less than seven).


                                          III. DATA

                                     A. Policy Reforms

       We build the most comprehensive dataset to date of structural reform regulation
for a large sample of 90 developing and developed countries. This dataset is unique in
terms of country-time coverage and in the breadth of the areas covered. The indicators of
regulation constructed cover both financial and real sector reforms. The former includes
domestic finance, as well as financial current account and capital account reforms. Real
sector reforms are divided into trade (tariff), product and labor market reforms. All
indicators are scaled to vary between zero and one, with higher values representing
greater liberalization. Differences in the values of each indicator across countries and
over time indicate the variation in the absolute degree of economic reform within each
sector. The dataset also identifies, documents, and provides the implementation date of
major reforms and reversals in the policy areas covered in this paper.
       We do not treat reform as a 0-1 variable. Both logic and description of actual
episodes of reforms suggest that reforms are best described as lying on a continuum
rather than as dichotomic events of similar intensity. Treating a continuous variable as
discrete introduces measurement error because a small error in accuracy in evaluating an
observation can cause a large change in the value assigned to it.
       The dataset was compiled through a systematic reading and coding of policy
actions documented in various sources, including national laws and regulations, as well



                                               7
    as IMF staff reports. 1 To address potential concerns regarding accuracy, reliability and
    consistency of our dataset, we evaluate the indicators in several ways. First, we compare
    our indicators to those existing in the literature, typically available for a smaller set of
    economies and time periods. 2 Second, we show that our indicators are consistent with the
    relevant de facto measures (such as financial depth, trade and financial openness). Third,
    we cross-check that major changes in the reform indicators are associated with major
    reform events identified in previous work. 3 Our database covers a balanced sample of 90
    countries over the period 1973­2014 (Table 1). 4 It includes 29 advanced economies, 50
    emerging markets, and 21 low-income countries, with a broad geographical
    representation. The countries included represent 96 percent of the world's 2017 GDP.
               Domestic financial sector. We construct the structural reform indicator for
    domestic finance following the approach used in Abiad, Detragiache, and Tressel (2009).
    We consider six dimensions of domestic finance regulation: credit controls; interest rate
    controls; bank entry barriers; banking supervision; privatization; and security market
    development. Along each dimension except banking supervision, a country is scored from
    0 (highest degree of repression) to 1 (full liberalization). For the banking supervision
    dimension, tighter regulations--whether a country has adopted a capital adequacy ratio
    based on the Basel standards, and whether it has an independent banking supervisory
    agency--are associated with a higher score.
               Current and capital account. These indicators follow the approach used in Quinn
    (1997) and Quinn and Toyoda (2008). 5 We also construct sub-indicators of the capital


    1
      The data sources are described in greater detail in the online Appendix 1. Five of the six reform areas (trade
    tariffs excepted) are based on coding of the laws and policies governments used to regulate economic activity in
    the relevant area. Teams of experts in each reform area were assembled, and coding rules were developed. For
    text-based coding, multiple coders independently scored rules and regulations in terms of the intensity of
    regulatory restrictions, with other coders reconciling differences.
2
    Other scholars and institutions have developed structural reform indicators over the past two decades in the
    areas of: (i) domestic finance (e.g., Abiad et al., 2009); (ii) openness to external finance (e.g., Chinn and
    Ito, 2008; Quinn and Toyoda, 2008; Fernández et al., 2016); (iii) financial current account openness and
    trade (Quinn and Toyoda, 2008; the World Bank); product market regulation (OECD); and labor market
    regulation (Botero et al., 2004; Campos and Nugent, 2012).
    3
        For product and labor market regulations in advanced economies for instance, Duval et al., 2017.
    4
        Post-Soviet countries are available from 1991 or 1992 onward.
    5
     The data on the capital account extension draw on joint work with Haillie Lee, Amy Pond, and A. Maria
    Toyoda.
                                                             8
account for inward and outward foreign direct investment, portfolio investment, bond
market, money markets, and finance and lending markets. These de jure indicators are
based on the laws and regulations described in the IMF's Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). They contain information about
policy based on six categories: payment for imports, receipts from exports, payment for
invisibles, receipts from invisibles, capital flows by residents, and capital flows by
nonresidents.
        Trade. The indicator measures trade tariffs at the product level. Product-level
tariff data are aggregated by calculating simple and weighted averages, with weights
given by the import share of each product. These averages are normalized from 0 (closed
to trade, corresponding to the highest tariff in the sample, about 110 percent) to 1 (fully
open to trade, corresponding to the lowest tariff in the sample, 0 percent).
        Product market. The indicator covers liberalization in two network sectors:
telecommunication and electricity. For each of these components, four dimensions of
regulation are considered. For telecommunications, these are: competition; state
ownership; the presence or absence of an independent regulatory agency; and the degree
of government intervention in access to telecommunications. For electricity markets, the
measures are as follows: the bundling or unbundling of generation; transmission
distribution; state ownership; the presence or absence of an independent regulatory
agency; and the degree of liberalization in the wholesale market. Along each of the four
dimensions, a country is scored from 0 (highest degree of repression) to 1 (full
liberalization).
        Labor market. The labor market liberalization (LML) indicator provides a new
measure of employment protection legislation (EPL) related to the termination of full-
time indefinite contracts for objective reasons. Three dimensions of EPL are considered:
(1) procedural requirements, such as third-party approval; (2) firing costs, including
severance payments and note requirements; and (3) grounds for dismissal with the
possibility (or not) of redress. Each sub index is constructed by taking the simple average
of several indicators and is normalized to range from 0 (highest regulation) to 1 (highest
liberalization). We consult statutory legislation setting minimum requirements to generate
this indicator. To reconstruct the history of EPL in each country, we use the most recent

                                                9
laws as a reference point. Next, three distinct approaches are followed to analyze older
legislation. First, we check whether the most recent laws specify which older laws they
repealed or amended upon their entry into force. Second, we check the coverage of older
legislation. Third, we study country-specific databases and other documents, such as
government gazettes and parliamentary records. In a final step we cross-check the data
from different sources.


                                          B. Electoral data

         The electoral dataset contains information on each election taken place in the
countries covered in the structural reform database, from 1960 onward. 6 The most
relevant information contained are: (i) the election date; (ii) the name of the incumbent
leader (prime minister or president) and his/her party affiliation; (iii) the name of the new
leader and party affiliation; (iv) the date in which the incumbent leader took office; (v)
the vote share of the (coalition of) party (parties) supporting the incumbent at the current,
last and second-last elections. Additional information includes the types of political
systems (presidential vs. parliamentarian), the electoral system (majoritarian vs.
proportional) and the number of parties in the coalition. We describe the dataset below
and in more detail in the online appendix, Appendix 2 "Electoral Dataset Appendix." 7
         In this paper, we use an unbalanced sample of democratic elections from the
beginning of our reform data, namely 1973 (or the first year in which the country is
characterized as a democratic regime) to 2014 for 66 countries (Table 2). The identification
of democratic regimes is based on the POLITY2 score--a measure of regime characteristics
ranging from -10 (strongly autocratic) to 10 (strongly democratic) published by Marshall el
al. (2017). A country is defined as having a democratic regime if its POLITY2 score is



6
 The analysis on the electoral effects of reform is restricted to cover an unbalanced sample of democratic
elections from 1973 (or the first year in which the country is characterized as a democratic regime) to 2014 for
66 economies.
7
 Two other excellent electoral datasets are available. These are Dawn Brancati's Global Elections Database and
Scartascini et al.'s (2018) Database of Political Institutions 2017. GED covers the elections in 57 countries in
detail but stops (depending on the country) in the mid-2000s.


                                                       10
greater than 6. 8 Overall, the dataset contains information on 495 elections, of which 327--
those used in the empirical analysis--are for countries meeting the democracy threshold.
        The start and end dates in office, as well as the party affiliation for the head of
government in each country, are taken from the Database on World Political Leaders
produced by Roberto Ortiz de Zárate (2019). The person acting as head of the government
(parliamentary systems) or president (presidential systems) preceding the election is recorded
as the incumbent. The party to which the incumbent is affiliated is recorded as the
incumbent's party. The parties running on the same ticket of the incumbent's party are
recorded as part of the coalition government. We account for changes of party names,
mergers and separations. This allows us to accurately calculate the length of the tenure of the
leaders as well as that of the parties in office.
        In the analysis, the dependent variable is the vote share of the incumbent´s party. The
main sources are the official records released by each country's electoral authority. To ensure
accuracy, we complement and cross-check this information with the vote shares reported in
the Global Elections Database (Brancati, 2013) and the Adam Carr's Election Archive. In
addition to the vote share for individual parties, we also compute the vote share of the
coalition of governing parties. In cases where there are no separate vote data for each party in
a coalition, the incumbent party vote share is recorded as missing, while coalition vote shares
data are recorded for the incumbent.
        The main explanatory variables used in the analysis are: (i) the reform in the election
year, and (ii) the reform in the rest of the term. Reforms in the election year are measured by
the change in the structural reform indicator during the year of the election. When elections
take place in the first three months of the year, we code reforms as the change in the indicator
in the year before. Reforms in the rest of the term are measured by the change in the indicator
between the beginning of the incumbent term and the year prior to elections. To make these
two variables comparable, we divide the reform in the rest of the term by the number of years
in the rest of the term.




8
 Democracies are defined, consistent with the recommendations of the creators of the Polity index, as countries
with scores greater than six. See Center for Systemic Peace (2016); Marshall et al. (2017).

                                                      11
                                  IV. PATTERN OF REFORMS

       In this section we present broad patterns of structural reforms across time and
country groups. Appendix 1 reports more details including descriptive statistics and other
empirical regularities of the data. First, there has been a significant, but heterogeneous,
reform effort in the past four decades (Figure 1): since the late 1980s, there has been a
broad tendency to pursue liberalization across advanced and developing economies
(Panel A). The pace of liberalization, however, has typically declined since the Global
Financial Crisis (GFC). This has been especially the case in the areas of domestic
finance, and financial current and capital account regulation, where we observe a modest
reversal of reforms in some countries. Second, the reform process has proceeded
unevenly across different sectors (Panel B): reforms appear to have been more frequent in
domestic finance, trade, capital and current account than in product and labor markets. In
addition, major liberalization pushes across different areas have occurred in different
periods: trade reforms occurred in the 1970s and 1980s; domestic and external finance
reforms in the early 1990s; and product market reforms in the late 1990s. In labor market
regulation (EPL), we find no deregulation trend, but even a regulatory tightening in
recent years. Third, advanced economies tend to be characterized by less stringent
regulations than emerging markets and low-income counties (Panel C). In addition, while
emerging markets and low-income countries had a similar degree of regulation until the
1990s, reform progress has been stronger in emerging markets than in low-income
countries since then. Again, labor market regulation (EPL) is an exception, where no
systematic differences emerge across countries at different levels of development. Fourth,
reform progress has been heterogeneous across different regions (Panel D): it has been
the strongest in Europe, while it has been generally modest in the Middle East and
Central Asia and in Sub-Saharan Africa.
       Despite this broad tendency toward liberalization, there have been several cases of
tightening of regulation and major reform reversals especially regarding employment
protection legislation. Tightening reforms have occurred also in other regulatory areas
both in advanced and developing economies. Major examples include the capital and
current accounts regulatory tightening in Argentina after the collapse of the currency
board in the early 2000s; the significant increase in tariffs in Thailand following the crisis
                                               12
in the late 1990s; the increase in domestic financial regulation in Ecuador in the mid-
2000s; the reversal of the privatization of the electricity sector in Jordan in 2011; and the
tightening labor market reforms in Portugal in the mid-1970s.


                              A. Reforms in the electoral cycle

       Table 3 shows the intensity of reforms--that is, the annual change in the reform
indicator--during the incumbent leader's electoral term. Two key general patterns are
noticeable. First, the extent of liberalization reforms is lower during the year of the election
than in the rest of the leader's electoral term. This may suggest that governments could have
stronger political support to implement reforms at the beginning of their mandate; and/or;
elected politicians may opt out from implementing reforms immediately before an election
because of the fear of jeopardizing their re-election. Interestingly, the opposite holds for
tightening reforms, the intensity of which is relatively large during an election year, possibly
as a result of the government's attempt to gain support from special interest groups.
       Second, liberalization reforms (both in election years and in the rest of the
government's term) are more frequent and are larger in magnitude when economic conditions
are weak. This suggests that often they are imposed in a situation of crisis when the timing
does not seem optimal. In contrast, tightening reforms (both in election years and in the rest
of the government's term) are more frequent when the economy is in an economic expansion.


                      V. THE EFFECTS OF REFORMS ON THE ECONOMY

       We use two econometric specifications to estimate the macroeconomic impact of
reforms. The first establishes whether reforms have significant effects on output. The
second assesses whether these effects vary with the state of the economy prevailing at the
time of the reform.
       We follow the approach proposed by Jordà (2005) to estimate impulse-response
functions, a methodology used also by Auerbach and Gorodnichencko (2013), Ramey
and Zubairy (2018), and Alesina et al. (2019b) among others. This procedure does not
impose the dynamic restrictions embedded in vector autoregression specifications and is



                                               13
particularly suited to estimating nonlinearities in the dynamic response. The first
regression we estimate is:


+, - -1, =  +  +  , + , + ,                                                        (1)


in which y is the log of output;  are country fixed effects, included to take account of
differences in countries' average growth rates;  are time fixed effects, included to take
account of global shocks such as shifts in oil prices or the global business cycle; R
denotes the change in the reform indicator. Note that R, the reform index, is increasing with
the degree of liberalization, thus a liberalizing reform implies a positive value of , and a
tightening is a negative value. X is a set of control variables including two lags of the
dependent variable, two lags of the change in the reform indicator, and country-specific
time trends--to account for country-specific regulation patterns before the reform.
        The second specification allows the response to vary with business cycle
conditions (a continuum of states between extreme recessions and booms) at the time of
the reform. It is estimated as follows:


                         
,+ - ,-1 =  +  +  (, ), + (1 -  (, )), + , + , (2)
with  ( ) = - /(- ),                         > 0



where z is an indicator of the state of the economy normalized to have zero mean and a unit
variance. The indicator of the state of the economy considered in the analysis is GDP growth. 9
The weights assigned to each regime vary between 0 and 1 according to the weighting
function  (. ), so that  ( ) can be interpreted as the probability of being in a given state of
                                   
the economy. The coefficients  and  capture the impact of reforms at each horizon k in
cases of extreme recessions ( ( )  1 when z goes to minus infinity) and booms (1 -
 ( )  1 when z goes to plus infinity), respectively. 10 We choose  = 1.5, following


9
  We use contemporaneous GDP growth as reforms do not have a significant contemporaneous effect on GDP.
Similar results are obtained when using lagged GDP growth.
10 (
    )=0.5 is the cutoff between weak and strong economic activity.


                                                   14
Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2012), so that the economy spends about 20 percent of the time
in a recessionary regime­defined as  ( ) > 0.8­close to the typical business cycle pattern of
advanced and emerging market economies. 11 Zit is the same set of control variables used in
equation (1) but now also including F(zit) to control for the state of the business cycle at the
time of the reforms.

           This approach is equivalent to the smooth transition autoregressive model
developed by Granger and Terävistra (1993). The advantage of this approach is twofold.
First, compared with a model in which each dependent variable would be interacted
with a measure of the business cycle position, it permits a direct test of whether the effect
of reforms varies across different regimes such as recessions and expansions. Second,
compared with estimating structural vector autoregressions for each regime, it allows the
effect of reforms to change smoothly between recessions and expansions by considering a
continuum of states to compute the impulse response functions, thus making the
response more stable and precise.
           Equations (1 and 2) are estimated for each k=0,..,5. Impulse response functions
are computed using the estimated coefficients  , and the confidence bands associated
with the estimated impulse-response functions are obtained using the estimated
standard errors of the coefficients  , based on clustered robust standard errors. Figure 2
shows the estimated dynamic response of GDP to a major historical reform--identified as
a change in the aggregate reform indicator above two standard deviations of the average
change in the indicator--over the five-year period following reform implementation,
together with the 90 percent confidence interval around the point estimate. Major
deregulation episodes have a positive and statistically-significant (at 5 percent) output
effect of about 1 percent five years after the reform.
           The dynamic effect of the reform varies between liberalizing reforms and
tightening reforms (Figure 3). 12 The former increases output in the medium term--with
the effect being statistically significant only four years after the reform, while tightening
reforms leads to a contraction in output in the short term--with the effect becoming less

11
     Our results hardly change when using alternative values of the parameter , between 1 and 6.
12
     The number of liberalizing and tightening reforms are 1772 and 620, respectively.

                                                        15
precisely estimated in the medium term. The difference in the absolute value of the effect
between liberalizing and tightening reforms is not statistically significant.
         The response of growth to reforms (both liberalizing and tightening) masks
different effects according to overall business conditions (Figure 4). Liberalizing
(tightening) reforms tend to deliver larger payoffs (more limited output losses) when
carried out in expansions than in recessions. This result is consistent with previous
empirical studies showing asymmetric effects across different economic regimes for
specific reforms such as changes in tariff rates (Furceri et al., 2018) and labor market
reforms (Duval and Furceri, 2018). 13
         We draw attention to two core results. First, liberalizing reforms take a while, up
to four years, to show their positive effects on growth; tightening reforms, in contrast,
have a negative, more-immediate, impact on the economy. Second, reforms tend to
generate higher growth if implemented during an upturn of the business cycle. These
points are relevant for the electoral effects of reforms to which we now turn.



                      VI. ELECTORAL IMPACT OF ECONOMIC REFORMS

                                      A.    Reforms and elections

         We begin by estimating the effects of reforms on the change of vote shares of the
incumbent party (or the coalition of parties), for both reforms introduced in the election
year and reforms introduced during the rest of the government's term as described above.
The coefficients we are mostly interested in are those on various measures of reforms, but
of course we control for other determinants of electoral outcomes.



13
  One of the reasons the impact of tariffs depends on the state of the business cycle is related to the effect
of tariffs on inflation and the role of monetary policies. An increase in tariffs acts as a supply shock by
decreasing output and increasing inflation in the short run. This, in turn, prompts central banks to respond
with a contractionary impulse, thereby magnifying the negative effect of tariffs (Barattieri et al., 2018). For
labor market reform, the theoretical rationale is that reform affects differently firms' hiring versus firing
incentives in good and bad times. In a recession, firms seek to dismiss more and hire less than in a boom,
but stringent job protection discourages them from laying off; relaxing that constraint triggers more layoffs,
increasing unemployment, weakening aggregate demand and delaying recovery (Cacciatore et al., 2016b).



                                                        16
         In the benchmark specification, we control for average GDP growth during the
electoral term and three binary indicators (see Table 2): a developed-country dummy (1 =
countries defined as advanced economy according to the IMF classification and 0
otherwise); a dummy variable for new democracies (1 = countries for the first four
elections after a year with a negative Polity score on the -10 to 10 scale, and 0 otherwise);
and a dummy variable for a majoritarian political system (1 = countries with an electoral
system that awards seats in "winner-take-all" geographically-based districts according to
the Database of Political Institutions, and 0 otherwise: Cruz, Keefer, and Scartascini,
2016). In line with Brender and Drazen (2008), we estimate the following specification:


   , = 0 + 1 , + 2 ,-1 +
3 ,-1 + 4 ,-1 + 4   +
5  , + 6  , + 7  ,- +
8    ,-1 + , ,                                                                                   (3)


where i=(country), t=(election year). We explicitly examine changes in the reform index
in the year of election: Reform_eyi,t, which is the change in the unweighted average of all
reform indicators in the year of an election. When elections take place in the first three
months of the year, we code reforms as the change in the indicator in the year before. 14
We also examine Reform_term_resti,t-x, which is the change in the aggregate reform
index in the rest of the incumbent's term, plus the initial level of the indicator at the start
of the incumbent's term, given that the reform indicators are bounded between zero and
one. Equation 3 is estimated using a panel pooled OLS estimator.
         A positive value of the reform indicator captures a move toward liberalization,
while a negative sign a move away from it. Thus, a positive sign on the coefficient on
that variable implies an increase in the dependent variable when the reforms move toward
liberalization. All the results are scaled to denote the electoral effect of a major reform--



14
  Brender and Drazen (2008) exclude situations where incumbents have been in power less than two years, which
in practice means a government may have been in power for up to 35 months and still not appear in their data.
Countries with frequent parliamentary elections prior to the end of a full-term are under-represented in their data.
                                                        17
identified as a change in the aggregate reform indicator above two standard deviations of
the average change in the indicator.
       We begin by presenting the results in Table 4 with reforms during the election
year and find that they are associated with a statistically-significant decrease in the vote
share. We find that a major reform is associated with a 2.7 percentage point decrease in
vote share (column I)--which is approximately a ½ standard deviation of the change in
vote share in our sample.
       Better economic conditions during either the election year or the incumbent's
term are associated with more favorable political outcomes. In addition, we find that the
changes in vote shares are typically larger in advanced economies and in the majoritarian
system. The results are robust to including country fixed effects (column II), country-
specific time trends (column III), and extending the set of controls to include changes in
the budget balance and inflation during the electoral term (column IV). The magnitude of
the effect of reforms on the vote share is almost identical, albeit larger, to the one
obtained in the baseline, although less precisely estimated.
       In Table 5, we repeat the exercise for reforms implemented during the rest of the
government's term--measured by the change in the indicator between the beginning of
the term and the year prior to an election. There is no negative effect on vote share for the
incumbent in this case. The other coefficients remain stable relative to those in Table 4.
When we introduce both reforms in the election year and in the rest of the term (Table 6),
the election-year regressor maintains the same negative and statistically-significant effect
as in Table 4 and the ""rest-of-the-term" regressor remains insignificant as in Table 5.


                     B. Economic conditions at the time of reform

        We use the smooth transition function described in equation (2) to allow the
electoral effect of reforms to vary with the overall business cycle conditions at the time of
the reform. Specifically, we estimate the following equation:


             
   , = 0 + , 1 ,-1 +
                         (1
2 ,-1  + 1 - ,  1 ,-1 + 2   -

                                                18
),-1  + 3 ,-1 + 4 ,-1 +
4   + 5 , + 6   , +
7  ,- + 8    ,-1 + ,                                                                (4)
where i=(country), t=(election year).


                                    
As before, the coefficients 1,2 and 1,2 capture the electoral impact of a major reform in

cases of extreme recessions ( ( )  1 when z goes to minus infinity) and booms (1 -
 ( )  1 when z goes to plus infinity), respectively.
       The results suggest a marked difference between the effects of reforms in good
and bad times. The negative effect of reforms is concentrated solely among those enacted
in election years with weak economic activity (Table 7). In bad times, a major reform--
identified as a change in the aggregate reform indicator above two standard deviations of
the average change in the indicator--is associated with a decline in the vote share of
about 4 percentage points. Note that, and this is important, we are still controlling for
growth in the election year and in the rest of the electoral term.
         In Table 8, we investigate whether liberalizing and tightening reforms produce
differing electoral effects by allowing for different coefficients in the estimation for the
indicator of reforms, depending on whether the reforms are liberalizing (positve) or
tightening (negative). Note that, when the reform indicator has a negative value
(tightening reforms), a positive coefficient implies that the reform leads to a loss of votes,
and vice-versa. For ease of interpretation, we report the value of the coefficients for
tightening reforms with the sign switched: the reported coefficients for tightening or
reversals indicate the loss of votes for a given (negative) change in the reform index.
       The results in column (I) suggest that while liberalizing reforms have a negative and
statistically-significant electoral cost when implemented during the election year, tightening
reforms tend to increase the vote share of the incumbent coalition. The estimated `tightening'
coefficient is, however, far from being statistically significant.
       When we allow the effect of reforms and reversals to vary between good and bad
economic times (column II as given in equation (4)), we continue to find that election year
reforms during recessions harm incumbent vote shares. A striking result in column (II) is that
incumbents are punished for reforms and reversals during the rest of their term when either
                                                19
occurs in recession years. Incumbents, in contrast, are rewarded for reforms and reversals in
non-election years when either occurs in expansions--remember that we are still controlling
for the rate of growth of the economy.
         It is important to note that while the effects reported are quite large, they also portray
hypothetical situations that have never occurred, such as a major tightening reform of two
standard deviations in the change of the indicator in periods of major recession or
expansion. 15 In particular, they suggest that in the extreme (and hypothetical) case of a
protracted and extreme recession (expansion)--that is, lasting for the entire electoral term--
major changes in the reform indicator for the entire electoral term would lead to a decline
(increase) in the vote share of about 21 (31) percentage points. The effects are considerably
smaller when considering the average changes (both positive and negative) in the reform
indicator during average recessions and expansions (that is, , =00.75). In these
circumstances, the effect on the vote share of the government party during recessions and
expansions is -2.2 and 4.7 percentage points, respectively.
         These results suggest that voters associate poor economic conditions with reforms,
liberalization or tightening in regulation, undertaken by the government. The opposite occurs
for reforms implemented during expansions. In other words, any policy which occurs during
a recession is viewed as "responsible" for the recession. In addition, voters may not fully
account for delays in the economic effects of different types of reforms.


                                             C. Summing up

         We show that timing of reform is crucial in two senses: when reforms occur relative
to the electoral cycle and when they occur relative to the business cycle. Voters do not seem
to internalize the time that it takes for a reform to generate its effects on the economy. A
liberalizing reform taken close to the next election is punished by the voters who do not see
any immediate average benefit while losses from reforms may be visible. In these
circumstances, we find that the vote share of the main governing party (or coalition) declines
with liberalizing reforms implemented in the election year. This political cost disappears

15
  For example, the average magnitude of tightening reform in the election year in the data is only about one-
twentieth of two standard deviations in the change of the indicator, and no major reform has occurred during
extreme expansions with only one (Venezuela 1983) in an extreme recession.

                                                      20
when reforms are implemented at the beginning of an Incumbent's term of office, and as
such have enough time to generate their positive effects on the economy.
       The state of the business cycle also influences the electoral effects of reforms. We
show that when economies are in contractions, both liberalizing and tightening reforms are
penalized at the ballot box. In contrast, reforms undertaken during a growth expansion are
not punished electorally, and in some cases, are even rewarded. Voters seem to not be able to
distinguish well enough between the effects of the business cycle and of the reform and
appear to attribute the current state of the economy to the action taken by the government at
that time, without allowing for the delays in effects of the reforms on the economy.


                                     VII. ENDOGENEITY

       Governments can sometimes choose when to implement reforms. We say
"sometimes" because the literature on policy reform (for instance Alesina and Drazen,
1991) shows that often the timing of reform is determined by the resolution of a political
struggle, involving complex and long parliamentary impasses; or reforms are imposed by
an economic crisis. Governments in some settings also have choices about when to call
elections. These considerations lead to possible endogeneity in the relationship between
reform and election outcomes as a government might delay unpalatable reforms until
after elections or a government may be re-elected despite having implemented reforms
because it chooses to reform when it is especially popular for other reasons. This
endogeneity might generate an upward bias in the electoral rewards from reform if the
government can choose when and whether to reform.
       To explore this issue, we proceed in two ways. First, we distinguish between
reforms which are externally mandated and not solely the choice of a national
government. To do so, we re-estimate equation (3) augmented with the interaction
between the reform indicator and a dummy variable that is equal to 1 for reforms
implemented during IMF programs, and zero otherwise. Note that this approach assumes
that reforms implemented outside an IMF program do not have political costs. As a
result, this identification strategy could introduce an `attenuation' bias and underestimate
the impact of IMF mandated reforms on the vote share.


                                               21
            Second, we use an instrumental variable proposed by Giuliano et al. (2013) and
applied in a different context by Acemoglu et al. (2019) to examine the effect of
democracy on long-term output. The estimation strategy relies on previous theoretical
and empirical evidence that economic reforms are driven by democratic transitions. 16 As
in Giuliano et al. (2013), the instrument is the weighted average of the change in the
democracy indicator in trading partners over the last two years, where the weights are
determined by the strength of trade linkages with other countries. The first stage
estimates suggest that this instrument is "strong" and statistically significant. The
KleibergenPaap rk Wald F statistic--which is equivalent to the F-effective statistic for
non-homoskedastic error in case of one endogenous variable and one instrument
(Andrews et al., 2019)--is higher than the associated Stock-Yogo critical value. In
addition, we can plausibly consider the instrument to be exogenous, since changes in
democratic institutions in trading-partner countries are unlikely to be correlated with the
error term of Equation (3)--regressions of the residuals from Equation (3) against the
instrument support this claim. 17
            Another endogeneity issue concerns the timing of elections. In many countries,
elections may be called early by leaders or legislative bodies. Exogenous elections
correspond to about 40 percent (127 out of 327) of overall elections in our sample. The
timing of an election could be correlated with economic conditions or with the popularity
of the incumbent, creating a bias in our estimates. We address this issue by focusing on
countries/time periods with exogenous elections--that is, those for which the head of
government does not have the power to dissolve a parliament and call new elections.


                                                      A. Results

            Tables 9 to 11 report our results. The qualitative patterns of the OLS regression
results reported in Tables 4-8 are confirmed in these three specifications. Table 9 shows that
the estimated effects of reforms on vote shares obtained with the IV approach, or limiting to

16
     See Milner and Mukerhjee (2008) and Giuliano et al. (2013) for a review.
17
     The estimates are    = 0.171 - 0.829*Iit ,
                                    (-1.43)
     where Iit denote the instrument, and t-statistics are reported in parenthesis.
                                                            22
the case of exogenously-imposed reforms, or cases in which the timing of elections is fixed,
are much larger than the ones obtained with OLS (column (I) in Table 9, which reprints the
OLS results in column (I) in Table 6). This finding confirms that politicians may decide not
to implement reforms because they are aware of possible political costs--which in our
framework implies a downward bias of the OLS coefficient estimates. The coefficients on the
other control variables remain stable.
        Table 10 confirms the results regarding the electoral cost of election year reforms
occurring mostly when the election year is in a recession. The distinction between reforms
implemented in recessions and in expansions is not precisely estimated for IMF-imposed
reforms. The reason is that most IMF-imposed reforms occur during recessions--that is,
countries are more likely to request IMF support when they are in a difficult economic
situation (see Table A1).
        The results in Table 11 confirm the results presented in Table 8 when distinguishing
between liberalizing and tightening reforms and their timings relative to the business cycle.
In this table, we do not include IMF-imposed reforms because there are only a handful of
cases of non-liberalizing reforms imposed by the IMF in addition to having very few IMF
mandated reforms in an expansionary period. 18


                                           VIII. EXTENSIONS

        In this section we explore several extensions. We examine whether the effect of
reforms on electoral outcomes varies: (i) across types of reforms; (ii) between coalition and
single party governments; (iii) between advanced and developing economies; (iv) between
majoritarian and proportional systems; and (v) between old and new democracies.


        The cases (ii)-(v) are tested by extending the baseline specification as follows:




18
  We report these results in Table A3. It is important to note that while the effects reported are economically
large, they also portrait hypothetical situations that never occurred, such as a major tightening reform of two
standard deviations of the change in the indicator in periods of major recession or expansion and IMF program.


                                                      23
                     
   , = 0 + 1   ,-1 + 2  
                 (1
,-1 + 1   ,-1 + 2   - )  ,-1 +
3 ,-1 + 4 ,-1 + 4   + 5 , +
6  , + 7  ,- +
8    ,-1 + ,                                                 (5)


where D is a dummy variable as described below for each analysis. Equation (5) is estimated
using OLS as well for the three strategies we use to mitigate endogeneity concerns. We
further extend Equation (5) to examine the electoral effect of reforms for the cases (i)-(v)
during periods of recessions and expansions. 19


                                                  A. Results

Types of reform

           We estimate equation (2) to differentiate the effect of financial sector reforms
(Domestic Finance, Capital, and Financial Current) and the other domestic sector reforms
(Trade, Product and Labor markets). The results show that while the effect of financial sector
reforms on the vote share is large and statistically significant, the effect of real sector reform
is not statistically significantly different from zero (Table 12). Similar results are obtained
when estimating each reform separately (Table A4). Table A5 extends the financial versus
real sector analysis to reversals and liberalizations, demonstrating that only financial reforms
in recessions during election years harm incumbent electoral prospects. One potential
explanation for this result is that financial sector reforms may be especially prone to
engender increased income inequality (see, for example, de Han and Sturm, 2017; Furceri
and Loungani, 2018; Ostry et al., 2018; Furceri et al., 2019).
           In addition, we find some evidence that in bad times, both financial and real sector
reforms are associated with lower incumbent's vote shares (Table A6). In contrast, in good
times, real sector reforms tend to have a positive effect, but the coefficients are not always

19
     The results are reported in Table A6 and A8 of the Appendix.



                                                        24
statistically significant at standard levels of confidence 20 In other words, real sector reforms
enacted in good times may help governments be re-elected. These results are again consistent
with voters being unable to distinguish between the expected future long-run growth effects
of reform and economic performance due to the underlining economic conditions at the time
of the reform.


Coalition vs. single party government

           We expect that the electoral penalty for reforms will fall largely on either the party
governing alone or the majority party in a coalition. To test for this prediction, we estimate a
specification analogous to equation (5), in which D is a dummy variable that takes a value of
1 when the government is governing alone, and zero otherwise. The results suggest that the
effect of reforms on the incumbent majority party's vote share is three times larger when the
party is governing alone than when governing in a coalition (Table 13 (I)), and particularly so
during recessions (Table A8 (I)). This is consistent with prior findings in the literature on
"clarity of responsibility" (Powel and Whitten, 1993).


Advanced vs. developing economies

           To test whether the effect of reforms varies across countries, we estimate a
specification analogous to equation (5), in which D is a dummy variable that takes the value
of 1 for countries defined as advanced according to the IMF classification and 0 otherwise
(Table 2). The results presented in Table 14 suggest that the effect is larger and more
precisely estimated in developing economies than in advanced economies. 21 The difference
between advanced and developing, however, is statistically significant only for the IV




20
     This is especially the case for product market reforms (Table A6).
21
  In addition, we find that while reforms implemented in bad times are associated with lower vote share in
developing economies, no statistically-significant difference between recessions and expansions emerges for
advanced economies (Table A8).



                                                         25
specification (III). In this table we do not include the IMF imposed reforms specification
since there are very few IMF programs in advanced countries. 22


New vs. old democracies

           Brender and Drazen (2005, 2008) find evidence that budget deficits reduce the
probability of reelection in new democracies, but not in old democracies. In the same spirit,
we test whether the electoral effect of reforms varies between these two groups. We use the
Brender-Drazen classification of "new democracies" 23 (see Table 2 for the list of countries).
The results in Table 15, obtained by estimating a specification analogous to equation (5) with
D a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for a new democracy, do not provide clear-cut
evidence that the estimated effects are systematically larger for new democracies.
Governments in both new and old democracies tend to be electorally penalized after
implementing reforms.


Majoritarian vs. proportional systems

           Finally, we test whether the effect of reforms varies between majoritarian and
proportional systems. As shown in the baseline specification in Table 4, the coefficient for
the majoritarian dummy is positive and statistically-significant, suggesting that majoritarian
systems see more swings in the vote share. This may also imply that the electoral effects of
reform tend to be amplified in these systems. To test for this possibility, we estimate a
specification like equation (5), in which D is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 for
majoritarian systems, and zero otherwise. The results presented in Table 16 suggest that the
effect of reforms is larger and more precisely estimated in proportional systems than in
majoritarian ones. The difference, however, is not statistically significant--in this table we
do not include the IMF-imposed reforms specification since there are very few IMF




22
     We report the results in Table A7.
23
  Brender and Drazen (2005, 2008) classified new democracies using a dummy variable that takes value 1 for
the first four elections after a year with a negative Polity score on the -10 to 10 scale, and 0 otherwise.


                                                     26
programs in majoritarian systems. In addition, for both majoritarian and proportional
systems, reforms are particularly costly during recessions (Table A8 (IV)).


                                      IX. CONCLUSIONS

       We offer two new datasets: a comprehensive global dataset of regulation and
major reforms and reversal events that covers a large sample of advanced and developing
economies over almost half a century; and an election outcomes dataset. These databases
offer many opportunities to scholars and policymakers for future research.
       We explore the electoral consequences of structural reform policy changes in
democratic countries. The electoral costs and benefits of reform depend on the nature (sector)
and direction (liberalizing or reversal) of the reform and the timing of reforms relative to the
electoral and economic cycles. Our results are consistent with a hypothesis that voters do not
internalize the lag between the implementation of a reform and its economic effects. In
addition, we find evidence suggesting that they attribute the current state of the economy at
least in part to reforms implemented at the same time. Thus, when reforms occur during a
recession, voters attribute overall economic conditions at least in part to the reform and turn
against the incumbent. The cost of liberalizing reforms during recessions is especially large
when they occur in an election year. When reforms occur during expansions, voters do not
punish and may reward the incumbent. These results are robust across different types of
electoral system, new and old democracies, and developing and developed countries. We also
investigated in a variety of ways the issue of endogeneity of the timing of reforms relative to
elections and our results seem robust.
       The policy implication is that the best time for a government to implement
reforms is at the beginning of its term of office and when the economy is in expansion.
However, for both political and economic reasons, often governments cannot optimally
choose the timing of reforms.




                                               27
                                      References
Abiad, Abdul, and Ashoka Mody. 2005. "Financial Reform: What Shakes It? What
        Shapes It?" American Economic Review 95(1): 66­88.
Abiad, Abdul, Enrica Detragiache, and Thierry Tressel. 2009. "A New Database of
        Financial Reforms." IMF Working Papers 08/266, International Monetary Fund,
        Washington, DC.
Acemoglu, Daron, Suresh Naidu, Pascual Restrepo, and James A. Robinson. 2019.
         "Democracy Does Cause Growth." Journal of Political Economy 127(1): 47­100.
Alesina, Alberto, and Allan Drazen. 1991. "Why are stabilizations delayed?" American
         Economic Review 81(5): 1170-1188.
Alesina, Alberto, Gabriele Ciminelli, Davide Furceri, and Giorgio Saponaro. 2019a.
        "Austerity and Elections." IMF Working Papers (forthcoming), International
        Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Alesina, Alberto, Carlo Favero, and Francesco Giavazzi. 2019b. Austerity: When It
        Works and When It Doesn't. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Andrews, Isaiah, James Stock, and Liyang Sun. 2019. "Weak Instruments in IV
        Regression: Theory and Practice." Annual Review of Economics (forthcoming).
Auerbach, Alan, and Youri Gorodnichenko. 2012. "Measuring the Output Responses to
        Fiscal Policy." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 4 (2): 1­27
Auerbach, Alan J., and Yuriy Gorodnichenko. 2013. "Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and
        Expansion." In Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis, edited by Alberto Alesina
        and Francesco Giavazzi. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 63-98.
Autor, David H., David Dorn, Gordon H. Hanson, and Kaveh Majlesi. 2016. "Importing
        Political Polarization? The Electoral Consequences of Rising Trade Exposure."
        MIT Working Paper (forthcoming), Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
        Cambridge, MA.
Barattieri, Alessandro, Matteo Cacciatore, and Fabio Ghironi. 2018. "Protectionism and
        the Business Cycle." NBER Working Paper No. 24353, National Bureau of
        Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Bassanini, Andrea, and Federico Cingano. 2018. "Before It Gets Better: The Short-term
        Employment Costs of Regulatory Reforms." International Labor Relations
        Review, March.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad. 2005. "Does Financial
        Liberalization Spur Growth?" Journal of Financial Economics 77(1): 3­55.
Blanchard, Olivier and Francesco Giavazzi. 2003. "Macroeconomic Effects of Regulaton
        and Deregulation in Goods and Labor Markets." Quarterly Journal of Economics
        118 (3): 879-907.
Botero, Juan C., Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and
        Andrei Shleifer. 2004. "The Regulation of Labor." The Quarterly Journal of
        Economics 119(4): 1339­1382.

                                             28
Brancati, Dawn. 2013. Global Elections Database [computer file]. New York: Global
        Elections Database [distributor].
Brender, Adi, and Allan Drazen. 2005. "Political Budget Cycles in New versus
        Established Democracies." Journal of Monetary Economics 52(7): 1271­95.
Brender, Adi, and Allan Drazen. 2008. "How Do Budget Deficits and Economic Growth
        Affect Reelection Prospects?: Evidence from a Large Panel of Countries."
        American Economic Review 98(5): 2203­2220.
Buti, Marco, Pietro Biroli, Mathias Thoenig, Alesandro Turrini, Paul Van den Noord, and
        Ekaterina Zhuravskaya. 2010. "Reforms and Re-elections in OECD Countries."
        Economic Policy 25(61): 61­116.
Cacciatore, Matteo, Romain Duval, Giuseppe Fiori, and Fabio Ghironi. 2016. "Short-
        term Pain for Long-Term Gain: Market Deregulation and Monetary Policy in
        Small Open Economies." Journal of International Money and Finance 68: 358­
        85.
Campos, Nauro F., and Jeffrey B. Nugent. 2012. "The Dynamics of the Regulation of
        Labor in Developing and Developed Countries since 1960." IZA Discussion
        Papers No. 6881, Institute of Labor Economics, Bonn, Germany.
Carr, Adam. 2019. Psephos: Adam Carr's Election Archive. http://psephos.adam-carr.net/
Center for Systemic Peace. 2016. The Polity Project.
       http://www.systemicpeace.org/polityproject.html.
Che, Yi, Yi Lu, Justin R. Pierce, Peter Schott, and Zhigang Tao. 2016. "Does Trade
       Liberalization with China Influence U.S. Elections?" NBER Working Paper No.
       22178, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2008. "A New Measure of Financial Openness." Journal
       of Comparative Policy Analysis 10(3): 309­22.
Cruz, Cesi, Philip Keefer, and Carlos Scartascini. 2016. "Database of Political
       Institutions Codebook, 2015 Update (DPI2015)." Inter-American Development
        Bank.
De Haan, Jakob, and Jan-Egbert Sturm. 2017. "Finance and Income Inequality: A Review
       and New Evidence." European Journal of Political Economy 50: 171-195.
Dreher, Axel. 2004. "The Influence of IMF Programs on the Re-election of Debtor
       Governments." Economics and Politics 16(1): 53­75.
Duval, Romain, and Davide Furceri. 2018. "The Effects of Labor and Product Market
       Reforms: The Role of Macroeconomic Conditions and Policies." IMF Economic
       Review 66(1): 31-69.
Election Results Archive. 2019. Election Results Archive (ERA).
       https://www.binghamton.edu/cdp/era15.html
Fair, Ray. 1978. The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President, The Review of
        Economics and Statistics 60(2): 159-73.



                                            29
Feigenbaum, James J., and Andrew B. Hall. 2015. "How Legislators Respond to
       Localized Economic Shocks: Evidence from Chinese Import Competition."
       Journal of Politics 77(4): 1012­1030.
Fernandez, Andres, Michael Klein, Alessandro Rebucci, Martin Schindler, and Martin
       Uribe. 2016. "Capital Control Measures: A New Dataset." IMF Economic Review
       64(3): 548-574.
Furceri, Davide, and Prakash Loungani. 2018. "The distributional effects of capital
       account liberalization." Journal of Development Economics 130: 127-144.
Furceri, Davide, Prakash Loungani, and Jonathan D. Ostry. 2019. "The Aggregate and
       Distributional Effects of Financial Globalization: Evidence from Macro and
       Sectoral Data." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 51(S1): 163-198.
Furceri, Davide, Swarnali A. Hannan, Jonathan D. Ostry, and Andrew K. Rose. 2018.
       "Macroeconomic Consequences of Tariffs." No. 25402, National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.
Giuliano, Paola, Prachi Mishra, and Antonio Spilimbergo. 2013. "Democracy and
       Reforms: Evidence from a New Dataset." American Economic Journal:
       Macroeconomics 5(4): 179-204.
Granger, Clive W. J., and Timo Teräsvirta. 1993. Modelling Nonlinear Economic
       Relationships. New York: Oxford University Press.
Haggard, Stefan, and Steven B. Webb. 1994. Voting for Reform: Democracy, Political
       Liberalization and Economic Adjustment. New York: Oxford University Press.
Henry, Peter Blair. 2007. "Capital Account Liberalization: Theory, Evidence, and
       Speculation." Journal of Economic Literature 45(4): 887­935.
Kramer, Gerald H. 1977. "A Dynamical Model of Political Equilibrium." Journal of
       Economic Theory 16(2): 310-334.
Jensen, J. Bradford, Dennis P. Quinn, and Steven Weymouth. 2017. "Winners and Losers
       in International Trade: The Effects on U.S. Presidential Voting." International
       Organization 71(3): 423-457.
Jordà, Òscar. 2005. "Estimation and Inference of Impulse Responses by Local
       Projections." American Economic Review 95(1): 161­182.
Lewis-Beck, Michael S., and Charles Tien. 2008. "Forecasting Presidential Elections:
       When to Change the Model." International Journal of Forecasting 24(2): 227­
       236.
Margalit, Yotam. 2011. "Costly Jobs: Trade-Related Layoffs, Government
       Compensation, and Voting in U.S. Elections." American Political Science Review
       105(1): 166­188.
Marshall, Monty G., Ted Gurr, and Keith Jaggers. 2017. "Polity IV Project: Political
       Regime Characteristics and Transitions, 1800-2016 (Dataset Users' Manual)."
       Center for Systemic Peace.



                                           30
Milner, Helen V., and Bumba Mukherjee. 2009. "Democratization and Economic
        Globalization." Annual Review of Political Science 12: 163­181.
Ortiz de Zárate, Roberto. 2019. ZPC: World Political Leaders. Zárate's Political
        Collections. http://zarate.eu/countries.html
Ostry, Jonathan D., Alessandro Prati, and Antonio Spilimbergo. 2009. "Structural
        Reforms and Economic Performance in Advanced and Developing Countries."
        IMF Occasional Paper 268, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Ostry, Jonathan D., Andrew Berg, and Siddharth Kothari. 2018. "Growth-Equity Trade-offs
        in Structural Reforms." IMF Working Papers 18/5, International Monetary Fund,
        Washington, DC.
Pacek, Alexander C. 1994. "Macroeconomic Conditions and Electoral Politics in East
        Central Europe." American Journal of Political Science 38(3): 723-744.
Powell, G. Bingham, and Guy D. Whitten. 1993. "A Cross-National Analysis of
        Economic Voting: Taking Account of the Political Context." American Journal of
        Political Science 37 (2):391-414.
Prati, Alessandro, Massimiliano G. Onorato, and Chris Papageorgiou. 2013. "Which
        Reforms Work and Under What Institutional Environment? Evidence from a New
        Data Set on Structural Reforms." Review of Economics and Statistics 95(3): 946-
        968.
Quinn, Dennis. 1997. "The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation."
        American Political Science Review 91(3): 531-551.
Quinn, Dennis P., and A. Maria Toyoda. 2008. "Does Capital Account Liberalization
        Lead to Growth?" Review of Financial Studies 21(3): 1403-1449.
Quinn, Dennis P., and John T. Woolley. 2001. "Democracy and National Economic
        Performance: The Preference for Stability." American Journal of Political Science
        45(3): 634­657.
Ramey, Valerie A., and Sarah Zubairy. 2018. "Government Spending Multipliers in
        Good Times and in Bad: Evidence from U.S. Historical Data." Journal of
        Political Economy 126(2): 850-901.
Scartascini, Carlos, Cesi Cruz, and Philip Keefer. 2018. "Database of Political
        Institutions 2017." The Inter-American Development Bank.
Sturzenegger, Federico, and Mariano Tommasi. 1998. The Political Economy of Reform.
        Cambridge, MA: MIT University Press.
Tressel, Thierry, and Enrica Detragiache. 2008. "Do Financial Sector Reforms Lead to
        Financial Development? Evidence from a New Dataset." IMF Working Papers
        08/265, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Tufte, Edward R. 1978. Political Control of the Economy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
        University Press.




                                            31
Weyland, Kurt. 1998. "Swallowing the Bitter Pill: Sources of Popular Support for
      Neoliberal Reform in Latin America." Comparative Political Studies 31(5): 539-
      568.




                                           32
Figure 1. Stylized facts on reform progress

   1.0                                                                                                                                       Trade
                                                                                                                                             Capital Account
                                                                                                                                             Current Account
                                     All reforms                                                                                             Financial
   0.8                                                                                             1.0                                       Product Market


                                                                                                   0.8
   0.6

                                                                                                   0.6
   0.4
                                                                                                   0.4

   0.2
                                                                                                   0.2

   0.0
                                                                                                   0.0
         1970
                1974
                       1978
                              1982
                                     1986
                                            1990
                                                    1994
                                                           1998
                                                                  2002
                                                                         2006
                                                                                2010
                                                                                       2014




                                                                                                         1970
                                                                                                                1974
                                                                                                                       1978
                                                                                                                              1982
                                                                                                                                     1986
                                                                                                                                            1990
                                                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                                                          1998
                                                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                                                        2006
                                                                                                                                                                               2010
                                                                                                                                                                                      2014
                                                                                                   1.0
   1.0


   0.8                                                                                             0.8



   0.6                                                                                             0.6


   0.4                                                                                             0.4
                                                   Advanced economies
                                                                                                                                Asia and the Pacific
   0.2                                             Emerging economies                              0.2                          Africa
                                                                                                                                Europe
                                                   Low-income economies                                                         Middle East and Central Asia
                                                                                                                                Western Hemisphere
   0.0                                                                                             0.0
         1970
         1974
         1978
         1982
         1986
         1990
         1994
         1998
         2002
         2006
         2010
         2014




                                                                                                         1970
                                                                                                         1974
                                                                                                         1978
                                                                                                         1982
                                                                                                         1986
                                                                                                         1990
                                                                                                         1994
                                                                                                         1998
                                                                                                         2002
                                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                         2010
                                                                                                         2014




Note:the indicators ranges from 0 to 1. Higher levels denote more liberlization.




                                                                                              33
Figure 2. Macroeconomic effects of reform--output effect (%)
          2.5


            2


          1.5


            1


          0.5


            0
                       -1            0             1               2             3            4               5

          -0.5

Note: Output effects estimated using equation (1). t= 0 is the year of the reform; solid lines denote the response of output to
a major reform event, defined as a change of two standard deviations in the reform indicator. Dotted lines denote 95 percent
confidence bands.




Figure 3. Macroeconomic effects of reform--output effect of liberalizing and tightening
reforms (%)

                    Panel A. Liberalizing                                        Panel B. Tightening
    2.5                                                                2

      2                                                                1

                                                                       0
    1.5
                                                                            -1       0    1       2       3       4      5
                                                                       -1
      1
                                                                       -2
    0.5
                                                                       -3
      0
                                                                       -4
            -1     0        1    2       3     4       5
   -0.5                                                                -5

     -1                                                                -6

Note: Output effects estimated using equation (1). t= 0 is the year of the reform; solid lines denote the response of output to
a major reform event, defined as a change of two standard deviations in the reform indicator. Dotted lines denote 95 percent
confidence bands.




                                                              34
Figure 4. Macroeconomic effects of reform--output effect of liberalizing and tightening
reforms depending on economic conditions (%)

        Panel A. Liberalizing & Recessions                             Panel B. Liberalizing & Expansions
    4                                                              4

    3                                                              3

    2                                                              2

    1                                                              1

    0                                                              0
          -1     0       1      2      3      4      5                   -1      0      1      2      3       4      5
   -1                                                             -1

   -2                                                             -2



        Panel C. Tightening & Recessions                            Panel D. Tightening & Expansions
    6                                                               5
                                                                    3
    4
                                                                    1

    2                                                              -1     -1      0      1      2      3      4      5
                                                                   -3
    0                                                              -5
          -1     0      1      2      3      4      5
                                                                   -7
   -2
                                                                   -9
   -4                                                             -11
                                                                  -13
   -6                                                             -15

Note: Output effects estimated using equation (2). t= 0 is the year of the reform; solid blue lines denote the response of
output to a major reform event, defined as a change of two standard deviations in the reform indicator, in recessions and
expansions. Solid black lines denote the unconditional effects reported in Figure 3. Dotted lines denote 95 percent
confidence bands.




                                                             35
Table 1. Reform dataset country coverage

    Advanced economies                 Emerging markets           Low income countries
 Australia                   Albania              Namibia        Bangladesh
 Austria                     Algeria              Pakistan       Bolivia
 Belgium                     Argentina            Paraguay       Burkina Faso
 Canada                      Azerbaijan           Peru           Cameroon
 Czech Republic              Belarus              Philippines    Côte d'Ivoire
 Denmark                     Botswana             Poland         Ethiopia
 Estonia                     Brazil               Romania        Ghana
 Finland                     Bulgaria             Russia         Kenya
 France                      Chile                South Africa   Kyrgyz Republic
 Germany                     China                Sri Lanka      Lesotho
 Greece                      Colombia             Swaziland      Madagascar
 Hong Kong SAR               Costa Rica           Thailand       Malawi
 Ireland                     Dominican Republic   Tunisia        Mozambique
 Israel                      Ecuador              Turkey         Nepal
 Italy                       Egypt                Ukraine        Nicaragua
 Japan                       El Salvador          Uruguay        Nigeria
 Korea                       Georgia              Venezuela      Senegal
 Latvia                      Guatemala                           Tanzania
 Netherlands                 Hungary                             Uganda
 New Zealand                 India                               Uzbekistan
 Norway                      Indonesia                           Vietnam
 Portugal                    Jamaica                             Zambia
 Singapore                   Jordan                              Zimbabwe
 Spain                       Kazakhstan
 Sweden                      Lithuania
 Switzerland                 Malaysia
 United Kingdom              Mexico
 United States               Morocco




                                           36
Table 2. Election dataset coverage

 Country          Years        No. of       Leg.        Pre.        Dev.    Maj   New dem.
 Name            Covered      Elections   Elections   Elections   economy
 Albania        1996-2013         6           x                                   1996-2013
 Argentina      1989-2011         6                      x                        1989-2003
 Australia      1974-2013        16          x                       x
 Austria        1975-2013        12          x                       x            1975-1986
 Belgium        1974-2010        12          x                       x
 Bolivia        1985-2009         7                      x                        1985-1997
 Brazil         1989-2010         6                      x                        1989-2002
 Bulgaria       2001-2009         3          x                                    2001-2009
 Canada         1974-2011        12          x                       x       x
 Chile          1993-2013         5                      x                   x    1993-2009
 Colombia       1974-2010        10                      x                        1974-1986
 Costa Rica     1974-2010        10                      x
 Czech                                                               x            1996-2006
                1996-2006            3       x
 Republic
 Denmark        1975-2011        14          x                       x            1975-1979
 Dominican                                                                        1978-2012
                1978-2012        10                      x
 Rep.
 Ecuador        1984-2013         9                      x                        1984-1996
 El Salvador    1989-2009         5                      x                        1989-2004
 Estonia        1992-2011         6          x                       x       x
 Finland        1979-2011         9          x                       x            1979-1991
 France         1974-2012         7                      x           x       x    1974-1988
 Georgia        1995-2013         3                      x           x
 Germany        1976-2013        11          x                                    1976-1987
 Ghana          2000-2012         4                      x                   x    2000-2012
 Greece         1977-2009        10          x                       x            1977-1989
 Guatemala      1990-2011         6                      x                        1990-2011
 Hungary        1994-2006         4          x                                    1994-2006
 India          1977-2009        10          x
 Indonesia      2004-2014         2                      x                         2004-14
 Ireland        1977-2011        11          x                       x
 Israel         1981-2013        11          x                       x
 Italy          1976-2013         9          x                       x            1976-1987
 Jamaica        1976-2011         9          x                               x
 Japan          1976-2012        13          x                       x            1976-1986
 Kenya          2002-2013         3                      x                   x    2002-2013
 Kyrgyzstan     2009-2011         2                      x                        2009-2011
 Latvia         1993-2011         7          x                       x
 Lithuania      1997-2009         3                      x           x
 Madagascar     1996-2006         3                      x                        1996-2006
 Malaysia       1974-2013        10          x                               x
 Mexico         1988-2012         5                      x                        1994-2012
 Mozambiqu                                                                        1994-2014
                1994-2014            4                   x
 e
 Nepal          1991-2008            4       x                               x    1991-2008

                                             37
 Netherlands        1977-2012            12            x                           x                        1977-1986
 New                                                                               x            x
                    1975-2011            13            x
 Zealand
 Nicaragua          1990-2011             5                          x                                      1996-2011
 Nigeria            1983-2015             4                          x                          x           1983-2015
 Norway             1977-2013            10            x                           x
 Paraguay           1993-2013             5                          x                                      1998-2008
 Peru               1985-2011             6                          x                                      1985-2011
 Philippines        1992-2010             4                          x                          x           1992-2010
 Poland             1995-2010             4                          x                                      1995-2010
 Portugal           1980-2011            11            x                           x                        1983-1991
 Romania            1996-2012             4            x                                                    1996-2012
 Senegal            2007-2012             2                          x                                      2007-2012
 South Africa       1987-2009             6                          x                                      1994-2014
 South Korea        1992-2012             5                          x             x                        1992-2007
 Spain              1979-2011            10            x                           x                        1979-1993
 Sri Lanka          1982-2010             6                          x
 Sweden             1976-2010            11            x                           x                        1973-1982
 Thailand           1995-2011             5            x                                        x           1995-2011
 Turkey             1977-2011             8            x                                                    1977-1999
 Ukraine            1994-2010             3                          x                          x
 United                                                                            x            x
                    1974-2010            10            x
 Kingdom
 United                                                                            x            x
                    1976-2012            10                          x
 States
 Uruguay            1989-2009             5                          x                                      1989-2004
 Venezuela          1978-2006             7                          x                                      1973-1988



Table 3. Reforms in the electoral cycle (% of one standard deviation)
                                                    All             Weak economic          Strong economic
                                                                     conditions               conditions
 Reform_ey                                         0.410                0.432                   0.381
 Reform_ey (+)                                     0.491                  0.503                     0.474
 Reversal_ey (-)                                  -0.072                  -0.065                    -0.081
 Reform_term                                       0.628                  0.687                     0.555
 Reform_term (+)                                   0.680                  0.729                     0.620
 Reversal_term (-)                                -0.043                  -0.037                    -0.049
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Reform (+) and Reversal (-) denote liberalization and tightening reforms, respectively. Weak
and strong economic conditions are defined as in equation (2).




                                                      38
Table 4. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--election year
                                                (I)               (II)               (III)              (IV)
 Reform_ey                                 -2.770***           -3.187**           -3.496**            -2.721**
                                             [0.915]            [1.263]             [1.321]            [1.278]
 Initial level regulation                     -5.097             1.563              23.375             13.669
                                             [5.910]           [10.561]            [33.409]           [17.134]
 Growth_ey                                   0.516**             0.373               0.260              0.171
                                             [0.206]            [0.267]             [0.410]            [0.429]
 Growth_term                                   0.411            0.692*              0.834*              0.748
                                             [0.320]            [0.394]             [0.487]            [0.497]
 Advanced economy                           3.409***
                                             [1.235]
 New democracies                               0.837             0.146              0.310              -0.033
                                             [1.117]            [2.240]            [3.990]            [4.018]
 Majoritarian system                         2.314**             4.763            10.350**           11.147***
                                             [0.940]            [4.141]            [4.021]            [4.113]
 Lagged vote share                            -0.146           -0.242**            -0.265*            -0.265*
                                             [0.093]            [0.103]            [0.137]            [0.135]
 Budget                                                                                                 0.153
                                                                                                      [0.267]
 Inflation                                                                                            -0.006*
                                                                                                      [0.003]

 Country fixed effects                         No                 Yes                Yes                 Yes
 Country-specific time trends                  No                 No                 Yes                 Yes

 R2                                           0.10                0.27               0.47               0.48
 Observations                                 327                 327                327                327
Note: Reform_ey denotes reforms in the election year. Estimates based on equation (3). Standard deviations based on
robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                        39
Table 5. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--rest of term
                                                  (I)                  (II)                (III)               (IV)
 Reform_term                                    -0.400               -0.413               0.825               -0.060
                                               [1.088]               [1.173]             [1.432]              [1.743]
 Initial level regulation                       -1.095                5.845              32.619               29.353
                                               [6.210]              [10.042]            [35.431]             [37.351]
 Growth_ey                                     0.468**                0.299               0.167                0.081
                                               [0.201]               [0.255]             [0.417]              [0.423]
 Growth_term                                     0.488               0.784*              0.878*                0.781
                                               [0.327]               [0.406]             [0.484]              [0.506]
 Advanced economy                              3.275**
                                               [1.243]
 New democracies                                 0.766               0.248                1.331                0.437
                                               [1.176]              [2.243]              [3.889]              [3.883]
 Majoritarian system                           2.303**               4.396              10.057**             10.067**
                                               [0.992]              [3.977]              [4.430]              [4.810]
 Lagged vote share                              -0.149             -0.229**              -0.249*              -0.255*
                                               [0.092]              [0.104]              [0.138]              [0.133]
 Budget                                                                                                        0.163
                                                                                                              [0.251]
 Inflation                                                                                                  -0.008***
                                                                                                              [0.003]

 Country fixed effects                            No                   Yes                 Yes                  Yes
 Country-specific time trends                     No                   No                  Yes                  Yes

 R2                                               0.08                0.25                 0.46                 0.47
 Observations                                     327                  327                 327                  327
Note: Reform_term denote reforms in the rest of the incumbent leader term. Estimates based on equation (3).
Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent,
respectively.




                                                            40
Table 6. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--election year vs. rest of term
                                                   (I)                (II)                (III)               (IV)
 Reform_ey                                    -2.820***            -3.230**            -3.460**            -2.725**
                                                [0.947]             [1.295]             [1.327]             [1.279]
 Reform_term                                     -0.672             -0.656               0.354              -0.137
                                                [1.040]             [1.170]             [1.398]             [1.687]
 Initial level regulation                        -6.798             -0.981              26.900              26.035
                                                [6.009]            [10.376]            [35.584]            [36.605]
 Growth_ey                                      0.512**              0.362               0.260               0.171
                                                [0.206]             [0.265]             [0.410]             [0.431]
 Growth_term                                      0.425             0.699*              0.826*               0.751
                                                [0.323]             [0.398]             [0.486]             [0.495]
 Advanced economy                              3.474***
                                                [1.245]
 New democracies                                  0.804             -0.036               0.380               -0.063
                                                [1.109]             [2.187]             [3.950]             [3.981]
 Majoritarian system                            2.293**              4.376             10.865**            10.944**
                                                [0.923]             [4.164]             [4.585]             [4.811]
 Lagged vote share                               -0.146            -0.243**             -0.264*             -0.265*
                                                [0.093]             [0.103]             [0.137]             [0.134]
 Budget                                                                                                       0.152
                                                                                                            [0.266]
 Inflation                                                                                                  -0.006*
                                                                                                            [0.003]

 Country fixed effects                             No                 Yes                 Yes                 Yes
 Country-specific time trends                      No                 No                  Yes                 Yes

 R2                                               0.10                0.27                0.47                0.48
 Observations                                     327                 327                 327                 327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (3). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                           41
Table 7. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--recessions vs. expansions
                                                        (I)                       (II)                     (III)
 Reform_ey (recessions)                              -4.092**                                           -4.250**
                                                      [1.563]                                            [1.598]
 Reform_ey (expansions)                               -1.201                                              -1.338
                                                      [1.870]                                            [1.917]
 Reform_term (recessions)                                                       -0.010                    -1.583
                                                                               [2.520]                   [1.985]
 Reform_term (expansions)                                                       -0.772                     0.150
                                                                               [2.570]                   [2.345]
 Initial level regulation                             -4.759                    -1.090                    -6.709
                                                     [6.037]                   [6.221]                   [5.992]
 Growth_ey                                           0.474**                   0.465**                   0.478**
                                                     [0.214]                   [0.201]                   [0.215]
 Growth_term                                           0.415                     0.503                     0.391
                                                     [0.321]                   [0.365]                   [0.352]
 Advanced economy                                   3.341***                   3.281**                  3.400***
                                                     [1.227]                   [1.249]                   [1.229]
 New democracies                                       0.821                     0.785                     0.746
                                                     [1.124]                   [1.156]                   [1.107]
 Majoritarian system                                 2.210**                   2.294**                   2.208**
                                                     [0.960]                   [0.994]                   [0.930]
 Lagged vote share                                    -0.144                    -0.149                    -0.144
                                                     [0.094]                   [0.092]                   [0.094]

 Total effect recessions                             -4.092**                   -0.010                  -5.833***
 Total effect expansions                              -1.201                    -0.772                    -1.433
 F-test difference                                     0.34                      0.87                      1.02

 R2                                                    0.10                      0.08                      0.10
 Observations                                          327                       327                       327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (4). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                           42
Table 8. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--Reforms vs. Reversals
                                                          (I)                                 (II)
                                                       Baseline                    Recessions vs. expansions
 Reform_ey (+)                                         -2.930**
                                                        [1.157]
 Reversal_ey (-)                                         2.575
                                                        [3.025]
 Reform_term (+)                                        -0.397
                                                        [1.061]
 Reversal_term (-)                                       2.245
                                                        [4.071]
 Reform_ey (+) (recessions)                                                                   -4.196**
                                                                                               [1.663]
 Reversal_ey (-) (recessions)                                                                    0.618
                                                                                               [2.690]
 Reform_term (+) (recessions)                                                                  -4.658*
                                                                                               [2.349]
 Reversal_term (-) (recessions)                                                             -12.643***
                                                                                               [3.871]
 Reform_ey (+) (expansions)                                                                     -0.286
                                                                                               [1.993]
 Reversal_ey (-) (expansions)                                                                    7.286
                                                                                              [10.955]
 Reform_term (+) (expansions)                                                                   3.413*
                                                                                               [1.845]
 Reversal_term (-) (expansions)                                                              20.442***
                                                                                               [6.280]
 F-test: Reform_ey (+) vs. (-)                            0.92                                    0.83
 Total effect recessions                                                                     -5.833***
 Total effect expansions                                                                        -1.433
 F-test difference                                                                                1.02
 R2                                                       0.10                                    0.13
 Observations                                             327                                     327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Reform (+) and Reversal (-) denote liberalization and tightening reforms, respectively.
Estimates based on equation (5). Additional controls in the baseline specifications are included but not reported. Standard
deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                             43
Table 9. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--exogeneity checks
                                                             (I)              (II)                (III)              (IV)
                                                            OLS          Ex. elections           IMF                  IV
 Reform_ey                                              -2.820***         -3.966***           -5.109**           -7.672***
                                                          [0.947]           [1.043]            [2.143]             [1.584]
 Reform_term                                               -0.672           -0.596              -1.248             -1.140
                                                          [1.040]           [2.096]            [2.449]             [1.047]
 Initial level regulation                                  -6.798           -4.399              -1.482           -16.611**
                                                          [6.009]          [14.615]            [5.954]             [7.487]
 Growth_ey                                                0.512**           0.502*             0.502**            0.586***
                                                          [0.206]           [0.269]            [0.208]             [0.222]
 Growth_term                                                0.425          1.191**               0.445              0.316
                                                          [0.323]           [0.568]            [0.313]             [0.341]
 Advanced economy                                        3.474***            4.948             2.776**            3.815***
                                                          [1.245]           [2.985]            [1.321]             [1.281]
 New democracies                                            0.804            1.713               1.114              0.870
                                                          [1.109]           [2.253]            [1.127]             [1.039]
 Majoritarian system                                      2.293**            0.536             2.131**            2.275***
                                                          [0.923]           [2.480]            [0.999]             [0.856]
 Lagged vote share                                         -0.146           -0.009              -0.135             -0.141
                                                          [0.093]           [0.121]            [0.094]             [0.093]

 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                                                                               25.92
 Stock-Yogo 10% critical value                                                                                     16.38

 (Uncentered) R2                                           0.10               0.14               0.09               0.23
 Observations                                              327                127                327                327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (3). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                           44
Table 10. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--recessions vs. expansions,
exogeneity checks
                                                              (I)             (II)                (III)               (IV)
                                                             OLS         Ex. elections           IMF                   IV
 Reform_ey (recessions)                                   -4.250**        -5.362***             -1.886           -7.357***
                                                           [1.598]          [0.813]            [11.814]            [1.193]
 Reform_ey (expansions)                                     -1.338          -1.441              -6.893              -0.093
                                                           [1.917]          [4.201]             [4.811]            [1.690]
 Reform_term (recessions)                                   -1.583          -2.465              -2.293              -2.193
                                                           [1.985]          [3.424]             [3.667]            [1.954]
 Reform_term (expansions)                                    0.150           1.043              -0.474               0.474
                                                           [2.345]          [4.531]             [5.353]            [2.269]
 Initial level regulation                                   -6.709          -4.002              -1.579              -8.525
                                                           [5.992]         [14.824]             [5.975]            [6.062]
 Growth_ey                                                 0.478**           0.451             0.510**             0.436*
                                                           [0.215]          [0.295]             [0.208]            [0.225]
 Growth_term                                                 0.391          1.145*               0.428               0.357
                                                           [0.352]          [0.572]             [0.311]            [0.353]
 Advanced economy                                         3.400***           4.899             2.744**            3.370***
                                                           [1.229]          [2.981]             [1.327]            [1.209]
 New democracies                                             0.746           1.519               1.090               0.712
                                                           [1.107]          [2.433]             [1.143]            [1.074]
 Majoritarian system                                       2.208**           0.595             2.135**             2.057**
                                                           [0.930]          [2.459]             [0.994]            [0.912]
 Lagged vote share                                          -0.144          -0.002              -0.137              -0.139
                                                           [0.094]          [0.123]             [0.094]            [0.091]

 Total effect recessions                                  -5.833***         -7.827**            -4.178           -9.551***
 Total effect expansions                                    -1.433           -0.398             -7.367             0.382
 F-test difference                                           1.02             0.96               0.03              4.51**

 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                                                                                184.4
 Stock-Yogo 10% critical value                                                                                      16.38

 (Uncentered) R2                                             0.10             0.14               0.09               0.26
 Observations                                                327              127                327                327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (4). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                             45
Table 11. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--Reforms vs. Reversals
                                                           (I)                  (II)                    (III)
                                                          OLS              Ex. elections                 IV
 Reform_ey (+) (recessions)                            -4.196**             -5.620***              -6.623***
                                                        [1.663]               [1.880]                [1.191]
 Reversal_ey (-) (recessions)                             0.618                1.679                  -0.388
                                                        [2.690]               [3.957]                [2.859]
 Reform_term (+) (recessions)                           -4.658*               -4.701                -4.859**
                                                        [2.349]               [5.895]                [2.233]
 Reversal_term (-) (recessions)                      -12.643***               -5.675              -10.961***
                                                        [3.871]               [6.833]                [2.985]
 Reform_ey (+) (expansions)                              -0.286                1.700                   0.583
                                                        [1.993]               [4.827]                [1.656]
 Reversal_ey (-) (expansions)                             7.286               13.680                   7.934
                                                       [10.955]              [18.993]               [10.522]
 Reform_term (+) (expansions)                            3.413*                5.529                 3.460**
                                                        [1.845]               [3.829]                [1.764]
 Reversal_term (-) (expansions)                       20.442***             17.341***              19.711***
                                                        [6.280]               [6.833]                [5.749]
 Initial level regulation                                -6.097               -1.760                  -7.717
                                                        [6.494]              [14.667]                [6.523]
 Growth_ey                                               0.457*                0.290                  0.377*
                                                        [0.246]               [0.354]                [0.234]
 Growth_term                                              0.091                0.869                   0.078
                                                        [0.365]               [0.751]                [0.354]
 Advanced economy                                      3.467***               5.237*                3.417***
                                                        [1.287]               [2.881]                [1.248]
 New democracies                                          1.311                2.427                   1.285
                                                        [1.108]               [2.492]                [1.081]
 Majoritarian system                                    2.175**                0.774                 2.034**
                                                        [0.963]               [2.392]                [0.937]
 Lagged vote share                                      -0.160*               -0.031                 -0.154*

                                                       [0.093]                [0.128]               [0.089]
 Total effect recessions                             -20.879***               -14.317             -22.831***
 Total effect expansions                              30.856**               38.251**              31.688**
 F-test: difference                                   11.95***                 4.77**              14.18***
                                                                                                    293.32
 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic
 Stock-Yogo 10% critical value                                                                        16.38
 (Uncentered) R2                                         0.13                   0.18                   0.29
 Observations                                            327                    127                    327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Reform (+) and Reversal (-) denote liberalization and tightening reforms, respectively.
Estimates based on equation (5). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* denote
significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.


                                                           46
Table 12. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--Finance vs. Real
                                              (I)            (II)           (III)       (IV)               (V)            (VI)           (VII)          (VIII)
                                                    OLS                   Exogenous elections                     IMF                             IV
                                           Finance          Real         Finance       Real             Finance            Real        Finance            Real
Reform_ey                                -7.346***          1.712       -9.090***      7.776          -20.612***          11.987     -16.685***           0.297
                                           [2.362]        [2.155]         [2.491]     [7.290]           [6.743]         [14.689]       [3.749]         [16.620]
Reform_term                                  0.018         -1.257          4.427      -2.126             -1.886         -11.984*        -0.554           -1.174
                                           [2.557]        [1.786]         [3.851]     [4.096]           [3.797]          [6.120]       [2.464]          [1.993]
Initial level regulation                    -3.049         -0.706          4.586       2.228             -1.553           -0.788        -7.655           -1.372
                                           [4.923]        [6.225]         [8.902]    [14.795]           [4.368]          [6.150]       [5.277]         [10.184]
Growth_ey                                    0.287        0.467**         0.442*       0.414              0.319          0.493**         0.299          0.473**
                                           [0.256]        [0.199]         [0.258]     [0.249]           [0.253]          [0.200]       [0.262]          [0.205]
Growth_term                                0.673**          0.484        0.987**     1.343**            0.679**            0.419       0.609*             0.483
                                           [0.311]        [0.326]         [0.454]     [0.528]           [0.314]          [0.318]       [0.314]          [0.324]
Advanced economy                          3.298***       3.189***         4.124*      5.290*            2.519**          2.603**      3.698***         3.211***
                                           [1.217]        [1.173]         [2.232]     [2.826]           [1.237]          [1.153]       [1.230]          [1.108]
New democracies                              0.739          0.668          1.188       1.385              1.163            1.022         0.742            0.708
                                           [1.125]        [1.162]         [1.917]     [2.507]           [1.137]          [1.184]       [1.086]          [1.112]
Majoritarian system                          1.536        2.264**          0.252       0.409              1.293           1.926*         1.528          2.280**
                                           [1.042]        [1.015]         [2.158]     [2.797]           [1.030]          [1.006]       [1.062]          [0.981]
Lagged vote share                         -0.182**          -0.15         -0.027      -0.019           -0.176**          -0.158*      -0.177**          -0.149*
                                           [0.082]        [0.091]         [0.112]     [0.113]           [0.081]          [0.085]       [0.081]          [0.090]

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F                                                                                                                31.37           9.03
statistic
Stock-Yogo 10% critical value                                                                                                            16.38          16.38

(Uncentered) R2                              0.11           0.09            0.15           0.12           0.11            0.1            0.08            0.08
Observations                                 363            327             140            127            363             327            363             327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (3).
Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.
Table 13. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--Governing alone vs. coalition
                                                        (I)               (II)              (III)              (IV)
                                                       OLS           Ex. elections         IMF                  IV
 Reform_ey (Gov. alone)                            -3.132***          -2.056***         -3.135***          -3.688***
                                                     [1.033]            [0.507]           [1.112]            [0.769]
 Reform_term (Gov. alone)                             -0.112            -0.372             0.123              -0.24
                                                     [1.402]            [1.021]           [1.045]            [0.670]
 Reform_ey (Gov. in coalition)                        -1.001             2.538             4.663             -0.852
                                                     [1.223]            [9.176]           [3.919]            [0.644]
 Reform_term (Gov. in coalition)                      -1.723             1.981         -18.161***            -1.252
                                                     [1.479]            [7.787]           [5.435]            [0.773]
 Initial level regulation                             -6.613            -4.449            -0.278           -14.448**
                                                     [5.940]           [14.821]           [5.874]            [6.966]
 Growth_ey                                           0.514**            0.490*           0.613***           0.573***
                                                     [0.205]            [0.267]           [0.194]            [0.218]
 Growth_term                                           0.437           1.214**             0.446              0.359
                                                     [0.318]            [0.564]           [0.296]            [0.319]
 Advanced economy                                   3.509***             5.136           3.020**            3.716***
                                                     [1.241]            [3.105]           [1.296]            [1.264]
 New democracies                                       0.729             1.766             0.993              0.814
                                                     [1.143]            [2.243]           [1.096]            [1.057]
 Majoritarian system                                 2.248**             0.209            1.901*            2.344***
                                                     [0.961]            [2.470]           [1.004]            [0.889]
 Lagged vote share                                    -0.146            -0.015             -0.11             -0.141
                                                     [0.093]            [0.118]           [0.092]            [0.093]

 Total effect (Gov. alone)                          -3.244*            -4.856*           -6.024*           -7.858***
 Total effect (Gov. in coalition)                    -2.724             9.038          -26.996***           -4.208**
 F-test: difference                                   0.06               0.17            8.07***              3.00*

 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F
 statistic                                                                                                    25.85
 Stock-Yogo 10% critical value                                                                                16.38

 (Uncentered) R2                                       0.1               0.15              0.13               0.07
 Observations                                          327               128               327                327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (6). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.
Table 14. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--Advanced vs. Developing
Economies
                                                                     (I)               (II)                 (III)
                                                                   OLS            Ex. elections              IV
 Reform_ey(Adv.)                                                 -1.310*             -8.991             -1.503**
                                                                  [0.696]            [7.035]             [0.687]
 Reform_ey(Dev.)                                                -4.075***          -3.711***           -7.651***
                                                                  [1.344]            [1.113]             [1.564]
 Reform_term(Adv.)                                                 -0.79              0.786               -1.058
                                                                  [1.030]            [5.423]             [1.047]
 Reform_term(Dev.)                                                  -0.7             -0.721               -1.011
                                                                  [1.824]            [2.115]             [1.718]
 Initial level regulation                                         -6.835             -4.255              -10.993
                                                                  [6.083]           [15.681]             [6.815]
 Growth_ey                                                       0.511**             0.510*              0.541**
                                                                  [0.206]            [0.273]             [0.217]
 Growth_term                                                       0.406            1.217**                0.339
                                                                  [0.322]            [0.578]             [0.323]
 Advanced economy                                                2.944**               4.94               2.398*
                                                                  [1.455]            [3.651]             [1.397]
 New democracies                                                   0.816              1.795                0.866
                                                                  [1.126]            [2.203]             [1.071]
 Majoritarian system                                             2.253**               0.43              2.193**
                                                                  [0.962]            [2.532]             [0.956]
 Lagged vote share                                                -0.144             -0.007               -0.139
                                                                  [0.093]            [0.122]             [0.093]

 Total effect (Adv.)                                              -2.100              -8.205            -2.561*
 Total effect (Dev.)                                             -4.775*              -4.432           -8.662***
 F-test: difference                                                0.97                0.22             7.21***

 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                                                                      22.44
 Stock-Yogo 10% critical value                                                                            16.38

 (Uncentered) R2                                                   0.11                0.15                0.26
 Observations                                                      327                 127                 327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (5). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                           49
Table 15. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--new vs. old democracy
                                                (I)               (II)                 (III)              (IV)
                                               OLS           Ex. elections            IMF                  IV
 Reform_ey(New dem.)                       -3.871***          -4.030***           -6.774***          -6.354***
                                             [1.224]            [1.153]             [2.200]            [1.350]
 Reform_ey(Old dem.)                          -1.529            -1.854               -2.017            -1.612*
                                             [1.007]            [3.919]             [3.692]            [0.981]
 Reform_term((New dem.)                        2.332             1.832               2.527*              1.881
                                             [1.538]            [2.093]             [1.361]            [1.457]
 Reform_term(Old dem.)                        -2.248            -3.968            -12.839**             -2.356
                                             [1.448]            [3.239]             [5.867]            [1.411]
 Initial level regulation                     -7.601            -4.596               -1.252             -9.206
                                             [6.228]           [15.009]             [5.880]            [6.250]
 Growth_ey                                   0.531**             0.465             0.556***           0.554***
                                             [0.208]            [0.278]             [0.199]            [0.213]
 Growth_term                                   0.346            1.060*                0.343              0.303
                                             [0.314]            [0.581]             [0.305]            [0.309]
 Advanced economy                           3.596***            5.208*               2.296*           3.622***
                                              [1.21]            [2.846]             [1.337]            [1.197]
 New democracies                              -0.141             0.197                0.146              0.536
                                             [1.555]            [2.778]             [1.230]            [1.518]
 Majoritarian system                         2.219**             0.449               1.844*           2.176**
                                             [0.924]            [2.373]             [0.990]            [0.912]
 Lagged vote share                            -0.150            -0.024              -0.139*             -0.144
                                             [0.093]            [0.129]             [0.091]            [0.091]

 Total effect (New dem.)                     -1.539              -2.198             -4.246            -4.473**
 Total effect (Old dem.)                    -3.777*              -5.822           -14.856**           -3.969**
 F-test: difference                           0.55                0.38               2.33               0.03

 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F
 statistic                                                                                              44.64
 Stock-Yogo 10% critical
 value                                                                                                  16.38

 (Uncentered) R2                              0.11                0.15               0.12                0.27
 Observations                                 327                 127                327                 327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (5). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                           50
Table 16. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--Majoritarian vs. non-majoritarian
systems
                                                         (I)               (II)                 (III)               (IV)
                                                        OLS           Ex. elections            IMF                   IV
 Reform_ey (Maj)                                      -2.438*            -2.913              -10.178            -2.932**
                                                      [1.328]            [8.732]              [6.552]            [1.339]
 Reform_ey (nonMaj)                                  -2.878**          -3.921***             -4.334*           -7.587***
                                                      [1.116]            [1.049]              [2.371]            [1.443]
 Reform_term (Maj)                                      0.415             8.642              -20.642              -0.401
                                                      [2.894]            [6.529]             [15.280]            [2.739]
 Reform_term (nonMaj)                                  -0.775            -0.913               -1.105              -1.030
                                                      [1.118]            [2.064]              [2.449]            [1.111]
 Initial level regulation                              -6.574            -1.748               -1.809            -14.121*
                                                      [6.199]           [14.801]              [6.064]            [7.257]
 Growth_ey                                            0.505**            0.459*              0.489**             0.554**
                                                      [0.211]            [0.263]              [0.204]            [0.226]
 Growth_term                                            0.428           1.206**                0.448               0.342
                                                      [0.325]            [0.568]              [0.315]            [0.337]
 Advanced economy                                     3.439**            4.880*              2.759**            3.677***
                                                      [1.248]            [3.018]              [1.328]            [1.284]
 New democracies                                        0.789             1.488                1.263               0.898
                                                      [1.109]            [2.285]              [1.142]            [1.045]
 Majoritarian system                                    1.906            -2.089              2.690**               1.265
                                                      [1.660]            [3.501]              [1.200]            [1.545]
 Lagged vote share                                     -0.145             0.001               -0.126              -0.144
                                                      [0.094]            [0.122]              [0.095]            [0.094]

 Total effect (Maj)                                   -2.022               5.729             -30.802*            -7.987
 Total effect (nonMaj)                               -3.653**             -4.834              -5.439*          -3.962***
 F-test: difference                                    0.17                 1.64                2.34              2.30

 Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                                                                              32.90
 Stock-Yogo 10% critical value                                                                                    16.38

 (Uncentered) R2                                        0.10               0.15                 0.10               0.26
 Observations                                           327                127                  327                327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (5). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                               51
Table A1. Reforms and reversal in the electoral cycle
                               All          IMF          Ex. El.         Adv.          Dev.       New dem.        Old dem.         Maj          nMAj
 Reform_ey                   0.410         0.521         0.390          0.360         0.468        0.520           0.341          0.481          0.401
 Reform_ey (+)               0.491         0.617         0.508          0.426         0.564        0.598           0.423          0.529          0.487
 Reversal_ey (-)             -0.072        -0.087        -0.106         -0.059        -0.086       -0.068          -0.075         -0.043        -0.079
 Reform_term                 0.628         0.860         0.632          0.605         0.654        0.685           0.594          0.526          0.650
 Reform_term (+)             0.680         0.934         0.707          0.621         0.748        0.759           0.634          0.592          0.700
 Reversal_term (-)           -0.043        -0.062         -0.063        -0.014        -0.077        -0.057         -0.035         -0.055        -0.042
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader term, respectively. Reform (+) and Reversal (-)
denote liberalization and tightening reforms, respectively.

Table A2. Reforms and reversal in the electoral cycle--recessions vs expansions
                                              Weak economic conditions                                 Strong economic conditions
                                          All          IMF           Ex. El.                       All            IMF           Ex. El.
 Reform_ey                               0.432         0.566          0.390                       0.381           0.459          0.390
 Reform_ey (+)                           0.503         0.636          0.477                       0.474           0.590          0.547
 Reversal_ey (-)                        -0.065        -0.069         -0.081                      -0.081          -0.108         -0.136
 Reform_term                             0.687         1.024          0.686                       0.555           0.703          0.568
 Reform_term (+)                         0.729         1.036          0.763                       0.620           0.836          0.641
 Reversal_term (-)                      -0.037        -0.012         -0.070                      -0.049          -0.097         -0.056
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader term, respectively. Reform (+) and Reversal (-)
denote liberalization and tightening reforms, respectively. Weak and strong economic conditions are defined as in equation (2).
Table A3. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--IMF Reforms vs. Reversals and
recessions and expansions

                                                                       IMF
 Reform_ey (+) (recessions)                                           -1.751
                                                                    [12.331]
 Reversal_ey (-) (recessions)                                        -31.348
                                                                    [26.763]
 Reform_term (+) (recessions)                                         -5.002
                                                                     [6.783]
 Reversal_term (-) (recessions)                                   -37.822***
                                                                    [11.755]
 Reform_ey (+) (expansions)                                           -7.924
                                                                     [4.907]
 Reversal_ey (-) (expansions)                                         47.293
                                                                    [29.767]
 Reform_term (+) (expansions)                                          1.839
                                                                     [5.409]
 Reversal_term (-) (expansions)                                    326.53***
                                                                    [71.920]
 Initial level regulation                                             -1.053
                                                                     [5.738]
 Growth_ey                                                          0.683***
                                                                     [0.204]
 Growth_term                                                           0.310
                                                                     [0.324]
 Advanced economy                                                    2.706**
                                                                     [1.352]
 New democracies                                                       1.226
                                                                     [1.151]
 Majoritarian system                                                 2.142**
                                                                     [1.017]
 Lagged vote share                                                   -0.155*
                                                                     [0.088]
 Total effect recessions                                             -13.278
 Total effect expansions                                           273.15***
 F-test: difference                                                  8.75***

 R2                                                                    0.12
 Observations                                                          327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Reform (+) and Reversal (-) denote liberalization and tightening reforms, respectively.
Estimates based on equation (5). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* denote
significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.
Table A4. The Effect of Reforms on Re-election--single reforms

                                               Financial                                             Real
                            (I)               (II)            (III)             (IV)            (V)              (VI)
                            Domestic          Capital         Fin.Current       Trade           Product          Labor
                            finance           account         account                           market           market
 Reform_ey                  -2.545*           -6.574*         -5.210**          0.314           -0.012           2.247
                            (1.369)           (3.496)         (2.105)           (0.635)         (1.397)          (5.240)
 Reform_term                -0.553            1.417           -0.480            -0.215          0.089            2.981
                            (1.510)           (2.456)         (2.044)           (0.699)         (0.943)          (3.850)
 Initial level
 regulation                 -2.315            -1.247          -2.252            2.019           -0.397           -5.426
                            (3.527)           (4.970)         (4.361)           (3.628)         (3.020)          (5.564)
 Growth_ey                  0.272             0.286           0.320             0.461**         0.278            0.328
                            (0.258)           (0.257)         (0.260)           (0.201)         (0.250)          (0.203)
 Growth_term                0.727**           0.676**         0.679**           0.472           0.725**          0.679**
                            (0.309)           (0.317)         (0.315)           (0.326)         (0.322)          (0.298)
 Advanced economy           3.275***          3.087**         3.164***          3.101**         3.026***         2.839**
                            (1.160)           (1.217)         (1.173)           (1.249)         (1.023)          (1.067)
 New democracies            0.714             0.648           0.792             0.761           0.708            0.476
                            (1.152)           (1.148)         (1.090)           (1.155)         (1.133)          (1.132)
 Majoritarian system        1.552             1.607           1.534             2.381**         1.564            1.671
                            (1.074)           (1.019)         (1.005)           (1.020)         (1.035)          (1.079)
 Lagged vote share          -0.182**          -0.185**        -0.188**          -0.151          -0.186**         -0.185**
                            (0.083)           (0.082)         (0.083)           (0.093)         (0.082)          (0.079)

 R2                         0.10              0.10            0.10              0.09            0.09             0.10
 Observations               363               363             363               328             363              362
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (1). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                           54
Table A5. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--Financial vs. real and Reforms vs.
Reversals
                                                                       (I)                   (II)
                                                                   Financial                Real
 Reform_ey (+)                                                     -6.889**                 1.313
                                                                    [2.823]               [2.229]
 Reversal_ey (-)                                                     11.105                -5.918
                                                                    [7.363]              [15.389]
 Reform_term (+)                                                      0.318                 0.611
                                                                    [2.838]               [1.609]
 Reversal_term (-)                                                    0.910                12.443
                                                                    [5.889]               [7.639]
 Initial level regulation                                            -2.532                 1.420
                                                                    [5.030]               [6.302]
 Growth_ey                                                            0.289               0.463**
                                                                    [0.265]               [0.210]
 Growth_term                                                        0.683**                 0.490
                                                                    [0.331]               [0.328]
 Advanced economy                                                   3.352**              3.338***
                                                                    [1.293]               [1.183]
 New democracies                                                      0.726                 0.812
                                                                    [1.109]               [1.175]
 Majoritarian system                                                  1.541               2.384**
                                                                    [1.046]               [1.020]
 Lagged vote share                                                 -0.182**               -0.162*
                                                                    [0.084]               [0.087]

 F-test reform vs. reversal coef.                                     0.36                  0.21

 R2                                                                   0.11                  0.09
 Observations                                                         363                   327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Reform (+) and Reversal (-) denote liberalization and tightening reforms, respectively.
Estimates based on equation (5). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* denote
significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                           55
Table A6. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--recessions vs. expansions, financial vs. real
                                               (I)            (II)             (I)              (II)            (I)                (II)
                                          Dom. Fin         Capital         Fin. Curr.         Trade            PMR                LMR
Reform_ey (recessions)                    -6.183***         -5.507        -10.153***          -2.597           2.678              2.707
                                            [2.300]        [7.392]          [2.354]          [2.637]          [5.449]          [12.409]
Reform_ey (expansions)                        1.138         -8.038            0.471            2.653          -1.541              1.410
                                            [2.552]        [7.198]          [3.509]          [1.865]          [3.333]          [28.763]
Reform_term (recessions)                     -4.000          1.169            2.357           -2.144          -5.010              9.286
                                            [3.367]        [2.876]          [2.011]          [1.858]          [3.195]           [8.292]
Reform_term (expansions)                      2.402          1.651           -3.004            1.435          3.475*              0.714
                                            [2.721]        [5.796]          [4.194]          [3.804]          [1.854]           [6.925]
Initial level regulation                     -2.414         -1.363           -1.171            1.562           0.048             -4.989
                                            [2.721]        [5.014]          [4.194]          [3.805]          [3.040]           [5.518]
Growth_ey                                   0.208**          0.288            0.302          0.465**           0.338              0.320
                                            [0.260]        [0.258]          [0.263]          [0.206]          [0.276]           [0.208]
Growth_term                                 0.633**        0.674**          0.700**            0.444           0.535            0.673**
                                            [0.315]        [0.321]          [0.314]          [0.343]          [0.360]           [0.306]
Advanced economy                           3.111***        3.105**          3.142**          3.172**         2.715***          2.873***
                                            [1.159]        [1.225]          [1.215]          [1.252]          [1.024]           [1.055]
New democracies                               0.523          0.628            0.994            0.769           0.762              0.562
                                            [1.140]        [1.145]          [1.094]          [1.166]          [1.083]           [1.086]
Majoritarian system                           1.561        1.631**            1.404          2.238**           1.487              1.647
                                            [1.068]        [1.034]          [1.036]          [1.020]          [1.060]           [1.074]
Lagged vote share                            -0.179       -0.186**         -0.185**           -0.153         -0.185**          -0.183**
                                            [0.083]        [0.084]          [0.084]          [0.093]          [0.082]           [0.077]

Total effect recessions                   -10.183***        -4.338        -7.796***          -4.741*           -2.332           11.994
Total effect expansions                      3.541          -6.387          -2.533            4.088*            1.933           2.124
F-test difference                           4.73**           0.02            0.55              2.63*             0.33            0.57

R2                                            0.11           0.09             0.11             0.09             0.10                 0.05
Observations                                  363            363              363              327              363                  363
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader term,
respectively. Estimates based on equation (4). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses. ***,**,* denote
significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                                           56
Table A7. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--IMF Advanced vs. developing

                                                                         IMF
 Reform_ey(Adv.)                                                      -9.126**
                                                                       [3.655]
 Reform_ey(Dev.)                                                      -4.927**
                                                                       [2.085]
 Reform_term(Adv.)                                                   -29.085***
                                                                       [5.376]
 Reform_term(Dev.)                                                      -0.006
                                                                       [2.187]
 Initial level regulation                                               -0.085
                                                                       [5.880]
 Growth_ey                                                             0.534**
                                                                       [0.202]
 Growth_term                                                             0.485
                                                                       [0.304]
 Advanced economy                                                      3.262**
                                                                       [1.313]
 New democracies                                                         0.958
                                                                       [1.127]
 Majoritarian system                                                    2.007*
                                                                       [1.009]
 Lagged vote share                                                       -0.11
                                                                       [0.092]

 Total effect (Adv.)                                                 -38.210***
 Total effect (Dev.)                                                   -4.933
 F-test: difference                                                   19.14***


 R2                                                                      0.12
 Observations                                                            327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (5). Standard deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses.
***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.




                                                             57
Table A8. The effect of reforms on electoral outcomes--extensions
                                                           (I)               (II)              (III)              (IV)
                                                      Gov. alone         Adv. Vs.          New vs.             Maj. vs.
                                                     vs. coalition           Dev          OLD dem.            nonMaj.
 Reform_ey*D (recessions)                             -5.533***             1.263         -5.107***          -13.867**
                                                        [1.119]           [5.907]           [1.238]            [6.287]
 Reform_ey*D (expansions)                                -0.678            -2.800            -1.296              0.441
                                                        [1.862]           [3.503]           [4.286]            [1.783]
 Reform_term*D (recessions)                              -1.735            -2.780             1.135             -3.192
                                                        [2.106]           [2.626]           [2.180]            [4.814]
 Reform_term*D (expansions)                               1.022             0.731             3.682              3.795
                                                        [3.269]           [2.509]           [3.420]            [5.607]
 Reform_ey*(1-D) (recessions)                            13.221         -5.150***             2.682           -4.023**
                                                       [10.485]           [1.295]           [5.703]            [1.848]
 Reform_ey*(1-D) (expansions)                           -12.472            -2.352            -3.975             -1.285
                                                        [8.363]           [3.924]           [3.302]            [3.199]
 Reform_term*(1-D) (recessions)                          -0.926            -1.621           -4.644*             -1.339
                                                        [4.596]           [2.973]           [2.339]            [2.003]
 Reform_term*(1-D) (expansions)                          -4.006             0.069            -0.796             -0.398
                                                        [4.086]           [3.846]           [2.832]            [2.407]
 Initial level regulation                                -6.700            -7.215            -8.763             -7.073
                                                        [6.015]           [6.150]           [6.345]            [6.208]
 Growth_ey                                              0.546**           0.533**           0.572**            0.457**
                                                        [0.212]           [0.226]           [0.226]            [0.215]
 Growth_term                                              0.417             0.332             0.253              0.398
                                                        [0.352]          [0.0.372]          [0.354]            [0.354]
 Advanced economy                                      3.691***           2.991**          3.638***           3.261***
                                                        [1.246]           [1.475]           [1.198]            [1.269]
 New democracies                                          0.996             0.734            -0.500             0.655
                                                        [1.159]           [1.154]           [1.583]            [1.138]
 Majoritarian system                                    2.012**           2.372**          2.328***              2.184
                                                        [0.989]           [0.964]           [0.879]            [1.720]
 Lagged vote share                                       -0.132            -0.140            -0.150             -0.142
                                                        [0.092]           [0.094]           [0.093]            [0.096]

 Total D                                               -6.924**            -3.586            -1.586           -12.823
 Total (1-D)                                            -4.183            -9.054*            -6.732            -7.046
 F-test difference                                       0.51               1.03              0.68              0.40

 R2                                                      0.12               0.11              0.12              0.11
 Observations                                            327                327               327               327
Note: Reform_ey and Reform_term denote reforms in the election year and in the rest of the incumbent leader
term, respectively. Estimates based on equation (5), differentiating between recessions and expansions. Standard
deviations based on robust standard errors in parentheses. D (1-D) respectively denotes governing alone (coalition)--
column I; advanced (developing) economies-column II; new (old) democracies--column III; majoritarian (non-majoritarian)
systems--column IV. ***,**,* denote significance at 1, 5 and 10 percent, respectively.

                                                         58
