                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   WHY IS UNEMPLOYMENT SO COUNTERCYCLICAL?

                                      Lawrence J. Christiano
                                      Martin S. Eichenbaum
                                        Mathias Trabandt

                                       Working Paper 26723
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26723


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    January 2020




We are grateful to Stefan Gebauer, Martin Harding and Sandra Pasch for helpful comments, and
to Hannah Seidl for her assistance. We also thank Lars Ljungqvist and Tom Sargent for useful
comments on an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26723.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Why is Unemployment so Countercyclical?
Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin S. Eichenbaum, and Mathias Trabandt
NBER Working Paper No. 26723
January 2020
JEL No. E0

                                         ABSTRACT

We argue that wage inertia plays a pivotal role in allowing empirically plausible variants of the
standard search and matching model to account for the large countercyclical response of
unemployment to shocks.

Lawrence J. Christiano                          Mathias Trabandt
Department of Economics                         Freie Universität Berlin
Northwestern University                         School of Business and Economics
2001 Sheridan Road                              Boltzmannstrasse 20
Evanston, IL 60208                              14195 Berlin
and NBER                                        Germany
l-christiano@northwestern.edu                   and DIW and IWH
                                                mathias.trabandt@gmail.com
Martin S. Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu
1        Introduction

Wage rigidities play a critical role in many quantitative business cycle models. Estimated
New Keynesian (NK) models consistently feature important nominal wage rigidities.1 The
newest generation of heterogeneous agent (HANK) models also assigns prominent roles to
wage rigidities.2 There is also a long tradition of wage rigidities in open-economy models of
aggregate fluctuations.3 Wage rigidities enable all of these models to generate employment
fluctuations that are comparable to those observed in the data.
        But do wage rigidities play an important role in understanding why un employment is
so countercyclical? The standard framework used to study unemployment features search
and matching frictions of the sort emphasized by Diamond (1982), Mortensen (1982) and
Pissarides (1985) (henceforth, DMP). Shimer (2005) showed that standard versions of these
models cannot - at least with plausible parameter values - explain the countercyclical behav-
ior of unemployment. This `Shimer critique' has led to a very large literature whose goal is
to account quantitatively for the dynamics of unemployment. There is intense disagreement
within this literature about the role of wage inertia in the cyclical behavior of unemployment.
        Authors like Hall (2005) and Rogerson and Shimer (2011) argue that wage inertia greatly
increases the cyclical volatility of unemployment in search and matching models. Similarly,
Gertler and Trigari (2009) and Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2016, CET) stress
the importance of wage rigidities in estimated New-Keynesian search and matching models.
In sharp contrast, Hagedorn and Manovskii (2008, HM) and Ljungqvist and Sargent (2017,
LS) argue that the emphasis on wage rigidity is misplaced. Building on HM's analysis, LS
stress the usefulness of what they call the `fundamental surplus fraction' for understanding
the response of unemployment to shocks. By the fundamental surplus fraction they mean
the "upper bound on the fraction of a job's output that the invisible hand can allocate
    1
     See for example Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) and Smets and Wouters (2007). See also
Del Negro, Eusepi, Giannoni, Sbordone, Tambalotti, Cocci, Hasegawa and Linder (2013) for an example of
DSGE models used for policy analysis.
   2
     See for example Broer, Hansen, Krusell and Oberg (2018) and Auclert, Rognlie and Straub (2019).
   3
     See for example Kollman (2001), Schmitt-Groh´ e and Uribe (2016) and Eichenbaum, Johannsen and
Rebelo (2019).


                                                  2
to vacancy creation".4 LS argue that the fundamental surplus fraction must be small to
account for the Shimer puzzle and that wage rigidities don't play any special role in this
connection. We argue that wage rigidities do in fact play a pivotal role in allowing variants of
the standard search and matching models to account for the large countercyclical response
of unemployment to shocks. In fact wage rigidities are necessary in empirically plausible
versions of those models for explaining the cyclical volatility of unemployment.
       In section two we present a simple labor market search and matching model. In section
three we proceed as in much of the literature and use comparative steady state analysis as a
short-cut for analyzing model dynamics. We characterize the implications of the search and
matching model for the volatility of unemployment by a standard statistic: the elasticity
of steady state labor market tightness with respect to a shift in the steady state marginal
revenue product of labor. We decompose that elasticity into a wage inertia component and
a profit rate component. Our decomposition makes clear that wage inertia is a necessary
condition for generating a large countercyclical response of unemployment to a shift in the
marginal revenue product of labor. If the wage rate responds one-to-one to the marginal
revenue product across steady states, then the unemployment rate remains exactly the same
across those steady states. Our decomposition also makes clear that, other things equal,
the less the wage rate responds to the marginal revenue product, the more responsive is the
unemployment rate. We show that similar conclusions hold for changes in the discount rate
of the sort considered in Hall (2017).
       We apply our decomposition to analyze the role of wage inertia in dierent wage-setting
models estimated by CET. Specifically, we consider versions of their DSGE model where
wages are set according to Nash bargaining and alternating oer bargaining (AOB). Both
models solve the Shimer puzzle because they have more wage inertia than does the model
considered by Shimer. A sticky wage variant of the model, in which wages are constant
across steady states, generates an enormous response of unemployment to a permanent shift
in firms' marginal revenue product. As a by-product of our analysis, we provide a counter-
  4
      See LS, abstract.


                                               3
example to the claim in LS that search and matching models can only successfully address the
Shimer critique by incorporating features that make the inverse of the fundamental surplus
fraction large. In that section we also address the HM critique of wage inertia as a solution
to the Shimer puzzle.
    The comparative steady state approach can yield important insights about the role of
wage rigidity in dynamics. However, it can also be very misleading. The approach assumes
the underlying shock is close to a random walk and the economy does not have quantitatively
important state variables. These two assumptions are satisfied in the simple search and
matching model, e.g., Shimer (2005). But they are not satisfied in generalizations of that
model which include transitory shocks and a rich assortment of state variables. Moreover,
model features like adjustment costs and nominal rigidities give rise to additional sources of
dynamics while leaving no trace in the steady state. A steady-state analysis could assign no
role at all to wage rigidity even if in fact it plays an very important role.
    In light of these considerations, section four focuses on the dynamic response of unem-
ployment to shocks. We do so using variants of the Nash and AOB models estimated in
CET. Our main results can be summarized as follows. First, wage inertia greatly magnifies
the response of unemployment to shocks. That is, models which do well at matching the data
like the estimated AOB model do poorly if one replaces the wage determination mechanism
by one in which wages are less inertial. Models that do badly at matching the data, like
the Nash model with plausible replacement ratios, do much better if we impose on them
wage processes that are more inertial. Second, we show that steady-state based measures
of the fundamental surplus are uninformative about the dynamic response of unemployment
to shocks. Models which have identical steady states exhibit dynamic response functions
of unemployment to shocks that are very dierent from each other. These dierences are
driven by dierent degrees of wage inertia.
    Section five contains concluding remarks.




                                               4
2     A Simple Labor Market Model

In this section we consider a simple discrete time search and matching model developed in
CET. There is a continuum of identical workers and firms. To map into the medium-sized
DSGE model in section 4, we refer to these firms as wholesaler firms. Firms produce a good
using labor as the sole input. A wholesaler firm that wishes to meet a worker in period t
must post a vacancy at a cost st , expressed in units of the consumption good. The vacancy
is filled with probability Qt . Following Pissarides (2009), the firm must pay a fixed real cost,
t , before bargaining with the newly-found worker.
    Let Jt denote the value to the firm of a worker, expressed in units of the final consump-
tion good:
                                         J t = #p
                                                t
                                                         p
                                                        wt .                                 (1)

Here, #p
       t denotes the expected present discounted value, over the duration of the worker/firm

match, of the marginal revenue product of the worker. The latter could be stochastic because
technology shocks aect the productivity of workers or because there are shocks to the price
                                          p
of the wholesale firm good. The variable wt denotes the discounted value of the real wage.
The latter is determined by worker-firm bargaining and is discussed below. In recursive form:


                      #p                 p      p                 p
                       t = #t + Et mt+1 #t+1 , wt = wt + Et mt+1 wt+1 .                      (2)


Here  is the probability that a given firm/worker match continues from one period to the
next. In equation (2), mt+1 is a discount factor which firms and workers view as an exogenous
stochastic process with a well defined steady-state value. We allow mt to be stochastic in
anticipation of the medium-sized DSGE model considered in section 4.
    The law of motion for aggregate employment, lt , is given by:


                                      lt = lt   1   + xt l t 1 .




                                                5
The term lt   1   denotes the number of workers that were attached to firms in period t 1 and
remain attached at the start of period t. The variable xt denotes the hiring rate so that xt lt   1

represents the number of new firm/worker meetings at the start of period t. The number of
workers searching for work at the start of period t is the sum of the number of unemployed
workers in period t     1, 1     lt 1 , plus the number of workers that separate from firms at the
end of t   1, (1     )lt 1 . Consequently, the probability, ft , that a searching worker meets a
firm is given by:
                                                        xt l t 1
                                             ft =                .
                                                       1 lt 1

Free entry by wholesalers implies that, in equilibrium, the expected benefit of a vacancy
equals the cost:
                                            Q t ( Jt      t ) = st .                           (3)

Let Vt denote the value to a worker of being matched with a firm. We write Vt as the sum of
the expected present discounted value of wages earned while the firm-worker match endures
and the continuation value, At , when the match terminates:


                                                    p
                                              Vt = wt + At .                                   (4)


Here
                  At = (1      )Et mt+1 [ft+1 Vt+1 + (1         ft+1 )Ut+1 ] + Et mt+1 At+1    (5)

and
                                                        ~t
                                              Ut = Dt + U                                      (6)

                                                     ~t denotes the continuation value of
where Dt denotes unemployment benefits. In addition, U
unemployment:
                                ~t Et mt+1 [ft+1 Vt+1 + (1
                                U                                      ft+1 )Ut+1 ].           (7)

Labor market tightness,         t,   is the ratio of aggregate vacancies to the number of workers
searching for work. Assuming a standard constant returns to scale matching function, the

                                                        6
vacancy filling rate, Qt , and the job finding rate for workers, ft , are related to         t,   as follows:


                                               1
                                      ft =   m t         , Qt =     m t                                  (8)

where     m   > 0, 0 <     < 1 and
                                                       vt l t 1
                                              t   =             .                                        (9)
                                                      1 lt 1

Here, vt lt   1   denotes the total number of vacancies posted by firms at the start of period t.
       As soon as the lt matches are determined at the start of period t, each worker in lt
engages in bilateral bargaining over the current wage rate, wt , with a wholesaler firm. Each
worker-firm bargaining pair takes the outcome of all other period t bargains as given. In
addition, they take as given the outcome of future wage agreements as long as the worker
and firm remain matched. Because bargaining in period t applies only to the current wage
rate, we refer to it as period-by-period bargaining. The bargaining problem of all worker-firm
pairs is the same, regardless of how long they have been matched.5
       In the basic search and matching model, the match surplus Jt + Vt              Ut is split between
a matched firm and worker according to Nash bargaining. The Nash-sharing rule is given
by:
                                                  1      
                                          Jt =               (Vt   Ut )                                 (10)
                                                      

where  is the share of total surplus going to the worker.
       Following Hall and Milgrom (2008) and CET, we also consider a version of the model
in which real wages are determined by alternating oer bargaining (AOB). We suppose that
bargaining proceeds across M sub-periods within the period, where M is even.6 The firm
   5
     This result follows from our assumptions that hiring costs, i.e. st and t , are sunk when bargaining
occurs and the expected duration of a match is independent of how long a match has already been in place.
   6
     Our model diers from Hall and Milgrom's in two ways. First, they assume alternating oers are made
in successive periods, t, t + 1, etc., and can potentially continue indefinitely. With this assumption, they
must specify the time period of the model to be shorter than the quarterly or monthly rate over which many
macroeconomic variables are measured. Our approach, which assumes that bargaining proceeds within a
period, means that when we use standard time series estimation methods which use quarterly data, as in
CET, we can avoid having to explicitly take into account temporal aggregation eects. Second, we assume
that a worker can go from one job to another without passing through unemployment.



                                                         7
makes a wage oer at the start of the first sub-period. It also makes an oer at the start of
a subsequent odd sub-period in the event that all previous oers have been rejected. The
cost to a firm of making an oer is           t.   Similarly, the worker makes a wage oer at the start
of an even sub-period in case all previous oers have been rejected. The worker makes the
last oer, which is take-it-or-leave-it. In sub-periods j = 1, ..., M                                1, the recipient of an
oer has the option to accept or reject it. If the oer is rejected, the recipient may declare
an end to the negotiations or she may plan to make a counteroer at the start of the next
sub-period. In the latter case, with probability                 bargaining breaks down.
       As shown in CET, the solution to the AOB problem is given by:


                       p       1
                      wt =         (  1 #p
                                         t + 2 (Ut             At ) + 3           t        4 ( #t   Dt )) .          (11)
                             1 + 2

where 1 = 1              + (1     )M , 2 = 1              (1         )M , 3 = 2 (1                    )/      1 and 4 =
(1      )(2 /M )/(2       )+1     2 . Relations (1), (4) and (11) can be combined and written in
the form of the AOB-sharing rule:


                                 Jt =   1 (Vt      Ut )        2 t   +       3 ( #t       Dt )                       (12)


with     i   = i+1 /1 , for i = 1, 2, 3. The Nash-sharing rule can be viewed as a special case of
the AOB-sharing rule, in which          1   = (1      )/ and             2    =       3   = 0.
                                                    p          p                    p
       We use (2) to solve for the real wage: wt = wt Et mt+1 wt +1 . In principle wt is consistent

with a wide variety of wage payments over the periods in which the worker and firm remain
matched. We resolve this potential non-uniqueness in wt by assuming that each period's
wage rate is the same time-invariant function of variables that are exogenous to the worker
and firm.




                                                          8
3    Steady-State Analysis of Wage Inertia and Labor

     Market Volatility

This section analyzes the role of wage inertia in generating labor market volatility using the
type of comparative steady-state methods commonly used in the literature. We consider
three models of wage determination: Nash bargaining, AOB, and sticky wages. In the latter
case, w is simply a constant, w
                              ~ , like in Hall (2005).
    The analysis in this section focuses on the elasticity,          ,# ,   of market tightness ( ) with
respect to the marginal revenue product of labor (#). The first subsection develops a de-
composition of this elasticity that highlights the role of wage inertia. The second subsection
studies the fundamental surplus fraction decomposition developed in LS. In the examples
studied in LS, that decomposition can be used in a simple and transparent way to determine
the impact on     ,#   of a change in the value of a model parameter. We show that for the
Nash bargaining case with a positive fixed cost, , the LS decomposition is not su cient
to determine the impact of a parameter change on           ,# .   In that case it is necessary to also
recompute the steady state finding rate, using the relevant steady state equilibrium condi-
tions. The same observations hold for the AOB case when                         0. The third subsection
below presents a quantitative analysis of the decompositions considered in this section. The
version of the AOB model estimated in CET has an elasticity,                  ,# ,   that is about six times
bigger than the value implied by a standard version of the Nash bargaining model. We show
that the inverse fundamental surplus fraction plays only a small role in this substantial in-
crease. Using our wage interia-based decomposition, we show that wage inertia is the main
reason for the jump in      ,# .   The fourth subsection extends the analysis to disturbances in
the discount rate. Hall (2017) has recently argued that discount rate shocks are important
in labor market fluctuations, and we show that wage inertia is important for amplifying the
eects of those shocks.




                                                  9
3.1      A Wage-Inertia Decomposition

The free-entry condition and the bargaining equation play a central role in the steady-state
equilibrium conditions of the model. Equation (8) implies that in steady state, the vacancy
filling probability, Q, and market tightness, , are related by:


                                                      Q=      m      ,


where a time series variable without a time index denotes its steady-state value. The steady-
state version of the free entry condition, (3) is:

                                              s                     # w
                                                       +=               .                                       (13)
                                              m                     1 

Here,    is the steady-state value of the representative household's discount factor, mt . The
right hand side of equation (13) corresponds to the steady-state expected profits from a filled
vacancy.
      Denote the elasticity of market tightness with respect to the marginal revenue product
#, by    ,#   :
                                                              d log
                                                      ,#              .                                         (14)
                                                              d log #

Shimer (2005) and much of the related literature use                           ,#   as a measure of the labor market
volatility implied by a model.
      Totally dierentiating (13) and rewriting implies:

                                                                           
                                      1                #                              dw
                             ,#   =                                            1         .                      (15)
                                          #       w     (1           )                d#
                                          |            {z            } |            {z }
                                                  1/(Profit rate)        Wage inertia term



Expression (15) decomposes labor market volatility                        ,#   into a term that reflects the inverse
profit rate and a term that is a function of dw/d#. Note that equation (15) uses only the free
entry condition, so that it holds regardless of how wages are determined. Other things equal,


                                                           10
a wage determination mechanism that implies greater wage inertia, i.e. a smaller value of
dw/d#, implies a larger value of           ,# .   The intuition is simple. When the wage rate is more
inertial, firms receive a greater share of the rent associated with vacancies after a rise in the
marginal revenue product (or technology) #. So the more inertial is the wage, the greater is
the incentive of the firm to post vacancies in the wake of an increase in #. This increased
incentive leads to a greater increase in market tightness and a larger drop in unemployment
after an increase in #.
      Expression (15) makes clear that some wage inertia is necessary for the model to generate
a larger value of    ,# .   If, across steady states, a change in # is fully reflected in the real wage
rate (dw/d# = 1), then          ,#   must be zero.


3.2     Fundamental Surplus-Based Decompositions

We now study the steady-state decomposition of                         ,#   developed in LS. This decomposition
is based on what they call the fundamental surplus fraction, which we denote by F S. In
contrast to our decomposition, an F S based decomposition is derived using both the free
entry condition and the details of the wage-setting mechanism. That decomposition takes
the following form,
                                                                
                                                      ,#   =       ,
                                                                FS

where  > 0. We show that this type of decomposition is in general not unique. In what fol-
lows we discuss two such decompositions for each of the Nash and AOB models. In the first
decomposition F S is an analytic function of model structural parameters. In contrast,  gen-
erally involves steady-state variables. We refer to this type of decomposition as a structural
decomposition. With the possible exception of the section on the financial accelerator model,
LS focus on such decompositions. In the second decomposition F S depends on steady-state
variables. We refer to this type of decomposition as a non-structural decomposition.




                                                           11
3.2.1     Nash Bargaining

In Appendix A.1.1 we derive the following structural decomposition for                                    ,#   in the Nash
bargaining model,
                                                                   N ash
                                                       N,#
                                                         ash
                                                             =                                                        (16)
                                                                  F S N ash

where
                                                                              1 
                                                                       f
                                 1     +  f 1 +               m
                                                              s
            N ash
                                                                       m
                                                                                            N ash   1 
                    =                                                                  1  ,       =     ,             (17)
                                                                                  f                  1 
                            (1        ) +  f 1 + (1                )      s
                                                                           m
                                                                                  m

                                         N ash
                        #        D             
        F S N ash =                               .                                                                   (18)
                                     #

This decomposition eectively coincides with the decomposition reported in section A.5
of the LS online technical appendix.7 There is a slight dierence between our structural
decomposition and the one in LS, reflecting timing dierences in job-to-job transitions. These
timing dierences do not aect the substance of our analysis.8
       A distinguishing feature of F S in equation (16) is that it does not involve endogenous
variables like f . In contrast, N ash involves f .
       In Appendix A.1.2 we derive a non-structural decomposition for                            ,# .   It takes the form
of (16) with F S N ash given in (18). The dierence is that N ash and N ash
                                                                           in (17) are then
given by:

                                     1  +  f                                      (1     (1 f  ))2
                N ash =                        ,  N ash =                                             .               (19)
                                     (1  ) +  f           (1                       ) (1    (1 f  / ))

            N ash
Notice that       and, hence, F S N ash , depend on the steady-state value of f . In the special
                                                                                                   11
   7
     The equivalence between the two decompositions is easier to see using the fact that Q = m fm    t
                                                                                                           .
   8
     LS use the same timing assumptions adopted by Hall and Milgrom (see footnote 6). In their main text
LS assume, as in Mortensen and Nagypal (2007), that  is paid after bargaining has occurred. In section
A.5 of their online technical appendix, LS assume, as in Pissarides (2009), that  is paid before workers and
firms bargain. We adopt the latter assumption.




                                                              12
case,  = 0, the structural and non-structural decompositions coincide.9
        We now show that when  6= 0 there is an important dierence between the structural
and non-structural decompositions in terms of their usefulness for analyzing how changes in
parameter values aect         ,# .   To understand the dierence, it is useful to distinguish between
two types of model parameters. First, some parameters enter the decomposition explicitly.
Second, there may be other parameters that only enter via their impact f . In the case of
our non-structural decomposition there is such a background parameter,             m.   In the presence
of such a background parameter, the non-structural decomposition provides a simple and
transparent way to perform a particular experiment: evaluate the impact on               ,#   of a change
in a model parameter holding f and the non-background parameters constant. This type
of experiment is of interest to the extent that the analyst has flat priors about the value of
       10
 m.         In the case of the structural decomposition stressed in LS, when  6= 0 there are no
background parameters that can implicitly be adjusted to keep f fixed. As a consequence
the formula loses its transparency and simplicity. This loss is easy to see for the experiment
described above: the analyst is now forced to solve a non-trivial problem to determine the
required change in       m.



3.2.2        Alternating Oer Bargaining

We now consider the alternating oer bargaining case. In Appendix A.2.1 we derive the
following structural decomposition for           ,# ,



                                                          AOB
                                              AOB
                                               ,# =                                                 (20)
                                                         F S AOB
   9
    In this special case the two formulas also coincide with the one studied in HM.
  10
    The proposed change in the structural parameter must be su ciently small so that it does not require
inadmissible values for the background parameters, e.g., m < 0.




                                                        13
where


                       1   + (1       ) 3+                     3f
  AOB =                                                                                                                                                             (21)
                                 1 + (1  ) 3
                                                                                                                                                 1 
                                                                                                                                            f
                                (1        ) (1 +          1)
                                                   +  f 1 + ( + 2                                              3     (#    D))     m
                                                                                                                                   s        m
         =                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                               1 (22)
                                                                                                                                                      f
                       (1             ) (1 + 1 ) +  f 1 + (1  ) ( +                                        2              3 (#   D))        m
                                                                                                                                            s             m


   AOB         (1 + 1 ) (1  ) AOB                                               (1
                                                                                 2            )
       =                       ,    =                                                                                                                               (23)
                 1 + (1    ) 3                                              1 + (1            )       3
                          AOB
               # D              AOB
 F S AOB     =                       .                                                                                                                              (24)
                           #

The coe cients              1,       2   and       3   are defined after equation (11). Notice that F S AOB is not a
function of endogenous variables like f .
    In Appendix A.2.2 we derive a non-structural decomposition for                                                               ,#    in which:


                                                                    1   +    3       (1    (1             f ))
                                                   AOB =                                                         ,
                                                                                          a

where

                                                                                                                                                 
               f + (1  ) (1 + 1 )                                                                                           f(              1)
                                  , a=                                           1   + 1           (1              f) +                                   3.
               f + (1  ) (1 + 1 )

Also,
                                                                                                  h                                                   i
                                                                f(          1)                                                         f(        1)
             (1 +          1 ) (1         ) + f +                                                     1         (1          f) +                              2
  AOB
      =                                                                          ,  AOB =                                                                         . (25)
                                               a                                                                             a

Here    1,   2   and        3    are the same as above. Equations (20) and (24) continue to hold. Note
that f now appears in F S AOB via AOB
                                      and  AOB (see (25)).
    Recall that in discussing Nash bargaining, we discussed a particular experiment in which
the analyst wants to study the eect on  N,#
                                          ash
                                              of a structural parameter, keeping f fixed.
We argued that it is easy to do so using the non-structural decomposition and is more com-


                                                                                 14
plicated using the structural decomposition. The same result holds in the case of AOB bar-
gaining. One interesting dierence is that in the Nash case the structural and non-structural
decompositions are the same when  = 0. In the AOB case, the two decompositions are
dierent, even when  = 0.


3.2.3        Sticky Wages

When wages are constant (dw/d# = 0) (15) implies:

                                                      #
                          Sticky
                           ,#    = Sticky                          , Sticky = 1/ .
                                            #    w
                                                 ~    (1      )

Here, w
      ~ denotes the constant wage. LS interpret this expression as an F S based decompo-
sition.


3.2.4        Using F S based Decompositions for Cross-model Comparisons

The discussion above focused on the use of the F S based decomposition to analyze how,
within a given model, changes in parameter values aect                 ,# .   LS also argue that F S based
decompositions are useful for understanding why dierent models imply dierent values for
   ,# .

          We now briefly summarize their argument. LS consider structural, F S based decom-
positions for various models, including a version of the AOB model. For those models,  has
an upper bound of roughly 1/ . The consensus view in the literature is that , the marginal
product of unemployment in the matching function, is roughly 1/2. So,  has an upper
bound of about 2. Shimer argues that a reasonable data-based target for                    ,#   is about 20.11
These observations lead LS to conclude that researchers should look for models in which F S
is small.
          Critically, the version of the AOB model that LS consider diers from ours along three
important dimensions. First, the time needed to make an oer or a counteroer is the same as
   11
     Mortensen and Nagyp´  al (2007) and Pissarides (2009) argue that a better empirical estimate of the target
is 12, also a large number.


                                                      15
the time needed to produce the good. Second, the bargaining process can in principle go on
forever. Third, to solve their version of the AOB model, LS adopt a particular approximating
assumption : the probability that a job is destroyed is the same as the probability, , that
bargaining breaks down. This assumption has the important consequence that workers do
not consider the value of their outside option when they decide whether or not to accept a
wage oer from a firm.12
      Ljungqvist and Sargent (forthcoming) consider our version of the AOB model. However,
in solving and analyzing the model they adopt the approximating assumption just discussed.
Recall that in our AOB model jobs can be destroyed at the beginning of a period, but not
within a period. So the approximating assumption requires ! 0. As above, this assumption
leads to the extreme implication that workers do not consider the value of their outside option
when bargaining.
      To see why setting         to zero in our model has this extreme implication, it is useful to
understand how a firm chooses its wage oer in bargaining round, j . Let wj,t denote a firm's
wage oer in bargaining round j of period t, where j is an odd number between 1 and M                1.
The firm wants to set wj,t as low as possible, subject to not being rejected by the worker.
So, wj,t has the property that workers are indierent between accepting and rejecting the
oer:

                                                                    
                    p               M    j+1   ~t + (1                 D               p
         wj,t +   w
                  ~t    + At =               D+U                )        + wj +1,t + w
                                                                                     ~t  + At .   (26)
                                        M                              M

                   p
The term, wj,t + w
                 ~t  , represents the present discounted value of the wages associated with
accepting the firm's oer, wj,t . So, the left-hand side of (26) represents the value to the worker
of accepting the firm's oer. Under our period-by-period bargaining assumption, the firm
        p
takes w
      ~t  as given. The right-hand side of the indierence condition is the value to the worker
of rejecting an oer and, with probability 1             , making a counteroer in bargaining round,
j + 1. The firm takes wj +1,t as given and understands that if its current oer is rejected, then
 12
    LS also assume  = 0 when they work with the AOB model. But, this assumption does not aect our
qualitative results for that model.


                                                   16
wj +1,t will be accepted unless bargaining breaks down. The first term on the right-hand side
of (26) is     times the sum of two terms: (i) the pro-rata unemployment benefits received
by the worker in the event that bargaining breaks down; and (ii) the continuation value of
being unemployed (see (7)). The second term on the right-hand side is 1                      times the sum
of one sub-period's unemployment benefit plus the value to the worker of an accepted oer.
       When    = 0 the worker indierence condition, (26) reduces to

                                                       D
                                              wj,t =     + wj +1,t .
                                                       M

So, under Ljungqvist and Sargent (forthcoming)'s approximating assumption, workers in
our AOB model do not consider the value of their outside option, Ut , when considering a
particular wage oer, wj,t .
       In the special case of = 0, the structural and non-structural F S based decompositions
coincide and are given by

                                              1              #
                                     ,#   =                                 .                             (27)
                                                  #   D    (M    2)     2

Here,  AOB = 1/ . So, our AOB model with the approximating assumption,                          = 0, fits the
pattern of the models considered by LS in which  is bounded above by roughly 2.13
       While the arguments associated with the LS approximation assumption are elegant, we
find the models above that embed this assumption unappealing. First, the implication that
workers do not consider their outside option when considering a wage oer seems implausible
on a priori grounds. Second, CET find that                 = 0 is empirically implausible. In particular,
the 95 percent probability interval associated with CET's estimate of                     easily excludes a
value of zero.14 Third, CET report that the mode of the posterior distribution of                     implies
  13
     It is easily verified that ! 0 implies 1 ! 0, 2 ! M2 2 , 3 ! 1     2 . Substitute out for J and Q in (3)
using (12) and (8), respectively. Then, take the limit, ! 0. Finally, totally dierentiate (3) with respect
to and # and rearrange, to obtain (27).
  14
     CET estimate their model using Bayesian methods. Notably, the lower bound of the posterior probability
interval is substantially higher than the lower bound of the prior probability interval for that parameter. So,
the data push the distribution of away from zero. See Table (4).


                                                          17
that the total job destruction probability, conditional on no resolution to bargaining over
a quarter, is meaningfully higher than zero, at roughly 10 percent.15 Fourth, formula (27),
which corresponds to the case            = 0, provides a strikingly bad approximation to the value of
   ,#   implied by CET's estimated AOB model. The value of             ,#   implied by the mode of the
posterior distribution reported by CET is 24.1.16 In sharp contrast, equation (27) implies a
negative value,     28.14, for    ,# .




3.3       Quantitative Analysis

In this section we provide a quantitative analysis of the role played by the fundamental
surplus and wage inertia on labor market volatility in dierent models.


3.3.1      F S based Decompositions

We begin by discussing the implications of CET's AOB model for  AOB
                                                                 ,# . Row one of Table 2

displays components of the structural F S based decomposition of  AOB
                                                                   ,# as well as the wage-

inertia decomposition. These are evaluated at the mode of the model parameters' posterior
distribution and steady states (see Tables 1 and 4). Notice that  AOB
                                                                   ,# is roughly 24, so
the model is successful in terms of generating a large elasticity of labor market tightness
(and unemployment) to a change in the marginal revenue product of labor. The key factor
underlying the model's success in generating a large value of  AOB
                                                                ,# is the high value of 
                                                                                        AOB
                                                                                            ,
7.08. The latter exceeds by a factor 3 the upper bound of AOB emphasized by LS for
the models that they consider. The inverse fundamental surplus fraction, 1/F S, plays a
smaller role than AOB in generating the large value of  AOB
                                                         ,# . This finding provides a stark

counterexample to the claim in LS that a small surplus fraction is crucial for a model to
generate empirically plausible volatility in labor market variables.
        Row four of Table 2 displays results for the estimated Nash model (for parameter and
   15
                                                                        PM          j 1               M
     Table (4) reports that the mode of is 0.0019. CET set M = 60, so j =1 (1     )     =1   (1   )       =
0.11. We thank Lars Ljungqvist for suggesting this way of interpreting the magnitude of .
  16
     The number is generated using equation (20).



                                                     18
Table 1: Steady States and Implied Parameters at Estimated Posterior Mode in Alternating
Oer Bargaining and Nash Bargaining Models.

                        Alternating Oer           Nash
           Variable                                             Description
                           Bargaining          Bargaining
                #             0.910               0.844         Marginal revenue product
                w             0.904               0.837         Real wage
                D             0.333               0.734         Unemployment benefits
                              0.057               0.072         Fixed hiring cost
                              0.552               0.542         Matching function parameter
                              0.900               0.900         Job survival probability
                             0.9968              0.9968         Discount factor
                f             0.632               0.632         Job finding rate
                                 -                0.674         Worker bargaining power
                              0.002                 -           Prob. of bargaining breakdown
                              0.009                 -           Firm counteroer costs
                Q              0.7                 0.7          Vacancy filling probability
                M               60                  -           Max. bargaining rounds
Notes: For model specifications where particular parameter values are not relevant, the
entries in this table are blank. Further calibrated and estimated model parameters are
provided in Tables 3 and 4. Source: CET.

steady state values see Tables 1 and 4). The estimated Nash model also generates a value of
   ,#   in excess of 20. But, it does so with a low N ash and a high 1/F S N ash . Taken together,
the Nash and AOB model results imply that F S is not a reliable guide to understanding
whether a model generates a high value of           ,# .

        We now consider the role of the F S based decomposition in cross-model comparisons
of      ,# .   As CET point out, the estimated Nash model is able to generate a high elasticity
because the estimated value of unemployment benefits D, reported in Table 1, is very high
(88% of the steady-state wage). The last row of Table 2 presents results for what we call the
restricted Nash model. This is a version of the estimated Nash model in which D is a more
reasonable 37% of the steady-state wage, a replacement ratio that corresponds to the one in
the estimated AOB model.17 Notice that             ,#   is only about 4 in the restricted Nash model,
as opposed to 24 in the estimated AOB model. The lion's share of this six-fold increase in
 17
    We adjusted  in the restricted Nash model to keep the steady-state job finding rate as in the estimated
Nash model.


                                                    19
the elasticity is due to the higher value of  in the AOB model. So, the inverse surplus
fraction is not a good guide for understanding why one model generates much higher labor
market volatility than another.


3.3.2    Wage Inertia

We now turn to the role of wage inertia in generating high values of         ,# .   Consider first the
estimated AOB and Nash models. According to Table 2, wage inertia fully accounts for the
fact that  AOB                N ash
            ,# is larger than  ,# . The wage inertia eect more than makes up for the fact

that the inverse profit rate is lower in the AOB model than in the Nash model.
    Although the wage inertia component may appear to be numerically small in the esti-
mated AOB model, it is the percent change in that term that matters for  AOB
                                                                          ,# when wage
inertia changes. This percent change can be large even if the level seems low.
    Next, we compare the estimated and restricted Nash models. By construction, the
inverse profit rate is the same in these two models. But,     ,#   is much larger in the estimated
Nash model. All of the dierence is due to the rise in wage inertia as we move from the
restricted to the estimated Nash model.
    We now consider our two sticky wage models. In the first one we fix the wage rate at
its steady state value in the estimated AOB model. The non-bargaining parameters are the
same as in the estimated AOB model. The results are reported in row two of Table 2. Notice
that    ,#   is now 3837 ­ orders of magnitude larger than in the estimated AOB model. As
one might anticipate from LS, the inverse of the fundamental surplus increases dramatically
compared to the estimated AOB model. But the interesting economic question is why? By
construction the profit rate is the same in this model and in the estimated AOB model. So,
all of the change in the fundamental surplus is due to the wage inertia component, which is
equal to 1 by construction in the sticky wage model.
    Results for the second sticky wage model appear in the third row of Table 2. That
model has the same parameters and steady state wage as the estimated Nash model. Notice
that the results of the two sticky wage models are similar.

                                             20
Table 2: Numerical Expressions for the Elasticity of Labor Market Tightness with Respect
to Technology and Decomposition of Fundamental Surplus into Profit Rate and Wage In-
ertia in Estimated Nash, Estimated Alternating Oer Bargaining (AOB), Sticky Wage and
Restricted Nash Models.



                                                         1
                 Elasticity =          1/Fundamental =          1/Profit  Wage      Wage
                      ,#                  Surplus                 Rate    Inertia
                                                                           Term


 Alternating Oer Bargaining (AOB)
                24.1     7.08     3.41                   1.81    2120.7    0.0063   0.90


 Sticky Wage
 AOB Params.       3837.4       1.81      2120.7         1.81    2120.7      1      0.90
 Nash Params.      7333.1       1.84      3985.4         1.84    3985.4      1      0.84

 Nash Bargaining
                    20.4        2.11       9.65          1.84    3985.4    0.0028   0.84

 Restricted Nash
                    3.97        2.11       1.88          1.84    3985.4    0.0005   0.84


Notes: The sticky wage model is evaluated using parameters of the estimated alternating
oer bargaining (AOB) model and estimated Nash model. The restricted Nash model is the
estimated Nash model with the estimated replacement rate of 88% set to 37%.




                                           21
        Our results may appear to contradict some claims in the literature, according to which
wage inertia has at best only a marginal impact on labor market volatility. For example
HM reach this conclusion using the Nash model. To make wages inertial in that model HM
reduce  to zero. Recall that  governs the bargaining power of workers. Reducing  drives
the wage down to the workers' outside option, D, so that dw/d# = 0. When HM induce
wage inertia in this way,     ,#   rises by only a negligible amount.
        HM's finding depends on their assumption that wages are determined by Nash bargain-
ing and their way of inducing wage inertia. To see this, recall our decomposition of       ,# ,   given
by equation (15). That decomposition is derived using only the firms' free entry condition.
It holds regardless of how wages are determined. Equation (15) implies that, other things
equal, wage inertia drives      ,#   up. But other things aren't equal. HM induce wage rigidity
in a way that drives the level of the wage down. According to (15), this level eect drives
   ,#   down. The net eect of these osetting forces is the negligible rise in    ,#   that HM find.
Clearly HM's results do not imply that other ways of inducing wage inertia in other models
of wage determination will have small eects on           ,# .




3.4       Alternative Driving Forces: Discount Rate Shocks

A variety of authors argue that variations in discount rates can be an important source of
variations in unemployment. Hall (2017) models these variations as exogenous shocks to
the stochastic discount factor in a search and matching model. A comparative steady-state
analysis implies that wage inertia is a necessary condition for variations in the discount factor
to induce movements in labor market tightness and unemployment.
        For simplicity, we assume that the fixed hiring cost  is equal to zero. In steady state
the value of a worker to a firm is equal to


                                         J = #         w + J.                                      (28)




                                                  22
In addition, the free entry condition is given by:

                                              s
                                                          = J.
                                                  m



Substituting out J , totally dierentiating and re-arranging yields the elasticity of labor
market tightness with respect to the discount rate,                ,   :

                                      d                           
                                                        #                        dw
                              ,   =   d
                                          =                            J                  .                  (29)
                                              #       # {z w
                                                      |     }                    d
                                                                  |         {z        }
                                                  1/(Profit rate) Wage inertia term



To interpret this expression suppose that the steady-state value of # is unaected by the
                                                                                              dw
value of . This is the case in standard search and matching models. If                        d
                                                                                                   = J , then the
right hand side of equation (28) is unaected by a change in . In equation (28), the term
 J is the discounted expected future value of a worker to the firm. If the discount rate
change induces a change in w that is exactly equal to J , then the current value of a worker
to the firm, J, is unchanged. Then the firm has no incentive to post more vacancies and the
unemployment rate is not aected by a change in . So, equation (29) shows that for                              ,

                                                                       dw
to be positive, wages must be inertial in the sense that               d
                                                                            < J . Of course the actual value
     dw
of   d
          is determined by the wage determination mechanism in the model, e.g. sticky wages,
Nash bargaining or AOB.



4         Dynamic Analysis

In this section we consider the dynamic impact of wage inertia in generating labor market
volatility in search and matching models. We make two key points. First, comparative
steady-state analysis can be deeply misleading about the dynamic behavior of these mod-
els. Models which have identical fundamental surpluses can exhibit very dierent dynamic
response functions. In these cases, the fundamental surplus is uninformative about the
question of interest. Second, even conditioning on a low inverse fundamental surplus, wage


                                                       23
inertia greatly magnifies labor market fluctuations in empirically plausible versions of search
and matching models. In the first subsection we consider a simple dynamic example. In
the second subsection, we analyze the impact of wage inertia in estimated DSGE models
conditional on a given value of the fundamental surplus.


4.1     Wage Inertia: A Simple Dynamic Example

In this section we consider the role of wage inertia using a simple dynamic example. Suppose
that the equilibrium wage rate is given by the following simple inertial wage rule:


                                   w t = #t     (1         ) ( #t   #)                     (30)


where     > 0 and D  wt  #t . In addition, assume that 0 < (1               ) < . The latter
assumption implies that a rise in #t generates a positive response in wt . The dynamics of wt
depend on     and . Note that      has no impact on the steady-state value of wt . We can think
of this wage rule as being a variant of the Hall (2005) wage norm, as long as D  wt  #t so
that the firm and worker each have an incentive to produce. A larger value of      means more
inertia in wt : a given shock to #t is associated with a smaller change in wt . For simplicity,
in this subsection, we abstract from the hiring cost, i.e.  = 0.
      We seek to evaluate the generic formula for the steady-state elasticity of labor market
tightness with respect to technology, i.e. equation (15), for the simple wage rule (30).
                            dw
Note that in steady state   d#
                                 = . Inserting the latter result together with the steady-state
version of equation (30) into equation (15) yields the following expression for the steady-state
elasticity:
                                                       1
                                            steady
                                             ,#    =       .

Note that the steady-state elasticity is independent of the fundamental surplus. Moreover,
the elasticity is identical to one implied by the Nash bargaining model with  = D = 0.
      To derive the actual dynamics of the simple model, we must take a stand on the law of


                                                24
motion for #t . To this end, we assume:


                                                 #t = (1       v )# + v #t           1   + "t .                                        (31)


where "t is uncorrelated over time and uncorrelated with #t                                        u   for u > 0.
     In Appendix B we show that the equilibrium solution for the value of a worker to the
firm, Jt , is given by:
                                                         Jt =     0   +     1 #t                                                       (32)

where
                                  (1        )#           1 (1     v )#                            (1         ) (1 + ) .
                   0   =                                                    and          1   =
                                              1                                                            1     v

Combining the free-entry condition (13) with the solution for Jt we obtain:

                                                   s
                                                         t   = Jt =         0   +     1 #t .
                                                    m



Totally dierentiating and rearranging yields the following expression for the dynamic elas-
ticity of labor market tightness with respect to the marginal revenue product:

                           d t          1                                   (1           ) (1 + )
          dynamic
           ,#              d# t   =                                                                                                .   (33)
                                                                       1        v                             (1    )(1+ )(1 v )
                            #
                                            (1      ) (1 + )            1       
                                                                                          (1           )           1 v



Consider v close to unity, so that the marginal revenue product of a worker is close to a
random walk. The limiting case implies that a shock to #t is permanent which mimics the
permanent shift in technology considered in the comparative steady-state analyses in section
3. For v ! 1, the dynamic elasticity (equation 33) becomes:

                                                        1
                                        dynamic
                                         ,#     '            (1 + ) =  steady
                                                                        ,#    (1 + ) .


Note that if    > 0 then  dynamic
                           ,#     >  steady
                                      ,#    . The restriction on the parameters                                                > (1       )
discussed above implies that                 >     1+
                                                         or     <     (1        )
                                                                                    . By making               su ciently large, i.e. by


                                                                 25
making wages su ciently inertial,  dynamic
                                    ,#     can be made arbitrarily large, even though  steady
                                                                                        ,#

is always simply equal to 1/ . That is, the more inertia there is in wages, the larger is
the impact of a shock to #t on labor market tightness and unemployment. Clearly, in this
example comparative steady-state analysis is very misleading about the dynamic eects of a
persistent shock to technology. Also notice that the parameter     which plays a central role
in  dynamic
     ,#     is completely absent from the fundamental surplus formula. So the latter is not
helpful for anticipating the results of a dynamic analysis of a shock to the marginal revenue
product of labor.


4.2     Wage Inertia in an Estimated Dynamic Search and Matching

        Model

In this subsection we consider the model of CET who embed the labor market model of
subsection 2 into a medium-sized DSGE NK model.


4.2.1   Households

The economy is populated by a large number of identical households. The representative
household has a unit measure of workers which it supplies inelastically to the labor market.
We denote the fraction of employed workers in the representative household in period t
by lt . An employed worker earns the nominal wage rate, Wt and an unemployed worker
receives Dt goods in government-provided unemployment compensation. Each worker has
the same concave preferences over consumption. Households provide perfect consumption
insurance to their members, so that each worker receives the same level of consumption,
Ct . The preferences of the representative household are the equally-weighted average of the
preferences of its workers:
                                       1
                                       X
                                             t
                                  E0             ln(Ct   bCt 1 )
                                       t=0




                                                  26
where the parameter 0  b < 1 controls the degree of habit formation in preferences. The
representative household's budget constraint is:


 Pt Ct + PI,t It + Bt+1  (RK,t uK
                                t    a( u K
                                          t )PI,t )Kt + (1                      lt )Pt Dt + Wt lt + Rt 1 Bt   Tt . (34)


Here, Tt denotes lump sum taxes net of profits, Pt denotes the price of consumption goods,
PI,t denotes the price of investment goods, Bt+1 denotes one period risk-free bonds purchased
in period t with gross return, Rt and It denotes the quantity of investment goods. The object
RK,t denotes the rental rate of capital services, Kt denotes the household's beginning of
period t stock of capital, a(uK
                              t ) denotes the cost, in units of investment goods, of the capital

utilization rate, uK      K
                   t and ut Kt denotes the household's period t supply of capital services.

We discuss details about the capital utilization cost function in subsection 4.2.4. All prices,
taxes and profits in equation (34) are in nominal terms. The representative household's stock
of capital evolves as follows:


                           Kt+1 = (1        K ) Kt          + (1         S (It /It 1 )) It


where   K   denotes the depreciation rate and S (It /It 1 ) are convex investment adjustment
costs. We discuss details about the latter in subsection 4.2.4.


4.2.2   Final Goods Producers

A final homogeneous good, Yt , is produced by competitive and identical firms using the
following technology:
                                                Z       1                 
                                                                     1
                                    Yt =                    (Yj,t ) dj                                            (35)
                                                    0

where    > 1. The representative firm chooses specialized inputs, Yj,t , to maximize profits:

                                                Z           1
                                       P t Yt                   Pj,t Yj,t dj,
                                                        0




                                                        27
subject to the production function (35). Output, Yt can be used to produce either consump-
tion goods or investment goods. The production of the latter uses a linear technology in
which one unit of Yt is transformed into          t   units of It .


4.2.3     Retailers and Wholesalers

The j th input good in (35) is produced by a retailer, with production function:


                                              
                                      Yj,t = kj,t (zt hj,t )1   
                                                                      't .


Here kj,t denotes the total amount of capital services purchased by firm j and 't represents
a fixed cost of production which evolves according to an exogenous stochastic process that is
consistent with balanced growth. We discuss details about the latter in subsection 4.2.4. The
variable zt is a technology shock and hj,t is the quantity of an intermediate good purchased
by the j th retailer. This good is purchased in competitive markets at the price Pth from a
wholesaler discussed in subsection 2. To produce in period t, the retailer must borrow Pth hj,t
at the gross nominal interest rate, Rt . The retailer repays the loan at the end of period
t after receiving sales revenues. The j th retailer sets its price, Pj,t , subject to the demand
curve for its good, and a Calvo sticky price friction. With probability 1              , the retailer can
re-optimize his price and with probability  , Pj,t = Pj,t 1 .18
       Wholesaler firms produce the intermediate good using labor which has a fixed marginal
productivity of unity. The real price of the intermediate good is Pth /Pt where Pth and Pt are
the nominal prices of the intermediate and final good, respectively. Let #t  Pth /Pt which
is the marginal revenue of wholesalers. Then the analysis of the labor market discussed
in sections 2 and 3 obtains directly with the understanding that all of the shocks to the
economy, including monetary policy, impact #t , thereby aecting firms incentives to post
vacancies.
  18
    We assume that producers make their price setting decision before observing the current period realiza-
tion of the monetary policy shock, but after the time t technology shocks.




                                                      28
4.2.4      Monetary Policy and Functional Forms

We adopt the following specification for monetary policy:


       ln(Rt /R) = R ln(Rt 1 /R) + (1              R )[r ln(t / ) + ry ln(GDPt /GDPt )] +                        R "R,t .




Here,  denotes the monetary authority's target inflation rate. The monetary policy shock,
"R,t , has unit variance and zero mean. Also, R is the steady-state value of Rt . The variable,
GDPt , denotes Gross Domestic Product (GDP), which equals Ct + It /                                    t   + Gt and GDPt
denotes the value of GDPt along the non-stochastic steady-state growth path. We assume
that the growth rate of neutral technological progress, lnµz,t  ln(zt /zt 1 ), is i.i.d. and that
the growth rate of investment-specific technological progress, lnµ                       ,t    ln(         t/   t 1 ),   follows
a stochastic first order autoregressive process.
       The sources of growth in the model are neutral and investment-specific technological
                                                                        (/(1 ))
progress because        t   and zt grow over time. Let          t   =   t       zt      denote the composite level
of technology. To guarantee balanced growth in the non-stochastic steady state, we require
that each element in ['t , st , t , t , Gt , Dt ] grows at the same rate as                       t   in steady state. To
this end, we adopt the following specification:


                                                       0                            0
                                ['t , st , t , t , Gt , Dt ] = [', s, , , G, D] t .


Here, t is a diagonal matrix with the ith diagonal element, i
                                                            t , where i 2 ', s, , , G, D
               i
and i
    t =
                     i
               t 1 ( t 1 )
                           1 i 19
                              .
       The cost of adjusting investment takes the form:

                               p                                           p
       S (It /It 1 ) = 0.5(exp[ S 00 (It /It   1    µ  µ )] + exp[             S 00 (It /It   1       µ  µ )])           1.
  19
    With this specification, i  t / t 1 converges to a constant in non-stochastic steady state, for each i. When
i is close to zero, i
                    t is virtually unresponsive in the short-run to an innovation in either of the two technology
shocks, a feature that we find attractive on a priori grounds.




                                                           29
                                                                                                        00
Here, µ and µ denote the unconditional growth rates of                        t    and       t.   Also, S denotes the
second derivative of S (·), evaluated in steady state. The cost associated with setting capacity
utilization is given by:


                        a( u K
                             t ) =
                                            K 2
                                     a b ( ut ) / 2   +   b (1
                                                                      K
                                                                 a ) ut   +       b ( a /2        1)


where   a    and   b   are positive scalars. For a given value of                    a,   we select     b    so that the
steady-state value of uK
                       t is unity.

    Finally, we refer the reader to CET and CET's technical appendix for the market clearing
conditions, the definition of equilibrium and the set of dynamic and steady-state equilibrium
equations.


4.2.5   The Role of Wage Inertia in the Estimated Model

CET estimate the medium-sized DSGE NK model discussed above for various wage bar-
gaining environments. Their estimation strategy is a Bayesian variant of the strategy in
Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans (2005) that minimizes the distance between the dynamic
responses to three shocks in the model and the analog objects in the data. The shocks used
by CET include a shock to monetary policy, a neutral technology shock, and an investment-
specific technology shock. The dynamic responses to those shocks are obtained using an
identified VAR for post-war quarterly U.S. times series that include key labor market vari-
ables, see CET for further details.
    Here we focus on the versions of the model in which wages are determined by Nash and
AOB bargaining. Table 3 reports the values of parameters that CET set a priori. Table 4
reports the mean and 95 percent probability intervals for the priors and posteriors of the
estimated parameters in the Nash and AOB bargaining models. Table 1 reports the implied
steady states.
    Note that the estimated values of the replacement ratio D/w in the Nash and AOB
models are 0.88 and 0.37, respectively. CET argue that the estimated value of the replace-


                                                          30
                 Table 3: Non-Estimated Parameters and Calibrated Variables.


               Parameter         Value   Description
                                        Panel A: Parameters
                     K          0.025 Depreciation rate of physical capital
                                0.9968 Discount factor
                                  0.9    Job survival probability
                   M              60     Max. bargaining rounds per quarter (AOB)
                400ln(µ)          1.7    Annual output per capita growth rate
              400ln(µ · µ )       2.9    Annual investment per capita growth rate
                                     Panel B: Steady State Values
               400( 1)            2.5    Annual net inflation rate
                prof its           0     Intermediate goods producers profits
                   Q              0.7    Vacancy filling rate
                   u             0.055 Unemployment rate
                 G/Y              0.2    Government cons. to gross output ratio

                                     Notes: Table based on CET.

ment ratio of 0.88 in the Nash model, i.e. steady-state unemployment benefits amount to
88% percent of the steady-state wage, is strongly at odds with the micro evidence. Given
that in the Nash model, the posterior mode of D/w is in the tail of the prior distribution, the
marginal likelihood of the Nash model is about 14 log points lower than the AOB model. We
also find it useful to consider the restricted Nash model defined in section 3, i.e. we set D/w
to 0.37, keeping all other estimated parameters in the estimated Nash model unchanged.
       The solid thin back lines in rows 1 and 2 of Figure 1 display VAR-based estimates of
the dynamic responses of the unemployment rate, the real wage rate and the inflation rate
to a monetary policy shock and a neutral technology shock.20 The grey bands correspond
to 95% confidence intervals. The blue lines correspond to the dynamic response functions of
the Nash model, evaluated at the mode of the parameter estimates. Notice that the model
does a good job of matching the dynamic response of unemployment to both shocks. There
is no Shimer puzzle here.
       This result depends critically on the fact that the model does a reasonably good job of
  20
    For brevity and without loss of generality, we exclude the responses to the investment-specific technology
shock.


                                                     31
      Table 4: Priors and Posteriors of Parameters in Estimated Bargaining Models.


                                                       Alternating Oer              Nash
                                                          Bargaining            Bargaining
                                 Prior Distribution            Posterior Distribution
                                D,Mode,[2.5-97.5%]               Mode,[2.5-97.5%]
                                    Price Setting Parameters
 Price Stickiness,               B ,0.68,[0.45 0.84]     0.75,[0.69 0.78]      0.74,[0.69 0.79]
 Price Markup,                   G ,1.19,[1.11 1.31]     1.42,[1.33 1.51]      1.43,[1.35 1.52]
                                Monetary Authority Parameters
 Taylor Rule: Smooth., R         B ,0.76,[0.37 0.94]     0.84,[0.81 0.87]      0.84,[0.82 0.87]
 Taylor Rule: Inflation, r       G ,1.69,[1.42 2.00]     1.38,[1.21 1.65]      1.38,[1.23 1.69]
 Taylor Rule: GDP, ry            G ,0.08,[0.03 0.22]     0.03,[0.01 0.07]      0.04,[0.02 0.08]
                             Preferences and Technology Parameters
 Consumption Habit, b            B ,0.50,[0.21 0.79]     0.80,[0.78 0.84]      0.81,[0.78 0.84]
 Cap. Util. Adj. Cost, a         G ,0.32,[0.09 1.23]     0.11,[0.04 0.30]      0.18,[0.05 0.32]
                          00
 Investment Adj. Cost, S         G ,7.50,[4.57 12.4]     15.7,[11.0 19.6]      15.2,[10.7 19.0]
 Capital Share,                  B ,0.33,[0.28 0.38]     0.26,[0.20 0.27]      0.23,[0.21 0.27]
 Technology Diusion,             B ,0.50,[0.13 0.87]     0.05,[0.02 0.07]      0.03,[0.01 0.05]
                                    Labor Market Parameters
 Prob. Barg.Breakup, 100         G ,0.18,[0.04 1.53]     0.19,[0.09 0.37]             -
 Replacement Ratio, D/w          B ,0.39,[0.21 0.60]     0.37,[0.22 0.63]      0.88,[0.85 0.90]
 Hiring Cost/Output, 100h        G ,0.91,[0.50 1.67]     0.46,[0.24 0.84]      0.64,[0.34 1.07]
 Search Cost/Output, 100s        G ,0.05,[0.01 0.28]     0.03,[0.00 0.12]      0.02,[0.00 0.09]
 Match. Fun. Parameter,          B ,0.50,[0.31 0.69]     0.55,[0.47 0.61]      0.54,[0.47 0.61]
                                Exogenous Processes Parameters
 Std. Mon. Pol., 400 R           G ,0.65,[0.56 0.75]     0.63,[0.57 0.70]      0.63,[0.58 0.70]
 Std. Neut. Tech., 100 µz        G ,0.08,[0.03 0.22]     0.16,[0.11 0.19]      0.14,[0.11 0.18]
 Std. Inv. Tech., 100            G ,0.08,[0.03 0.22]     0.12,[0.08 0.15]      0.11,[0.08 0.16]
 AR(1) Invest. Tech.,            B ,0.75,[0.53 0.92]     0.72,[0.60 0.85]      0.74,[0.59 0.83]
                                            Memo Item
 Log Marginal Likelihood:                                     286.7                 272.9


Notes: Posterior mode and parameter distributions are based on a standard MCMC algo-
rithm with a total of 10 million draws (11 chains, 50 percent of draws used for burn-in, draw
acceptance rates about 0.24). B and G denote beta and gamma distributions, respectively.
Source: CET.




                                             32
                                                  Figure 1: Impulse Responses in Estimated Nash Model.

                                       VAR 95%           VAR Mean            Estimated Nash Model              3-Years Elevated Wage in Estimated Nash Model

                                       Unemployment Rate                                    Real Wage                                    Inflation Rate
                           0.05                                                                                             0.3
                                                                            0.1
Monetary Policy Shock




                               0                                                                                            0.2
                                                                           0.05
                           -0.05
                                                                               0                                            0.1
                            -0.1
                                                                          -0.05
                                                                                                                              0
                           -0.15                                           -0.1
                                                                                                                           -0.1
                            -0.2                                          -0.15
                                   0          5           10                       0         5           10                       0          5           10



                                       Unemployment Rate                                    Real Wage                                    Inflation Rate
                                                                                                                            0.2
                           0.15
Neutral Technology Shock




                                                                            0.4
                             0.1                                                                                              0
                           0.05                                             0.3
                                                                                                                           -0.2
                               0                                            0.2
                           -0.05                                                                                           -0.4
                                                                            0.1
                            -0.1
                                                                                                                           -0.6
                           -0.15                                               0
                                                                                                                           -0.8
                                   0          5        10                          0         5        10                          0          5        10
                                              Quarters                                       Quarters                                        Quarters
                                       Notes: unemployment in percentage points, real wage in percent deviations and inflation in annualized percentage points.




                                                                                            33
                                              Figure
                                             Figure 2:2: Impulse
                                                       Impulse   Responses
                                                               Responses     in Restricted
                                                                         in Restricted NashNash Model
                                                                                           Model.
                     VAR 95%                VAR Mean            Restricted Nash Model (D/w=0.37)               3-Years Constant Wage in Restricted Nash Model (D/w=0.37)

                                       Unemployment Rate                                    Real Wage                                    Inflation Rate
                           0.05
                                                                                                                            0.3
Monetary Policy Shock




                               0                                            0.2

                                                                                                                            0.2
                           -0.05                                            0.1
                                                                                                                            0.1
                            -0.1
                                                                               0
                                                                                                                              0
                           -0.15
                                                                           -0.1                                            -0.1
                            -0.2

                                   0          5           10                       0          5          10                       0          5           10



                                       Unemployment Rate                                    Real Wage                                    Inflation Rate
                           0.15
Neutral Technology Shock




                                                                            0.4                                               0
                             0.1
                                                                            0.3
                           0.05                                                                                            -0.2
                                                                            0.2
                               0                                            0.1
                                                                                                                           -0.4
                           -0.05                                               0
                            -0.1                                           -0.1                                            -0.6
                           -0.15                                           -0.2
                                                                                                                           -0.8
                                   0          5        10                          0          5        10                         0          5        10
                                              Quarters                                        Quarters                                       Quarters

                                       Notes: unemployment in percentage points, real wage in percent deviations and inflation in annualized percentage points.




                                                                                         34
matching the inertial response of real wages to the shocks. To substantiate this claim we
consider the following experiment. We impose on the model the assumption that real wages
go up, in period 1, by 50% more than their peak response in the estimated Nash model and
then stay at that level for three consecutive years. After the three years the economy returns
to the wage rule implied by the restricted Nash-sharing rule. The dotted red lines in rows
1 and 2 of Figure 1 display the implied impulse response response functions. The response
functions are calculated using the Fair and Taylor (1983) perfect foresight simulation method
in which households and firms know, at the time of the shock, the assumed wage path in the
experiment, see Christiano, Eichenbaum and Trabandt (2015) for a detailed description.
    The key result here is that for both shocks the response of unemployment is much
smaller, in absolute value, than in the estimated model. For the monetary policy shock,
the response is counterfactually small, even taking VAR sampling uncertainty into account:
without wage inertia, there is a Shimer-like puzzle. Note also that by construction the
estimated Nash model and the estimated Nash model with the three-years elevated wage
have the same steady state so the fundamental surplus is exactly the same in both models.
So, the fundamental surplus contains no information about the dynamic responses of the
two economies being compared.
    Rows 1 and 2 of Figure 2 reports the results for the restricted Nash model. From the
solid blue lines we see that real wages respond by a counterfactually large amount to both
shocks. Not surprisingly, the response of unemployment in this model is much smaller than
in the estimated Nash model. Again, without wage inertia, there is a Shimer-like puzzle. The
red dashed lines display the impulse response functions if we hold real wages fixed for three
consecutive years and then let wages be determined by the Nash-sharing rule afterwards.
With inertial wages, unemployment now responds by much more. So, wage inertia allows a
Nash model with a low replacement ratio to overcome the Shimer-like puzzle. Note again,
that the two models being compared have identical steady states and fundamental surpluses.
    Finally rows 1 and 2 of Figure 3 repeat the experiment presented in Figure 1 for the
estimated AOB model. The results are consistent with those emerging from the estimated

                                             35
 Figure 3: Impulse Responses in Estimated Alternating Oer Bargaining (AOB) Model.

                                       VAR 95%            VAR Mean            Estimated AOB Model              3-Years Elevated Wage in Estimated AOB Model

                                       Unemployment Rate                                    Real Wage                                    Inflation Rate
                           0.05
                                                                            0.1
                                                                                                                            0.2
Monetary Policy Shock




                               0
                                                                           0.05

                           -0.05                                                                                            0.1
                                                                               0

                            -0.1                                          -0.05                                               0

                           -0.15                                           -0.1
                                                                                                                           -0.1
                            -0.2                                          -0.15
                                   0          5           10                       0         5           10                       0          5           10



                                       Unemployment Rate                                    Real Wage                                    Inflation Rate
                           0.15
Neutral Technology Shock




                                                                            0.4
                             0.1                                                                                              0

                           0.05                                             0.3
                                                                                                                           -0.2
                               0                                            0.2
                           -0.05                                                                                           -0.4
                                                                            0.1
                            -0.1                                                                                           -0.6
                           -0.15                                               0
                                                                                                                           -0.8
                                   0          5        10                          0         5        10                          0          5        10
                                              Quarters                                       Quarters                                        Quarters

                                       Notes: unemployment in percentage points, real wage in percent deviations and inflation in annualized percentage points.




                                                                                            36
Nash model. Again, wage inertia plays a pivotal role for the model's ability to account for
the dynamic response of unemployment to shocks. And again the fundamental surplus is
fundamentally uninformative about the model's dynamic impulse response functions.
    The results in this section highlight the potential danger of using comparative steady-
state analyses as a substitute for dynamic analyses. This warning is particularly clear in
the case of monetary policy shocks which have no impact on the steady state. Nevertheless,
dierent models of wage determination imply very dierent responses of unemployment to a
monetary policy shock.
    As we noted in the introduction, there do exist assumptions under which comparative
steady-state analyses do a reasonably good job of mimicking dynamics, i.e. shocks are close
to a random walk and there are no important state variables. These assumptions are not
satisfied in CET. Another recent example of note is the competitive search model developed
in Kehoe et al. (2019) which adopts the specification of preferences developed by Campbell
and Cochrane (1999). That specification generates important additional sources of dynamics
while leaving no trace in steady state. A comparative steady-state analysis sheds no light
on the interesting dynamic properties of their model.
    We conclude that one should be skeptical about the use of comparative steady-state
analysis to understand the dynamics of empirically plausible models.



5    Conclusion

Wage inertia is widely recognized as playing an important role in business cycle fluctuations.
An important exception to this view is the search and matching literature where the role of
wage inertia is the subject of an ongoing debate. In this paper we argued that wage inertia
does in fact play a crucial role in allowing variants of standard search and matching models
to account for the large countercyclical response of unemployment to shocks. We made this
argument using comparative steady state and dynamic analyses of estimated DSGE models.
While the former mode of analysis is widely used and can generate useful insights, it can also


                                             37
be very misleading in the present context. Specifically, dynamic models with the same steady
state and fundamental surplus can exhibit very dierent dynamic responses of unemployment
to shocks. In the models that we investigate, large dynamic responses of unemployment to
shocks always coincide with an inertial response of wages. The basic intuition is that if wages
increase too much after a change in the marginal revenue product of labor, firms have little
incentive to invest in new jobs.



References

 [1] Altig, David, Lawrence Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum and Jesper Lind´
                                                                         e, 2011, "Firm-
    Specific Capital, Nominal Rigidities and the Business Cycle," Review of Economic Dy-
    namics, Elsevier for the Society for Economic Dynamics, vol. 14(2), pages 225-247,
    April.

 [2] Auclert, Adrian, Matthew Rognlie and Ludwig Straub, 2019, "Micro Jumps, Macro
    Humps:     Monetary Policy and Business Cycles in an Estimated HANK Model",
    Manuscript, Northwestern University.

                                                             ¨
 [3] Broer, Tobias, Niels-Jakob H. Hansen, Per Krusell, Erik Oberg, 2018, "The New Key-
    nesian Transmission Mechanism: A Heterogenous-Agent Perspective", Review of Eco-
    nomic Studies, forthcoming.

 [4] Campbell, John and Cochrane, John, 1999, "Force of Habit: A Consumption-Based
    Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behavior," Journal of Political Economy, 107,
    issue 2, p. 205-251

 [5] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles L. Evans, 2005, "Nominal
    Rigidities and the Dynamic Eects of a Shock to Monetary Policy," Journal of Political
    Economy, 113(1), pp. 1-45.

 [6] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Mathias Trabandt, 2015, "Under-
    standing the Great Recession," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Ameri-


                                              38
    can Economic Association, vol. 7(1), pp. 110-67, January.

 [7] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Mathias Trabandt, 2016, "Unemploy-
    ment and Business Cycles", Econometrica, vol. 84, pp. 1523-1569.

 [8] Diamond, Peter A., 1982, "Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,"
    Journal of Political Economy, 90(5), pp. 881-894.

 [9] Del Negro, Marco, Stefano Eusepi, Marc Giannoni, Argia Sbordone, Andrea Tambalotti,
    Matthew Cocci, Raiden B. Hasegawa and M. Henry Linder, 2013, "The FRBNY DSGE
    model", No 647, Sta Reports, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

[10] Eichenbaum, Martin, Ben Johannsen and Sergio Rebelo, 2019, "Monetary Policy and
    the Predictability of Nominal Exchange Rates", Unpublished Manuscript.

[11] Fair, R. and Taylor, J., 1983, "Solution and Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Dy-
    namic Nonlinear Rational Expectations Models", Econometrica, 51(4), pp. 1169-85.

[12] Gertler, M., and Trigari, A., 2009, "Unemployment Fluctuations with Staggered Nash
    Wage Bargaining", Journal of Political Economy, 117(1), pp. 38-86.

[13] Hall, Robert E., 2005, "Employment Fluctuations with Equilibrium Wage Stickiness,"
    American Economic Review, 95(1), pp. 50-65.

[14] Hall, Robert E. and Paul R. Milgrom, 2008, "The Limited Influence of Unemployment
    on the Wage Bargain," American Economic Review, 98(4), pp. 1653-1674.

[15] Hall, Robert E. 2017, "High Discounts and High Unemployment," American Economic
    Review, 107 (2): 305-30.

[16] Hagedorn, M. and I. Manovskii, 2008, "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unem-
    ployment and Vacancies Revisited," American Economic Review, 98(4), pp. 1692-1706.

[17] Kehoe, Patrick, Pierlauro Lopez, Virgiliu Midrigan, and Elena Pastorino, 2019, "Asset
    Prices and Unemployment Fluctuations," Manuscript.




                                           39
[18] Kollmann, Robert, 2001, "The Exchange Rate in a Dynamic-Optimizing Business Cycle
    Model with Nominal Rigidities: A Quantitative Investigation," Journal of International
    Economics, 55(2), pp. 243-262.

[19] Ljungqvist, Lars, and Thomas J. Sargent, 2017, "The Fundamental Surplus", American
    Economic Review, 107 (9): 2630-65.

[20] Ljungqvist, Lars and Thomas J. Sargent (forthcoming), "Recursive Macroeconomic
    Theory", MIT Press, 5th edition.

[21] Mortensen, Dale T., 1982, "Property Rights and E ciency in Mating, Racing, and
    Related Games," American Economic Review, 72(5), pp. 968--79.

                         ´ Nagyp´
[22] Mortensen, Dale and Eva    al, 2007, "More on Unemployment and Vacancy Fluc-
    tuations," Review of Economic Dynamics, 10, issue 3, p. 327-347.

[23] Pissarides, Christopher A., 1985, "Short-Run Equilibrium Dynamics of Unemployment,
    Vacancies, and Real Wages," American Economic Review, 75(4), pp. 676-90.

[24] Pissarides, Christopher A., 2009, "The Unemployment Volatility Puzzle: is Wage Stick-
    iness the Answer?", Econometrica, vol. 77, no. 5, pp. 1339-1369.

[25] Schmitt-Groh´
                 e, Stephanie and Mart´
                                      in Uribe, 2016, "Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity,
    Currency Pegs, and Involuntary Unemployment", Journal of Political Economy, 124(4),
    pp. 1466-1514.

[26] Shimer, Robert, 2005, "The Cyclical Behavior of Equilibrium Unemployment and Va-
    cancies," American Economic Review, 95(1), pp. 25-49.

[27] Rogerson, Richard and Shimer, Robert, 2011, "Search in Macroeconomic Models of the
    Labor Market", Chapter 7 in Handbook of Labor Economics, pp. 619-700, Ashenfelter,
    O. and Card, D. eds., Elsevier.

[28] Smets, Frank and Rafael Wouters, 2007, "Shocks and Frictions in U.S. Business Cycles:
    A Bayesian DSGE Approach," American Economic Review, 97(3), pp. 586-606.



                                           40
Appendix

A          Steady-State Elasticity Formulae

A.1           Nash Bargaining

In this appendix we derive the structural and non-structural fundamental surplus based
decompositions of  N,#
                     ash
                         .


A.1.1         Structural Fundamental Surplus Based Decomposition

Recall the set of equilibrium labor market equations with the Nash-sharing rule:


                                       Stw = wt       D+          1            1
                                                                             m t+1   Et Stw
                                                                                          +1


                                       J t = #t    wt +  Et Jt+1
                                   s
                                        t   = Jt   
                                   m

                                        Jt = (1     ) Stw


Substitute out for Stw and Et Stw
                                +1 in the first equation using the last equation. Then add the

first and second equation to get rid of the wage:

                      1                                                                       1
                             J t = #t       D +  Et Jt+1 +                      1        m Et t+1   Et Jt+1
                  1                                                   1      
                      s
                             t   = Jt       
                      m



Substitute out for Jt and Et Jt+1 in first equation using the last equation:

                                                                                                                                     
    1         s                                          s                                               1             s
                  t   +          = #t       D +  Et           t+1     + +                      1    m Et t+1   Et          t+1   +
1             m                                          m                           1                                 m




                                                             41
Impose steady state, multiply out the last term on the right hand side, collect terms and
re-arrange:

                               s                                             1
          (1        )                     +  s +                       m          = (1           ) (#           D)      (1           )       (36)
                               m



Totally dierentiating:

                                s       d                         d                                 1       d                         d#
              (1       )                         +            s       + (1       )          m                       = (1        ) #
                                    m                                                                                                  #

Rearranging:

                           d
                                                                                           #
           N,#
             ash
                 =         d#
                                    = (1         )                                                                                           (37)
                                                                                                                                1
                            #                                 (1      )      m
                                                                                 +         + (1             )   s
                                                                                                                            m            s


Rewrite equation (36) as follows:

                                                          (1  ) (# D) (1  ) 
                                        s=
                                                 (1        ) 1
                                                             m
                                                                  +  +  m 1                                     
                                                                                                                s


Substitute for s in the elasticity formula (37) and rearrange:

                                                          1                                 1       
                                     (1       )                    +  +               m             s                       #
               N,#
                 ash
                       =                                  m
                                                                                                        1                       1 
                                   (1        )        m
                                                          +            + (1       )   s
                                                                                                m               #       D        1 
                                                                                                                                      

                               1
Recall that f =        m                and Q =               m       so that:

                                                  1    +  f 1 +       Q                                             #
                    N,#
                      ash
                          =                                         s
                                            (1        ) +  f 1 + (1     )s
                                                                           Q #                                  D       1 
                                                                                                                         1 
                                                                                                                                


Defining N ash and N ash
                         yields:

                                                                                      #
                                                   N,#
                                                     ash
                                                         = N ash                          N ash 
                                                                           #     D        




                                                                           42
where
                    N ash             1      +  f 1 +  Q
                                                       s                     N ash     1 
                            =                                              ,       =
                                 (1    ) +  f 1 + (1                 ) Q
                                                                       s
                                                                                        1 

which are the expressions for  N,#
                                 ash
                                     , N ash and N ash
                                                       in the main text. Note that the inverse
fundamental surplus fraction does not contain endogenous variables.


A.1.2    Non-structural Fundamental Surplus Based Decomposition

As discussed in the main text, we derive a non-structural fundamental surplus based decom-
position of    ,#   for the Nash model in which the inverse fundamental surplus term involves
the endogenous variable f . Note that the elasticity formula, equation (37), can be written
as:
                                                                     #
                N,#
                  ash
                      = (1        ) h                               i
                                           (1     )        +          s + (1   )           1
                                                       m
                                                                                       m


Also, equation (36) can be solved for s:

                                                                                   1
                                 (1        ) [#   D]       (1     )            m
                            s=
                                                  (1        )   m
                                                                  + 

Substituting for s in the elasticity formula and simplifying yields:

                                                                     #
                                            N,#
                                              ash
                                                  = N ash
                                                                #   D  

where

                                  1  +  f                              (1     (1 f  ))2
               N ash =                       ,  =
                                  (1  ) +  f      (1                    ) (1    (1 f  / ))

which are the expressions provided in the main text. Notice that  contains the endogenous
variable f in this alternative expression for the inverse fundamental surplus.




                                                           43
A.2        Alternating Oer Bargaining

A.2.1      Structural Decomposition

Recall the set of equilibrium labor market equations with the AOB-sharing rule:


                                         Stw = wt               D+                  1              1
                                                                                              m Et t+1       Et Stw
                                                                                                                  +1


                                             J t = #t           wt +  Et Jt+1
                                     s
                                             t   = Jt           
                                     m
                                                           w
                                             Jt =       1 St           2       +        3 ( #t    D)


Add the first and second equation and use the third equation to substitute out Jt and Et Jt+1

                                                                                                  
                    s                                                          s
        Stw    +            t   +  = #t               D +  Et                           t+1      + +           1             1
                                                                                                                           m t+1       Et Stw
                                                                                                                                            +1
                     m                                                         m
                    s                               w
                            t   + =              1 St       2      +       3 ( #t         D)
                     m



Use the last equation to substitute out for Stw and Et Stw
                                                         +1 in the first equation and impose

steady state:

                                         s                                      1                        1                             1
        (1 +       1 ) (1        )               + s +                     m             +         m           2                   m         3 (#   D)
                                         m

     = (   1   + (1          )    3 ) (#         D)     (1 +       1 ) (1            )            (1      )        2                                (38)


                                                            1
Totally dierentiating, using f =                        m              and Q =                m        and re-arranging gives:

d
                                                                   1 + (1  ) 3 +  f 3
     =                                                                                                                                                                 #
d#
 #         (1         ) (1 +         1)      +  f + (1             )  fQ  s
                                                                            + (1 ) f 2                                 Q
                                                                                                                       s
                                                                                                                              (1           ) f   3 (#    D) Q
                                                                                                                                                            s
                                                                                                                                                                   s
                                                                                                                                                                   Q


Rewrite equation (38):

                s   ( 1 + (1  ) 3 ) (#                             D) (1 + 1 ) (1  )                                   (1  ) 2
                  =
                Q   (1 + 1 ) (1  ) +                               Q +  fQ s
                                                                             +  fQ 2 s                                  f Q 3 # sD



                                                                            44
Substituting into the elasticity formula and rewriting yields:

                                               d
                                                                                           #
                                 AOB
                                  ,#       =   d#
                                                    = AOB                              AOB 
                                                #
                                                                 #          D                          AOB

where


                            1   + (1   ) 3 +  3f
            AOB =                                 
                                  1 + (1  ) 3
                                 (1  ) (1 + 1 ) +  f 1 + ( +                                      2         3   (#    D)) Q
                                                                                                                          s
                   =
                          (1  ) (1 + 1 ) +  f 1 + (1                                        ) ( +       2            3 (#    D)) Q
                                                                                                                                 s

            AOB         (1 + 1 ) (1  ) AOB         2 (1                                      )
                      =                 ,   =
                          1 + (1    ) 3         1 + (1                                       ) 3

which are the expressions provided in the main text for the AOB model where                                                          1,   2   and

 3   are defined in subsection 2. Note that the Nash model corresponds to the special case of

 1   = (1      )/ and       2   =    3     = 0.


A.2.2       Non-Structural Decomposition

Recall the set of equilibrium equations, with the AOB sharing rule:


                                    Stw = wt               D+                 1              1
                                                                                        m Et t+1       Et Stw
                                                                                                            +1


                                     J t = #t             wt +  Et Jt+1
                                s
                                       t    = Jt          
                                 m
                                                       w
                                     Jt =           1 St         2     +          3 ( #t   D)


      Substitute:

                                                                                               
                  c                                                     c
        Stw   +        t   +  = #t                 D +  Et                        t+1      + +              1          1
                                                                                                                     m t+1    Et Stw
                                                                                                                                   +1
                  m                                                      m
                  c                            w
                       t   + =              1 St      2      +       3 ( #t         D)
                  m




                                                                      45
        Impose steady state:



                                                  c                                                      1                              1                                   1
         () (1 +        1 ) (1            )                    + c +                                m             +                 m           2                   m             3 (#      D)
                                                  m

    = (     1   + (1        )        3 ) (#        D)                 (1 +             1 ) (1        )                 (1         )         2




        Totally dierentiate:

         
                                              c                                                                                                                                                          d
            (1 +       1 ) (1         )                       +  c + (1                              )  f  + (1                         ) f         2          (1               ) f      3 (#       D)
                                               m

                                                              1                        d#
    =       1   + (1        )        3   +            m                   3        #
                                                                                       #

        Re-arrange:

d
                                                                            + (1  ) 3 +  f 3
                                                                               1
d#
     =                                                            c                                                                                                                             #
 #
         [ (1          ) (1 +            1)   +  f]               Q
                                                                       + (1     )  f  + (1 ) f                                              2          (1          ) f           3 (#     D)

                           c
        Solve () for       Q
                                 :

                c    1 + (1  )                        3+ f 3                                                                    1  + f
                  =                                           (#                              D)                                                                        2
                Q   (1  ) (1 +                        1) +  f                                                       (1           ) (1 + 1 ) +  f

        Substitute into elasticity formula:

                 d
                                                                           1   + (1              )           3   + f            3
                 d#
                       =         (1  )(1+ 1 )+ f
                                                                                                                                                                       
                 #              (1  )(1+ 1 )+ f
                                                                      (   1    + (1              )        3      + f            3)      (1             ) f         3

                                                                                                    #
                                                                           (1  )(1+              1 )+        f (1          ) f
                            #            D         (1  )(1+ 1 )+ f                                                                                             2
                                                  (1  )(1+ 1 )+ f
                                                                                        (   1 +(1     )      3 +       f   3)   (1      ) f     3



                                                                          1  + f
                           [ (1  )(1+          1 )+           f ] (1       )(1+ 1 )+ f
                                                                                                    (1           ) f
        where  =          (1  )(1+ 1 )+ f                                                                                  .
                         (1  )(1+ 1 )+ f
                                                      (   1 +(1  )                 3 + f        3 ) (1        ) f      3

        Re-arrange to obtain the elasticity formula for the AOB model:

                                                          d
                                                                                                         #
                                                          d#
                                                                  = AOB
                                                          #
                                                                                         #       D                         

                                                                                             46
    where


                                          1     +   3   (1        (1            f ))
                        AOB =                                                                                                    (39)
                                                             a
                                                                                         f(      1)
                                         (1 +       1 ) (1         )+ f +
                             =
                                                                        a                     
                                                                             f(          1)           2
                                 =          1
                                             (1 f ) +
                                                                                                  a
                                                                                                     
                                                          f(                                      1)
                            a =          1+ 1   (1 f ) +                                                       3

                                          f + (1  ) (1 + 1 )
                                 =
                                          f + (1  ) (1 + 1 )



B       Dynamic Elasticity Formula in Inertial Wage Rule

Here we derive the equilibrium solution for the value of a worker to a firm, Jt , provided in
subsection 4.1.

    Note that the value of a worker to a firm is given by:


                                            J t = #t             wt + Et Jt+1 .                                                  (40)


Substituting out for wt using (30) gives:


                           J t = #t             #t + (1                ) ( #t      #) + Et Jt+1                                  (41)


Next, we solve for Jt using the method of undetermined coe cients. Guess that the solution
takes the following form:
                                                        Jt =      0   +     1 #t                                                 (42)

where   0   and   1   are undetermined coe cients that are to be determined as a function of
model parameters. Substituting (42) into (41) also making use of (31) gives:


        0 = [(1       ) (1 + )       1   +  1 v ] #t + [                    0      (1     )#              0   +  1 (1   v ) #]


                                                                  47
Setting the two square braskets to zero and solving for                                     0   and       1   gives:

                              (1       )#             1 (1            v )#                       (1         ) (1 + )
                  0   =                                                       and      1    =
                                         1                                                                1    v

Next, combine the free-entry condition (13) with the solution for Jt :

                                                s
                                                        t   = Jt =        0   +     1 #t .
                                                m



Totally dierentiating:
                                                s             d   t                d #t
                                                                      =       1#        .
                                                    m                               #
                              s
Re-arranging and using        m
                                       =    0   +       1#   yields:

                      d
                                       1#
                          t

         dynamic
          ,#          d #t
                              =        s
                       #               m

                                   1                                         (1        ) (1 + )
                              =                                                                                                        
                                                                        1      v                                (1      )(1+ )(1 v )
                                       (1           ) (1 + )             1     
                                                                                        (1            )                1 v



which is the expression for the dynamic elasticity of labor market tightness with respect to
the marginal revenue product (or technology) provided in subsection 4.1.




                                                                  48
