                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SIMPLIFYING AND IMPROVING THE PERFORMANCE OF RISK ADJUSTMENT
                                SYSTEMS

                                          Thomas G. McGuire
                                             Anna L. Zink
                                              Sherri Rose

                                          Working Paper 26736
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w26736


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      February 2020




This research was supported by a grant from the Laura and John Arnold Foundation and NIH Director's
New Innovator Award DP2-MD012722. The views presented here are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, its directors, officers, or staff. We thank
Konstantin Beck, Michael Chernew, Randy Ellis, Lukas Kauer, Tim Layton, Joseph Newhouse, Eran
Politzer, Sonja Schillo, Richard van Kleef and participants at the Risk Adjustment Network Meeting
in Portland, Maine, September 24-26, 2019 for helpful comments. We are grateful to Tram Nham
for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Thomas G. McGuire, Anna L. Zink, and Sherri Rose. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Simplifying and Improving the Performance of Risk Adjustment Systems
Thomas G. McGuire, Anna L. Zink, and Sherri Rose
NBER Working Paper No. 26736
February 2020
JEL No. I11,I13,I18

                                         ABSTRACT

Risk-adjustment systems used to pay health plans in individual health insurance markets have
evolved towards better "fit" of payments to plan spending, at the individual and group levels,
generally achieved by adding variables used for risk adjustment. Adding variables demands
further plan and provider-supplied data. Some data called for in the more complex systems may
be easily manipulated by providers, leading to unintended "upcoding" or to unnecessary service
utilization. While these drawbacks are recognized, they are hard to quantify and are difficult to
balance against the concrete, measurable improvements in fit that may be attained by adding
variables to the formula. This paper takes a different approach to improving the performance of
health plan payment systems. Using the HHS-HHC V0519 model of plan payment in the
Marketplaces as a starting point, we constrain fit at the individual and group level to be as good
or better than the current payment model while reducing the number of variables called for in the
model. Opportunities for simplification are created by the introduction of three elements in
design of plan payment: reinsurance (based on high spending or plan losses), constrained
regressions, and powerful machine learning methods for variable selection. We first drop all
variables relying on drug claims. Further major reductions in the number of diagnostic-based risk
adjustors are possible using machine learning integrated with our constrained regressions. The fit
performance of our simpler alternatives is as good or better than the current HHS-HHC V0519
formula.

Thomas G. McGuire                               Sherri Rose
Harvard Medical School                          Harvard Medical School
Department of Health Care Policy                Department of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue                             180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115                                Boston, MA 02115
and NBER                                        rose@hcp.med.harvard.edu
mcguire@hcp.med.harvard.edu

Anna L. Zink
Harvard Medical School
Department of Health Care Policy
180 Longwood Avenue
Boston, MA 02115
azink@g.harvard.edu
1. Introduction

        Germany, The Netherlands, and Switzerland, among other countries, purvey health

insurance to their residents through individual health insurance markets. In the U.S., Medicare

Advantage and the Marketplaces created by the Affordable Care Act (ACA) of 2010 do the same. In

all of these countries and sectors, plans charge premiums, and a regulator combines them with

public subsidies and disperses funds to plans using a "risk adjustment" formula. Switzerland and the

Marketplaces apply forms of risk sharing for high-cost cases to the payment formula, and Germany

and The Netherlands are scheduled to add risk sharing to their plan payment formula. Broadly,

these mechanisms seek to match plan payments to plan costs to improve the functioning of health

insurance markets by minimizing incentives related to adverse selection.

        Reflecting their salience to health policy, the past 30 years have seen a great deal of research

on risk adjustment and health plan payment, including theoretical research linking risk adjustment to

economic objectives of plan payment; empirical research on classification systems and estimation

methods; empirical evaluation of actual systems; and simulation methods for evaluating the

functioning of these payment models (McGuire and Van Kleef 2018). A primary and concrete

outcome of the empirical research has been improved "fit" of payments to plan costs at the

individual and group level. Fit at the individual level is predominantly measured by the R2 of the

prediction model, and fit at the group level by comparing average plan costs to average payments for

groups of interest, such as those with a certain illness. 1 Fit of the payment models has improved

over the years in all countries and sectors mentioned above. For example, Medicare's risk-

adjustment system for paying private health plans evolved from 1) using only demographic data, to




1In the U.S. the group measure is frequently the ratio of average payments to average costs, referred to as the
"predictive ratio." In Europe the group measure is typically the difference between average payments and
average costs, referred to as "over or undercompensation."

                                                                                                              2
2) adding diagnostic data from hospital claims, to 3) adding diagnostic data from office-based

encounters. The R2 of these models improved from about 1% in the early years to 11% in the

current payment model (Pope et al. 2011).

        Fit has another attraction as a target for improvement: it is measurable, with cardinal

metrics. The magnitude of reduction in undercompensation for persons with cancer falling from

$2,000 per year to $1,000 per year, for example, can be readily understood and appreciated. At the

same time, researchers and policymakers recognize that gains in fit have come at a cost in terms of

data demands, administrative complexity, creation of opportunities for gaming the system by

"upcoding" clinical data used for payment, and inducing provision of extra services to achieve

higher risk scores. While these side effects are acknowledged, there is no consensus on how to

measure them. 2 In the tradeoff between improvements in fit and reduction in incentives for cost

control, for example, a regulator must weigh measurable improvements in fit against a speculative

degradation in incentives for upcoding and excess costs.

        This paper takes an unconventional approach to improving the performance of health plan

payment systems. Rather than treating fit as an objective, we treat the level of fit in the existing

payment system as a constraint. The ready measurability of fit is critical to this approach, allowing

us to formulate explicit and exact constraints on fit. By treating fit as a constraint, we are free to

consider payment formula alternatives that can be compared on the basis of demands on data,

complexity, and adverse incentives to upcode or provide unnecessary services, even if these adverse

side effects cannot be precisely measured. In other words, this paper studies the potential of




2Researchers are able to estimate the magnitude of upcoding, but not, so far, the contribution of particular
variables or variable sets. For estimates of the magnitude of up coding in Medicare Advantage see Jacobs and
Kronick (2018) who compare changes in reported risk score to risk estimated from drug data (not used for
payment in Medicare Advantage, and Geruso and Layton (2020) who compare counties with different shares
of Medicare Advantage enrollment and how this affects the county-average risk score.

                                                                                                          3
payment models for reducing demands on data, risks of upcoding, and risks of encouraging

unnecessary service use, while matching or exceeding existing performance in terms of fit at the

individual and group level. Using the complicated HHS-HHC V0519 model of plan payment in the

Marketplaces as our application, we estimate individual and group-level fit with the current formula,

and then impose these as constraints in our consideration of simpler plan payment formulas.

        Based on recent research, we believe our plan has promise for two main reasons. First,

improving fit by addition of risk adjustor variables has hit the "flat of the curve" in many countries

and sectors. 3 A corollary to the finding that adding variables adds little to fit is that removing

variables does little to reduce fit. Thus, attaining fit by methods other than variable addition will

allow scope for dropping sets of risk adjustor variables. Modern methods for variable selection are

available to help guide this task. Second, directing only a very small share of plan payments to

individuals imposing the largest losses on plans improves fit substantially. While such reinsurance

has an incentive effect, inclusion of gameable variables in a payment formula has incentive effects

too. Pairing reinsurance with dropping sets of variables may therefore improve incentives while

improving or maintaining fit at current levels.

        Section 2 sets up our analyses with a review of the health plan payment system used in the

Marketplaces. We explain the data, methods, and estimation results for what we refer to as the

Baseline Formula that is in current use. Section 3 describes our measures of fit at the individual and

group level. For group fit, we begin with constraints on fit for individuals with one of four chronic

illnesses defined by Clinical Classification Software (CCS) categories: cancer, diabetes, heart disease,

and mental illness. Section 4 explains the three complementary components of our approach to

improvement of risk-adjusted payments. The first is to consider alternative estimation approaches


3 We also demonstrate the flat-of-the-curve property empirically in the Marketplaces below by assessing fit

with alternative numbers of risk adjustor variables chosen by variable selection methods.

                                                                                                              4
tailored to ensuring group-level fit: regressions subject to group-level constraints or penalties. 4

Paired with least squares estimation methods, constraints lead to coefficient estimates that satisfy

constraints at the least cost in terms of fit at the individual level. A second key feature we leverage

in conjunction with these estimators is reinsurance. Even the modest reinsurance applied here,

amounting to one percent of total payments, substantially improves fit at the individual level

(McGuire, Van Kleef and Schillo 2020), opening opportunities to improve the payment model in

other dimensions. Third, we implement variable reduction strategies ­ both those informed by

practical factors such as availability or cost as well as data-adaptive procedures from the machine

learning literature.

        Section 5 presents our empirical results, with some of the most notable summarized here.

We show that the set of risk adjustors drawn from drug claims introduced in the 2018 Marketplace

payment formula can be dropped entirely if fit is aided by devoting 1% of funds to reinsurance.

Indeed, fit at the individual level is greatly improved by the substitution of reinsurance for drug

variables. Furthermore, by introducing constraints on the regression coefficients so as to completely

eliminate over/undercompensation for the four chronic illness groups, under/overcompensation is

also reduced for nearly all 17 major chronic illness groups defined by the CCS. We also show that

individual and four chronic illness group fit can be maintained or even improved with fewer than

half of the current 111 risk-adjustor variables drawn from the current classification system.

        Our results have two main implications. First, major improvements in fit at the individual

and group level are attainable with a small share of funds devoted to reinsurance and a small set of

coefficient constraints. Second, application of these methods alters the tradeoff inherent in

decisions about adding or dropping variables to create wider scope to simplify payment models and


4 For example, constraints have been implemented for risk adjustment in Van Kleef et al. (2017), Bergquist et
al. (2019), and Zink and Rose (2019), where the latter also proposed penalized regressions for risk adjustment.

                                                                                                             5
drop risk adjustor variables with potentially adverse incentive effects. Improvements in the hard-to-

measure but important aspects of health plan payment system performance ­ administrative

complexity, demands on providers and plans to produce data, incentives to upcode and provide

unnecessary services ­ can be had without sacrifice of the easy-to-measure objectives of fit.



2. Baseline Marketplace Payment Formula

        Creation of the Marketplaces (originally, "Exchanges") under the ACA called for

construction of a health plan payment model to offset incentives for risk selection within the

individual and small group insurance markets. ACA plan payment is based on a risk adjustment

model to determine risk scores of enrollees and a transfer formula to redistribute premium revenues

within the market in response to the risk score and other factors (Layton, Montz and Shepard

2018). 5 The payment model in the Marketplaces is arguably the most complicated in use anywhere.

Our focus in this paper is the risk adjustment formula, leaving in place the other factors, such as

adjustments for geographic costs and premium levels, playing into transfers among plans.

        The Current Marketplace Formula: HHS-HCC V0519

        The Marketplaces use the HHS-HCC formula for risk adjustment, developed by the federal

Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), to predict enrollees' medical spending in the

current year given enrollee demographics and a set of Hierarchical Condition Categories (HCCs)

defined from diagnosis codes on medical claims. HCCs are sometimes grouped together (e.g.,

variable "G01" takes the value one if any of three diabetes-related HCCs are present). In total, 94




5 The goal of the risk transfer formula is to remove anticipated premium costs attributed to risk selection
while maintaining premium differences due to acceptable plan differences such as plan generosity and
geographic costs. In addition to risk scores, the transfer formula considers metal level actuarial value,
allowable rating factors, an induced demand factor, and a geographic cost factor.
https://www.cms.gov/mmrr/Downloads/MMRR2014_004_03_a04.pdf

                                                                                                              6
HCC-based variables ­ 75 HCCs plus 17 groups of HCCs plus 2 severity interactions explained

below ­ are included in V0519 drawn from the underlying 128 HCCs contributing to the variables.

The HHS-HCC Marketplace risk-adjustment model is "concurrent" in that it uses diagnoses from

the current year to determine classification and payment, in contrast with using diagnoses from the

previous year, as is done in the prospective risk adjustment systems used in Medicare Advantage and

individual health insurance markets in Europe and elsewhere. 6 ICD-10 diagnosis codes are drawn

from inpatient and outpatient claims involving a face-to-face meeting with a provider. 7 For

example, diagnoses generated in a physician office visit are accepted for purposes of risk adjustment

whereas diagnoses from a lab test are not.

          The HHS-HCC V0519 formula was estimated on data from MarketScan for years 2014 and

2015; CMS then "blended" estimates from these two years to obtain the final formula. In addition,

CMS, for the first time, had data available from plans (for 2016). These new data were considered,

but according to CMS, taking them into account had no substantial effect on the coefficients

estimated from MarketScan. 8

          The HHS-HCC formula has undergone several iterations since its inception in 2014, with

HHS-HCC V0519 (2019), a slight modification of V0518 (2018), introduced for 2019. 9 In a major


6The rationale for the use of concurrent diagnostic information for determining a risk score in the
Marketplaces was the high rate of anticipated turnover in the Marketplaces.
7   ICD-9 diagnosis codes were used in the HHS-HCC until 2016.
8Regarding the final 2019 model coefficient estimates, CMS states, "The overall change in coefficients [in
relation to the interim values reported prior to incorporating plan information] due to the update to the 2016
enrollee-level EDGE recalibration dataset is very small, and is further mitigated by blending of two other sets
of solved coefficients from the 2014 and 2015 Truven MarketScan data." "EDGE" data is reported to CMS
by the plans. See: https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-and-Guidance/Downloads/2019-
Updtd-Final-HHS-RA-Model-Coefficients.pdf.
9 https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-and-Guidance/Downloads/Updated-CY2018-DIY-
instructions.pdf . V0518 split HCC037 (chronic hepatitis) into a 37a and 37b to distinguish types of hepatitis
and, in a major change, included of risk adjustor variables based on prescription drug data. The HCC
variables included in V05 are listed below in Appendix B where we present our empirical results for selected
models.

                                                                                                              7
earlier change, V0518 added 12 drug categories (RXC01 ­ RXC12) of which ten (RXC01 ­ RXC10)

are used directly in the risk adjustment formula; with the other two used for HCC and RXC

interactions only. CMS adopted a so-called "hybrid approach" in which RXC variables are included

directly as risk adjustors, and, interacted with the HCCs with which the drugs are associated akin to a

severity indictor. 10 The V0519 drops the RXC11-12 interactions. Drug variables are generated

using National Drug Codes (NDC) from pharmacy claims with prescription filled dates within the

benefit year (NDC from medical claims are not accepted). 11 Definitions of the recently introduced

drug variables used for payment are contained in Appendix A.

        Both V0518 and V0519 make extensive use of interactions among the HCC variables. Eight

HCCs are categorized as "severe illnesses." If a patient has any of these eight severe illnesses, they

receive a SEVERE flag. SEVERE interacts with 16 other HCCs or groups of HCCs to create 16

interactions, nine of which belong to a high-cost category and the other seven to a medium-cost

category. The patient gets an additional variable added to their risk score for having any of the high-

cost interactions or medium-cost interactions. If they have both then only the high-cost variable is

added. 12 Finally, beginning with V0418 (2017), CMS introduced a variable measuring "months of




10 Xu, Trish and Joyce (2019) describe the new drug risk adjustor variables and evaluate their incremental

contribution to fit of the Marketplace payment model in a commercial health insurance data base from
OptumInsight. They found an increase in R2 from .38 to .40.
11When an NDC from a pharmacy claim is not available, HCPCS codes (Healthcare Common Procedure
Coding System) from inpatient, outpatient, and professional medical claims with discharge dates or through
dates within the benefit year can be used to create drug indicators. All our observations include drug
coverage so we use only NDC codes to create drug variables.
12Example: someone who has both sepsis (HCC002) ­ a severe HCC ­ and metastatic cancer (HCC008) will
get a flag for SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC008, which is a high-cost interaction. The high-cost coefficient will
then be added to their risk score. If they have sepsis and end-stage liver disease (HCC035), they will get a flag
for SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC035, a medium-cost interaction, and the medium-cost coefficient will be
added. If they have all 3 HCCs, only the high-cost coefficient is added.

                                                                                                                8
enrollment" during a contract year to contend with possible underpayment for those with partial

enrollment periods. 13

           The HHS-HCC formula produces 15 sets of risk adjustment coefficients, three age-specific

formulas (adult, child and infant) which include HCCs and RXCs most relevant for each age group,

and five formulas specific for each coverage level in the Marketplaces (platinum, gold, silver, bronze,

catastrophic). To calculate risk adjustment coefficients, relative annual plan liability is estimated

using weighted OLS with age, sex, enrollment duration, and the selected set of HCCs and RXCs as

predictors. Annual plan liability for each coverage tier is simulated based on annual expenditures

and the relevant cost sharing schedule for that tier. To get relative plan liability, individual plan

liability is divided by the average plan liability in the sample, using a predicted distribution of

enrollment across coverage tiers. 14 The coefficients are adjusted post-estimation for clinical

reasonableness: since the presence of a condition, or increased severity of a condition, presumes

additional spending, all HCCs (or RXCs) should have a positive payment weight, and higher severity

HCCs (or RXCs) should have a weight no less than lower severity HCCs (or RXCs) within the same

hierarchy. 15 The final risk adjustment coefficients are multiplied by the input vector (age, sex, HCCs,

RXCs, and interactions) for each enrollee to produce a risk score that feeds into the transfer formula

for determining fund transfers among plans. 16 CMS reports the R2 of V0519 estimated on

MarketScan data from 2014 and 2015 to be 41%. 17


13https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Forms-Reports-and-Other-Resources/Downloads/RA-March-
31-White-Paper-032416.pdf. See pages 35-39.
14   https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4214270/pdf/mmrr2014-004-03-a03.pdf
15   Ellis, Martins and Rose (2018).
16A new V06a has been proposed by CMS for payment years 2021 and beyond. See
https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-and-Guidance/Downloads/Potential-Updates-to-
HHS-HCCs-HHS-operated-Risk-Adjustment-Program.pdf.
17 https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-and-Guidance/Downloads/2019-Updtd-Final-

HHS-RA-Model-Coefficients.pdf.

                                                                                                        9
        In tandem with HHS-HCC formula changes, V05 restored a reinsurance function present

for the first three years of the ACA by adding a high-cost adjustment to the transfer formula to

cover 60% of insurer costs for claims greater than two million dollars, a feature funded by a charge

based on insurer premiums. 18 Any improvement in fit conferred by reinsurance is not reflected in

the CMS-reported R2.

        Data

        We use the 2017 Truven MarketScan Commercial Claims and Encounters database to

measure spending, HCCs and RXCs, and the 2019 HHS-HCC risk adjustment methodology to

define the risk adjustment payment for each person. 19 The Truven MarketScan data, drawn from

large insurers and employers, are a more recent version of the health insurance claims data used by

Kautter et al. (2014) to develop the original HHS-HCC Marketplace payment system, and for

subsequent revisions to the payment model. MarketScan data from 2017 were used to estimate

payment weights for the Baseline Formula. Following HHS criteria, our analytic sample is

composed of adults aged 21-64 who had both prescription drug and mental health coverage and

who had no negative claims or claims with a capitation payment. In addition, we restrict our study

population to those continuously enrolled for twelve months and who were in a non-HMO plan in

the first and last month. After applying these exclusion criteria, we have 10,043,052 individuals. We

then use a random sample of 5 million individuals for our analysis.



18https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-and-Guidance/Downloads/2018-RA-Model-DIY-
Instructions.pdf. Layton and McGuire (2017) show this high-cost adjustment is mathematically equivalent to
conventional reinsurance. In V05, risk adjustment weights are estimated without regard for the presence of
this reinsurance function (which removes some costs from plan obligations). With the very high attachment
point of $2m (where the reinsurance kicks in) in current Marketplace payment formula, correcting the
dependent variable would make only a trivial difference in the estimated weights. With the more robust
forms of reinsurance studied in this paper, it is "worth" correcting the dependent variable, plan spending
prior to estimation. We do so below.
192019 HHS Risk adjustment software downloadable from here: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Health-
Plans/MedicareAdvtgSpecRateStats/Risk-Adjustors-Items/RiskModel2019

                                                                                                        10
          The average annual health care expenditure is about $6,700, of which 56% is in the

outpatient setting, 20% is in the inpatient setting, and the remaining 24% on drug spending. Table 1

reports characteristics of the 5 million enrollee sample in 2017 and shows mean spending for each.

About 52% of the population is female and the average age is 44. Only a fifth of the population is

coded as having any of the HCCs included in the V0519 model, and fewer with the RXCs. Mean

spending for a person with an HCC or RXC flag is much higher than for those without. Chronic

conditions were identified by mappings ICD-10 diagnoses to the latest version (2019.1) of the

Clinical Classification Software (CCS) created by the AHRQ (2016). 20 We find that 12% of the

sample have a mental health condition, 9% heart disease, 9% diabetes, and 7% cancer. Mean

spending of someone with one of the chronic conditions is two to three times higher than the

overall sample mean. This spending includes costs associated with other health care needs, in

addition to the chronic condition. For example, someone with heart disease spends an average of

$3,780 on visits addressing their heart disease, compared to an average of $20,154 for all spending,

which can include other visits and drugs.

          Estimation of the Baseline Formula

          In order to compare the Baseline Formula to alternatives, we estimate a fresh set of risk

adjustment coefficients rather than using those supplied by CMS for the V0519 formula. (The

correlation between the predicted values of our estimated Baseline Formula with those from the

CMS formula is 0.96.) We modify the procedures used by CMS to suit our data. First, our

dependent variable is total spending rather than the estimated spending that would be covered by

the various metal level plans; second, we estimate the adult model only (ages 18-64); third, we make

no post-estimation changes to regression estimates; fourth, drug indicators come from NDC codes

only, not from outpatient procedure claims; and finally, we do not include a months-of-enrollment


20   https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs10/ccs10.jsp

                                                                                                       11
variable or weight observations by enrollment because all included individuals in the data are

observed for the full 12 months. The Baseline Formula is estimated by OLS and, as are the other

models studied here, uses five-fold cross validation with a sample of 5 million individuals. The

cross-validated R2 from our Baseline Formula is 36.8%. Coefficients for the Baseline Formula are

contained in Appendix B.



3. Measures of Fit

        Fit of risk-adjustment systems is conventionally measured by an R2 and by a comparison of

predicted to actual costs for specified groups. We follow this approach, modifying the fit measures

to recognize that plan payments may include some reinsurance as well as payments stemming from

the risk adjustment formula.

        Individual-Level Fit

        R2 is by far the most commonly reported fit statistic; indeed, in the CMS publication

describing V0519, R2 is the only fit statistic reported. 21 When plan payments are simply the predicted

values from a risk adjustment regression, fit at the individual level is the R2 from the risk adjustment

formula. 22 Any contribution of reinsurance or other form of risk sharing to fit is captured by a

generalization of the R2 referred to as `Payment System Fit' (PSF). 23 PSF is an R2-type statistic

(analogous to a pseudo-R2) measuring the degree to which plan payments for individual i, R i , track


21For example, reporting on final formula for 2019, see
https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Regulations-and-Guidance/Downloads/2019-Updtd-Final-HHS-
RA-Model-Coefficients.pdf. The only fit statistics reported are R2 in Table 4.
22 An R2 is not the only individual-level fit measure found in the risk adjustment literature, but it is the most

common one. R2 is virtually the only individual-level fit statistic reported in US publications. European
researchers also sometimes, along with the R2, report Cummings Prediction Measure (CPM), a linear version
of the quadratic R2. See Van Veen et al. (2015) for a report of the characteristics and the frequency of
alternative individual-fit measures.
23 For other applications of payment system fit see Geruso and McGuire (2016), Layton et al. (2017),

McGuire, Schillo and Van Kleef (2020), Beck et al. (2019).

                                                                                                               12
spending for that individual, Yi . PSF recognizes that the payment a plan receives for an individual,

R i , can include other components, such as reinsurance, in addition to the predicted spending from a

risk adjustment model: 24

                                                 (Yi - R i )2
                                       PSF = 1 -              .                             (1)
                                                 (Yi - Y)2

As noted, the estimated R2 for our Baseline Formula is 36.8%. This is the same as PSF because

payments are entirely determined by risk adjustment in the Baseline Formula.

        Group-Level Fit

        The risk of under and over service for certain groups of enrollees is well-recognized by

architects of health plan payment systems. In Europe, incentives to serve certain groups (e.g., those

with multiple chronic illnesses) is typically assessed by measuring over and undercompensation (in

Euros) for a group. Researchers in the U.S. concerned with the same issue form a ratio rather than a

difference between predicted values and costs. The groups for which fit is reported differ across

studies, countries, and insurance sector. 25

        In principle, groups should be defined at the level of action a plan can take and fit evaluated

at the group so-defined (Layton et al. 2017). If a plan cannot act on a distinction, then it is




24 In the Marketplaces, the R2 reported from the risk-adjustment model is not the same as payment system fit.
Plan premiums, geography, share of high cost cases, and other factors play a role through the transfer
formula. As far as we know, the overall fit of payments to plan costs have not been officially reported. PSF
in the Marketplaces has been estimated taking into account some features of the transfer formula in Layton et
al. (2017).
25For example, in the Netherlands, individuals reporting low health status or multiple chronic illnesses have
been identified as potential targets for plan underservice (Van Kleef et al. 2013; Eijkenaar et al. 2017). In the
U.S., researchers have studied users of particular classes of drugs (Carey 2017a; Carey 2017b; Han and Lavetti
2017; Geruso, Layton, and Prinz 2019), users of certain hospitals (Shepard 2016), users of certain types of
services (Ellis and McGuire 2007; McGuire et al. 2014).
For evaluation of an early version of the risk-adjustment model used in U.S. Marketplaces, Kautter et al.
(2014, E22) computed predictive ratios for subgroups defined by predicted costs. In their evaluation of the
CMS-HCC model, Pope et al. (2011) report predictive ratios for groups defined by disease, numbers of prior
hospitalizations, demographic characteristics, and others.

                                                                                                              13
unnecessary and possibly misleading to calculate over/undercompensation for a group based on that

distinction. For example, if in deciding about which hospitals to contract with for maternity

services, a plan cannot introduce distinctions in contracting decisions for complicated and

uncomplicated deliveries, there is no need to check fit (or include risk adjustor variables) for those

two types of deliveries separately. By contrast, a plan might be able to act on geography; for

example, by assembling a higher quality network of providers in areas where the enrollees are more

profitable. In this case, checking group fit by geography is merited. We recognize that the level of

action plans can take is not known, and we define groups at multiple levels of aggregation in our

empirical work.

        To begin, we assume that plans can make distinctions based on the nature of a chronic

illness, for example, by contracting for better/worse networks according to the disease specialties of

physicians and hospitals. 26 Specifically, following the recent evaluation of the group fit in the

Marketplaces by Layton et al. (2017), we define groups according the presence of one of four

chronic illnesses: cancer, diabetes, a heart condition, and mental illness. 27 CCS groups are used to

identify beneficiaries with a chronic condition because, unlike the HCCs included in the risk

adjustment formula, all ICD-10 codes map to a CCS condition group. Defining a chronic condition

by CCS groups identifies more people because it includes individuals with diagnostic codes not

recognized in the HCC indicators used in the risk adjustment formula. 28 CCS groups can be defined

by single-level diagnoses and procedure codes, or multi-level diagnoses and procedures codes.


26For study of hospital network contracting in the Massachusetts Marketplace in response to selection
incentives, see Shephard (2016).
27 One or more of these four groups have been used for purposes of assessing group fit in Bergquist et al.

(2019), Layton et al. (2017), Montz et al. (2016) and McGuire et al. (2014), Rose and McGuire (2019), Zink
and Rose (2019).
28The gap in disease coverage can be significant. Montz et al. (2016) found that HCCs in use in the
Marketplace payment formula captured only 20 percent of the individuals classified with mental health
disorders according the broader CCS classification.

                                                                                                             14
Single-level diagnoses map ICD-9 (or 10) codes to 285 mutually exclusive and, for the most part,

clinically homogeneous categories. These single-level CCS codes (and their associated ICD-9 codes)

can also be mapped to 17 multi-level diagnoses categories. For example, essential hypertension and

hypertension with complications are considered two separate single-level diagnosis categories, but

are included in the same multi-level category: "disease of the circulatory system." 29 Our four illness

groups are identified using multi-level diagnosis codes.

        We expand our concern with fit to other groups. Specifically, we track fit for the complete

set of 17 other multi-level diagnosis-based CCS categories to study the effect of our payment

formulas on additional groups not included in the payment formula. Appendix C contains a list of

multi-level CCS categories. In light of our consideration of payment formulas without drug

variables, we also keep track of the over/undercompensation for individuals with health conditions

treated with the drugs used in the present risk adjustment formula.

        The rationale for studying groups defined by a chronic illness is two-fold: first, membership

in the group is persistent and predictable, making a plan's decisions about services for that group a

potential tool to affect demand for enrollment by the group; and second, a disease grouping is a

plausible level of action for a plan, for example by setting level of payment or choosing provider

network design more or less favorably for different illness categories.

        In parallel to our generalization of fit at the individual level to PSF, we generalize the ratio

measure to be the total payments, not regression predicted values, over total costs for the group g.

To distinguish our measure from the conventional predicted ratio, we refer to the measure including

all payments in the numerator to be a Total Payment Ratio (TPR) for group g: 30



 https://www.hcup-us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/ccs/CCSUsersGuide.pdf
29

30McGuire et al. (2014) modify predictive ratios incorporating premium differences and risk sharing in the
U.S. Marketplaces. Geruso, Layton, and Prinz (2019) modify predictive ratios and under/overcompensation
measures in the same way.

                                                                                                           15
                                                   g R i
                                        TPR g =          ,                                    (2)
                                                   g Yi

where R i is total revenue a plan receives for person i and Yi is plan spending for i. A TPR less than

1.0 means the revenues for members of that group fall short of plan costs, giving the plan incentives

to discriminate against members of this group. Conversely, a TPR above 1.0 indicates that a group

is profitable to plan giving the plan incentives to overserve the group. TPRs near 1.0 are preferred

so as to neutralize incentives based on selection at the group level.



4. Simplifying and Improving the Payment Formula While Maintaining Fit

           Our goal to simplify and improve risk adjustment while maintaining fit involves three

complementary components. First, we consider alternative estimation approaches specifically

tailored to group-level fit. Regressions subject to group-level constraints or penalties have been

previously proposed for improving group fit in risk adjustment, and we deploy several here. 31

Another key feature we leverage in conjunction with these estimators is reinsurance. 32 Lastly, we

implement variable reduction strategies ­ both those informed by practical factors as well as data-

adaptive procedures from the machine learning literature. 33

           Constrained and Penalized Regressions

           We consider two forms of constrained regression estimators. In the first, a linear constraint

restricts the estimated coefficients such that, for each of the four chronic illness groups, the TPR is




31   See van Kleef et al. (2017), Bergquist et al. (2019), and Zink and Rose (2019).
32   As in McGuire, Schillo and Van Kleef (2020).
33Many machine learning methods can be implemented to reduce the number of variables considered. See,
for example, James et al. (2013) for a treatment of these procedures. The techniques have been used for
variable selection in health spending applications previously, including the random forests algorithm for risk
adjustment in Buchner, Wasem and Schillo (2015) and Rose (2016). Lasso penalized regression is used for
predicting unprofitability enrollees based on prescription use in Rose, Bergquist, and Layton (2017).

                                                                                                             16
set at the value from the Baseline Formula estimated by OLS in Table 2. For example, the TPR for

cancer was constrained to be equal to 0.91. Alternatively, we set the constraints such that the

TPR = 1.0 for each of the four groups, ensuring that payments equal plan spending at the group

level. A TPR of 1.0 improves the group fit in relation to that estimated in the Baseline Formula. In

the presence of goals to fit at both the individual and group level, constrained regressions attain

target group-level fit at the least cost in terms of fit at the individual level.

        Constrained regressions can be equivalently formulated as penalties, and because penalties

for risk adjustment have demonstrated promising performance elsewhere (Zink and Rose 2019), we

also considered penalized regression with tuning parameters optimized toward group fit. 34 To our

knowledge, this is the first application of penalized regression for multiple groups in risk adjustment.

These alternative estimators were combined in various ways with the reinsurance and variable

selection procedures described below to maintain group-fit performance.

        Reinsurance

        We explore two different implementations of reinsurance. In both, we set aside 1% of funds

to cover 80% of plan spending above an attachment point. Conventional reinsurance payments

defined on spending (e.g., covering 80% of plan spending over $500,000) can be quantified prior to

risk adjustment estimation. We also consider the more targeted reinsurance based on plan losses

(spending less payment, e.g., 80% of loss at the person level above $300,000). Loss-based, also

referred to as "residual-based" reinsurance requires estimating residuals at the person level in a first

empirical step, followed by solving for the threshold based on the funds available for reinsurance. 35


34 This led to  values of 10,000, 0, 10,000, and 100,000 for the cancer, diabetes, heart disease, and mental

health groups. For more information on penalized regression tailored to group fit in risk adjustment, we refer
to Zink and Rose (2019).
35Residual-based reinsurance was proposed in Schillo et al. (2016), and explored in a Marketplace context in
McGuire, Schillo and Van Kleef (2020). McGuire, Schillo and Van Kleef (2020) also simulates residual-based
reinsurance in Germany and The Netherlands.

                                                                                                            17
Residual-based reinsurance uses funds more efficiently in terms of individual fit than conventional

reinsurance by targeting high losses as opposed to high spending per se (which in some cases is

picked up by the risk adjustment formula).

        Variable Selection

        We estimate two major variants of the Baseline Formula. The first set drops all RXC (drug)

variables, both main effects and interactions. The second set of formulas additionally drops some

HCC variables using data-adaptive machine learning. There are a number of reasons dropping the

drug variables should be considered. First, because of the frequency of prescription drug use, drug

files are often the largest of any category of service. In our data, there are over 79 million new drug

prescriptions (not refills), more than the number of outpatient visits (74m), and inpatient admissions

(0.7m) combined. Dropping the drug-related variables eliminates the need to consult the enormous

drug claim files for purposes of risk adjustment. Second, dropping drug variables improves

incentives. CMS and others recognize that increasing payment in response to a filled prescription

creates incentives to overprescribe. 36 Third, new drugs appear continuously, exposing the formula

to be in need of constant refinement of variable definitions and recalibration. Fourth, drugs

included in plan formularies are not the same even for plans within the same regulatory structure.

And finally, using drug data for purposes of payment may decrease the elasticity of demand for a

drug at the plan level, undermining the bargaining leverage plans have with respect to drug

manufacturers, and increasing procurement prices.




36 Xu, Trish and Joyce (2019) note incentive concerns with the RXC variables. For discussion of concerns

from CMS perspective, see HHS-operated risk adjustment methodology meeting: Discussion paper.
Retrieved from https://www.cms.gov/CCIIO/Resources/Forms-Reports-and-Other-
Resources/Downloads/RA-March-31-White-Paper-032416.pdf. The originators of the drug-based risk
adjustors have expressed concerns about incentives and proposed reforms in the way drug data are used in
risk adjustment (Lamers and Vliet, 2003). One suggestion was to increase the required daily dose before a
risk adjustor was recognized. The Marketplace risk adjustor is activated with the first prescription.

                                                                                                            18
        We also rely on machine learning methods to guide removing HCCs in the risk adjustment

formula after having already dropped the drug variables. Here we use a lasso penalized regression

within the cross-validation folds of the constrained or penalized regressions to select a maximum of

20, 30, 40, or 50 HCC variables while keeping all age and sex category variables. 37 Earlier research

demonstrates that smaller sets of HCCs chosen via data-adaptive driven techniques can maintain

strong overall individual-level fit (Rose 2016; Rose, Bergquist and Layton 2017), but the potential of

variable-reduction to maintain group fit has not yet been studied. Final formulas drop the drug

variables and then drop some HCC variables while using reinsurance based on spending and

alternatively based of residual spending (after risk-adjustment payment) equal to about 1% of funds.



5. Results

        We present results for the range of formulas considered and then provide additional

information on the best-performing formula, the regression with tightened constraints on the TPR

for the four chronic illness groups.

Overall Results

        Results for the Baseline Formula and constrained and penalized regression methods using

reinsurance and variable selection techniques are shown in Table 2. The first row of the table

contains the results for the Baseline Formula. Our measure of individual fit, PSF, is the same as R2

from the regression equation because no other factors affect payment in the Baseline Formula. All

other formulas incorporate reinsurance so PSF diverges from the regression R2. The regression R2

for the other formulas reports the explained variance attributable to the risk adjustor variables after

deducting reinsurance payments from plan spending.


37 When ties occur such that more than the pre-specified number of variables would be selected, the

algorithm increases the value of the regularization tuning parameter until ties are excluded.

                                                                                                        19
        First, we consider the effects on individual and group-level fit dropping the drug variables. 38

We find that all alternative methods using reinsurance maintain or even improve upon individual

and group-level fit. Constrained regression with TPR's set to the baseline values and penalized

regression have PSFs (and R2) well above the Baseline Formula. In both the constrained regression

with TPRs set at baseline and the penalized regression with penalties tuned to hit or exceed baseline

values, PSF improves from 36.8% to 55.6% and 55.4%, respectively. At the same time, group fit is

maintained in the constrained regression (by construction). For the penalized regression we even

see improvement in group fit, with the mental health TPR increasing to 0.90 from the 0.81 in the

Baseline Formula. The final column in Table 2 summarizes the impacts on all 17 CCS groups. The

23.5% improved value for the constrained regression with TPRs set at baseline indicates that of the

17 CCS groups, 23.5%, i.e. four, saw their TPRs move towards 1.0, the balance of the CCS moving

away from 1.0.

        We can ask more of the constrained regression approach by constraining the TPRs to 1.0 for

each of the four chronic illness groups. Even with this stricter set of constraints, completely

eliminating selection incentives at the group level for these four conditions, we maintain high levels

of individual fit with conventional reinsurance. With the tightened constraints, the PSF still

substantially exceeds the Baseline Formula (52.7% compared to 36.8%) and the R2 drops only

negligibly to 36.4% from 36.8%. To compare, running an OLS regression on the reduced set of

variables with reinsurance gives an R2 of 40.0% and a PSF of 55.7%. Note that not only are the

TPRs improved for the four chronic illness groups subject to the explicit constraints, but imposing

these constraints improves the fit for other chronic illness groups too. Specifically, the impact of the




38The incremental improvement in R2 from simply adding the set of RXC variables to the HCC variables
used in the Marketplace model is about 2 percentage points, a finding in accord with the report of Xu, Trish
and Joyce (2019).

                                                                                                           20
constraints on all the CCS categories is generally positive, with 88% (i.e., 15 of 17) improving in

relation to the Baseline Formula. We revisit this promising approach in the next subsection where

we will characterize in more detail the effects of the tighter constraints on other CCS groups, those

with no CCS indicator, and those with illnesses related to the drug variables.

        We next compare fit using residual reinsurance rather than conventional reinsurance. Using

constrained regression with TPRs set to baseline values, we estimate individual fit under both

reinsurance methods (with group fit maintained by the constraints). We find that residual

reinsurance improves PSF from 52.7% to 53.2%. While this improvement in individual fit is small, it

comes "free" by better directing the same funds set aside for conventional reinsurance. Residual

reinsurance also improves individual fit without affecting the number of CCS groups positively or

negatively affected in relation to baseline.

        We subsequently remove HCCs from the risk adjustment formula using data-adaptive

variable selection. As discussed in Section 3, we implement a lasso penalized regression within the

cross-validation folds to select a maximum of 20, 30, 40, or 50 HCC variables (in addition to all age

and sex category variables) and find corresponding sets of 18, 30, 38, and 49 HCCs. The list of

HCCs selected for each of these variables sets can be found in Table 3. In general, we find that

conditions that are expensive and prevalent (e.g., diabetes and the high-severity flag) appear in the

most effective minimal set of variables. As we allow more HCCs, we see rare and expensive

conditions included. For example, hemophilia (coded in less than .01% of the sample with average

spending of $286,000) is added among the 12 new variables appearing between the set of 18 to the

set of 30. Cystic fibrosis, (also occurring in less than .01% with half the mean spending of

hemophilia) comes in when we expand from 38 to 49 HCCs. However, these variable sets should

not be overinterpreted as they were selected based on their predictiveness for the outcome. For




                                                                                                        21
example, selected variables could be proxies for factors that are not measured in the data. Other

empirical considerations, such as collinearity, could lead to a predictive variable not being selected.

        Our alternative methods maintain fit with the number of HCCs reduced to 40, less than half

of the current number. Figure 1 shows the diminishing returns of adding HCC variables to the risk

adjustment formula with respect to PSF compared to an OLS regression with the same number of

variables. The penalized regressions tracks the OLS regression and is better able to maintain overall

fit with smaller numbers of HCCs (e.g., 49.5% PSF with 18 HCCs) but group fit, displayed in Table

2, consequently suffers, most notably for the mental health group (TPR of 0.65 vs. 0.81 in the

Baseline Formula). Conversely, the constrained regressions with TPRs set to 1 have constant

performance across the groups, as they must, with individual fit quickly approaching penalized

regression once there are 28 HCCs. The constrained regression with 49 HCCs has a PSF of 50.8%,

which also compares favorably to the constrained regression with all 94 HCC-based variables

(52.7% PSF). Thus, the relative efficiency of the constrained regression that drops over 60% of the

HCC-based variables is 96%. However, fit for the dropped HCCs can suffer; for example, in the 18

HCC regression, the TPR for hemophilia (not included in the regression) drops from 1.0 to less than

0.3 for both penalized and constrained regression. In Figure 2, we further depict individual fit gains

among the constrained regressions as variable selection and reinsurance methods vary. We see the

largest improvement when moving from 18 to 30 HCCs. The gain from using residual as opposed

to conventional reinsurance is small given that all HCCs are included in the model.

TPRs set to 1.0: Results for Other CCS Groups and for Illnesses Associated with Drug Variable

        Our methods optimize overall fit and constrain group fit for four specified groups: those

with cancer, diabetes, heart disease, and mental health and substance use disorders. Results indicate

that constraining the TPR for these four groups to 1.0, fully eliminating over- and

undercompensation for these groups, also improves group fit for 15 of the 17 broad CCS categories.


                                                                                                          22
This subsection reports on additional fit properties of this most promising formula from Table 2 in

relation to the Baseline Formula. Specifically, we consider how predicted costs change for groups

defined by multilevel diagnosis-based CCS categories, including those falling into no group at all,

and for people most directly affected by the removal of the drug variable categories. We find that

the constrained regression with TPRs set to 1.0 far outperforms the Baseline Formula by

maintaining and often improving fit for these groups.

       Figure 3 compares TPRs for constrained regression with TPRs set to 1.0 to the Baseline

Formula for all 17 CCS groups, ranked by the TPR from the Baseline Formula. All 17 CCS groups

are undercompensated in the Baseline Formula (recall, many of the conditions placing an individual

in the CCS group are not explicitly recognized in the risk adjustment formula). Introducing

reinsurance and the four constraints generally moves the TPRs towards 1.0, decreasing

underpayment. Not surprisingly, we find that the CCS groups with the largest improvement have

more overlap with the set of four chronic conditions considered in our regressions. For example,

individuals with circulatory disease had the largest absolute improvement of 12% (from 0.87 to 0.99)

and more than half of these individuals have one of the four chronic conditions. Similarly, the only

CCS groups that did not improve have the smallest overlap (less than 1/3 of individuals in these

categories had at least one of the four conditions). The TPR for pregnancy-related complications

(5.3% of the sample) dropped slightly from 0.87 to 0.86 and those with perinatal-related conditions

(0.1% of the sample) dropped from 0.86 to 0.85. CCS group overlap with our 4 chronic conditions

can be found in Appendix C.

       We also consider the impact of our new formulas on the 724,981 people in our sample

(about 14.5% of the total) who do not fall into a CCS group. These enrollees have very little (if any)

interaction with the health care system and so their costs are low. The baseline risk adjustment

formula overestimates their costs by $2,258 on average. This overcompensation is more than cut in


                                                                                                      23
half, to $855, in the constrained regression with TPRs set to 1.0 for the four chronic illness groups. 39

The cut in overpayment for those with no illness indicator is thus financing part of the additional

compensation to previously undercompensated groups. We regard this transfer to be a particularly

attractive feature of the constrained regression formula paired with high-cost risk sharing.

        Those who would seem to be at the greatest risk for a reduction in payment by our

constrained regression in relation to the Baseline Formula are individuals with specific illnesses

associated with the drug indicators. For example, RXC_07 is an indicator for anti-diabetic agents

(excluding insulin and metformin) used to treat diabetes. Figure 4 compares the TPRs for the set of

HCC-defined conditions that are affected by the drug variables we dropped from the model. These

HCCs were selected because they are relevant clinical groups for the drug variables and thus directly

interacted with the drug variables in the Baseline Formula. See Appendix D for the list of HCCs

considered, and the corresponding drug variables. The Baseline Formula leads to TPRs above 1.0

for all of these groups, indicating that in the presence of the RX variables they tend to be

overcompensated. Removing the drug variables tends to reduce compensation but the TPR for

every group is maintained above 1.0. 40 For the largest group (with respect to sample size), those

with diabetes, the payment is increased slightly by 2% for the constrained regression with TPRs set

to 1.0 in relation to the Baseline Formula.

        Overall, Figures 3 and 4 present a remarkable set of results related to fit. The payment

formula (a) dropping drug variables, (b) using 1 percent of funds used for reinsurance, and (c)

constraining TPRs to 1.0 for four chronic illnesses moves fit at the individual level to a PSF of

52.7%. It also improves fit for virtually all CCS groups and does so without creating underpayment


39By comparison, constrained regression set to baseline reduces the overcompensation to $2,030 and
penalized regression reduces it to $1,945.
40 This may not be surprising. If the model were simple OLS, inclusion of the HCCs in the model would lead

to no over or undercompensation. Our constrained model with reinsurance does not have that guarantee.

                                                                                                       24
for any of the illness groups related to the drug variables. Looking at how the coefficients change

from the baseline formula to the constrained regression (with TPRs set to 1), we find that the largest

coefficient changes occur in groups impacted by the dropped drug variables, indicating that, overall,

the constrained regression re-routes funds to these conditions via the main effects of the diagnostic

variables. The other large increases were correlated with our four chronic conditions. Notably,

coefficients correlated with mental illness, such as personality disorder, major depressive disorder,

and psychosis more than doubled in value. Most coefficient decreases were among the SEVERE

flag and HCC interactions, although the coefficient on hemophilia (HCC066) also decreased

significantly from $268,000 thousand dollars to $194,000.



5. Discussion

        Reinsurance, constrained regression, and machine learning variable selection are powerful

methods to improve the fit of health plan payments systems at the individual and group level. We

show in the case of the complex payment formula applied in the Marketplaces that using these tools

permits radical reduction in the number of variables used in the risk adjustment formula, while

maintaining or improving performance in terms of fit. Design of risk adjustment systems involves

an inherent tradeoff between the benefits of adding a variable, generally measured in terms of fit,

and the costs, poorly measured, in terms of incentives to upcode, administrative burden, and other

costs. Our paper shows that use of reinsurance, constrained regression, and machine learning

variable selection change the terms of the tradeoff to permit more consideration of the difficult-to-

quantify but real costs of variable addition.

        There are several reasons to consider excluding specific variables from the risk adjustment

formula. Certain variables are vulnerable to the increased incentive to overuse and therefore good

candidates for removal. In our analysis, we removed the drug variables for several reasons.


                                                                                                        25
Accessing the drug claims file for purposes of risk adjustment classification adds significantly to

demands on data. In the specification used in the Marketplaces, just one prescription for a

designated drug triggers thousands of dollars of additional payments. Furthermore, coverage of

specific drugs can vary across health insurance formularies, and the technology of drug treatment is

changing constantly, increasing the cost of maintaining proper drug classifications.

        Drug variables are not the only variables whose contribution to fit may not be worth their

cost in terms of gaming and incentives. An important task for research is to identify which variable

are most responsible for elevation in risk scores so that the costs and benefits of their inclusion can

be assessed. Variables that are more difficult or time-consuming to document should also be

considered for removal.

        That said, dropping variables inevitably reduces overall fit measured by R2 in the risk

adjustment formula. Reinsurance is an effective antidote to loss of fit measured by R2. Group fit is

not generally included as part of the objectives in choice of risk adjustment weights, but it can be.

Constrained or penalized regression can ensure that group fit is maintained (or improved).

Incorporating group fit into the loss function means that the variable weights selected by a least

squares procedure attain the target group fit as efficiently as possible in terms of the R2 measure of

individual fit. This improvement in the efficiency in which variables are used permits, if desired, a

reduction in the number of variables used to hit fit targets. In our analysis, we constrained average

predicted costs for only four large and well-known chronic condition groups. We found that

imposing constraints on these four groups improved predictions for many other condition groups

because it transferred money from healthier to sicker individuals. A particularly attractive feature of

our four-group constrained formula is that it substantially reduced the overcompensation for those with no

indicator of any CCS group. In effect, our formula reduces undercompensation for a




                                                                                                        26
comprehensive set of illness groups, financed by a reduction in overcompensation by those with

claims for no illnesses.

        An obvious concern with the strategy of dropping variables is possible introduction of

underpayment for the people with the particular risk adjustment flag. Without an indicator for

Ischemic or Unspecified Stroke (HCC146), a variable that was removed when we went from 49 to

38 HCCs, persons with that condition may be underpaid. This argument can be made for any

potential risk adjustor and cannot therefore be dispositive in terms of inclusion or exclusion. Some

specific diagnoses may merit inclusion for fear of plan/provider response to underpayment, but if it

is implausible that a plan or provider can do anything in response to this particular form of

underpayment, inclusion of the variable has no positive effect on the outcomes induced by the

payment formula.

        Optimizing towards a payment system that considers a larger set of goals remains important.

While adding additional risk adjusters can be beneficial, it is costly too. Our application focused on

the U.S. health insurance Marketplaces, but these methods can be implemented in other individual

health insurance markets such as Switzerland, which shares many features of the Marketplaces, or

Germany, which currently has a fixed limit on the number of risk adjusters in the payment model.

Utilizing modern statistical tools and modifying the conventional approach to risk adjustment, we

find that the risk adjustment formula can be simplified at no evident cost to fit at the individual and

group level.




                                                                                                     27
References
Beck K, Kauer L, McGuire TG, and Schmid C. 2019 "Making Use of Canton Contributions to Health Care
        Costs in Switzerland," under review.
Bergquist S, Layton TJ, McGuire TG, and Rose S. 2019. "Data Transformations to Improve the
       Performance of Health Plan Payment Models," Journal of Health Economics 66: 195-207.
Buchner F, Wasem J, Schillo S. (2015) "Regression Trees Identify Relevant Interactions: Can this
      Improve the Predictive Performance of Risk Adjustment?" Health Economics, 26 OCT 2015,
      DOI: 10.1002/hec.3277
Carey C. 2017a. "Technological Change and Risk Adjustment: Benefit Design Incentives in
       Medicare Part D." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 9, no. 1: 38-73.
Carey C. 2017b. "Time to Harvest: Evidence on Consumer Choice Frictions from a Payment
       Revision in Medicare Part D." Working Paper. Retrieved from
       https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B2TeS7lispKBQ21RLV9PckE2eWs/view.
Eijkenaar F, van Vliet RCJA, and van Kleef RC. 2017. "Diagnosis-based Cost Groups in the Dutch
       Risk-Equalization Model - Effects of Clustering Diagnoses and of Allowing Patients to be
       Classified into Multiple Risk-Classes." Medical Care.
Ellis RP, Martins B, and Rose S. 2018. "Risk Adjustment for Health Plan Payment," In McGuire.
        T.G., & Van Kleef. R., Risk Adjustment, Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in Health Insurance
        Markets: Theory and Practice (pp. 105-131). London: Academic Press (Elsevier).
Ellis RP and McGuire TG. 2007. "Predictability and Predictiveness in Health Care Spending."
        Journal of Health Economics 26, no. 1: 25-48.
Geruso, M and Layton TJ. 2020. "Upcoding: Evidence from Medicare on Squishy Risk
       Adjustment." Journal of Political Economy.
Geruso M, Layton TJ, and Prinz D. 2019. "Screening in Contract Design: Evidence from the ACA
      Health Insurance Exchanges." American Economic Journal: Economic Policy 11, no. 2: 64-107.
Geruso M and McGuire TG. 2016. "Tradeoffs in the Design of Health Plan Payment Systems: Fit,
      Power and Balance." Journal of Health Economics 47: 1-19.
Han T and Lavetti K. 2017. "Does Part D Abet Advantageous Selection in Medicare Advantage?"
       Journal of Health Economics (December).
Jacobs PD and Kronick R. 2018. "Getting What We Pay For: How do Risk-Based Payments to
       Medicare Advantage Plans Compare with Alternative Measures of Beneficiary Health Risk?"
       Health Services Research 56 (3) Part I, 4097-5015.
James G, Witten D, Hastie T, Tibshirani R. 2013. An Introduction to Statistical Learning: with Applications
       in R. New York: Springer.




                                                                                                        28
Kautter J, Pope GC, Ingber M, Freeman S, Patterson L, Cohen M, and Keenan P. 2014. "The HHS-
       HCC Risk Adjustment Model for Individual and Small Group Markets under the Affordable
       Care Act." Medicare & Medicaid Research Review 4, no. 3: E1-E11.
Lamers LM and Vliet RCJA. 2003. "Health Based Risk Adjustment: Improving the Pharmacy
       Group Based Model to Reduce Gaming Possibilities." European Journal of Health Economics. 4:
       107-114.
Layton TJ and McGuire TG. 2017. "Options for Dealing with High-Cost Cases in Health Insurance
       Marketplaces," American Journal of Health Economics, 3(2): 1-27.
Layton TJ, Ellis RP, McGuire TG, and Van Kleef RC. 2017. "Measuring Efficiency of Health Plan
       Payment Systems in Managed Competition Health Insurance Markets." Journal of Health
       Economics (December), 56: 237-255.
Layton TJ, Montz E, and Shepard M. 2018. "Health Plan Payment in US Marketplaces: Regulated
       Competition with a Weak Mandate." In Risk Adjustment, Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in
       Health Insurance Markets: Theory and Practice, edited by Thomas G. McGuire and Richard C.
       van Kleef. Elsevier.
McGuire TG, Newhouse JP, Normand SL, Shi J, and Zuvekas S. 2014. "Assessing Incentives for
      Service-Level Selection in Private Health Insurance Exchanges." Journal of Health Economics
      35: 47-63.
McGuire TG and van Kleef RC (eds.) 2018. Risk Adjustment, Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in
      Health Insurance Markets: Theory and Practice, Elsevier.
McGuire TG and van Kleef R. 2018. Risk Sharing. In McGuire TG & Van Kleef R, Risk Adjustment,
      Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in Health Insurance Markets: Theory and Practice (pp. 105-131).
      London: Academic Press (Elsevier).
McGuire TG, Schillo S, and van Kleef R. 2020. Two-Sided Reinsurance and Risk Adjustment in
      Individual Health Insurance: Germany, the Netherlands and the US Marketplaces. American
      Journal of Health Economics.
Montz E, Layton TJ, Busch AB, Ellis RP, Rose S, and McGuire TG. 2016. "Risk Adjustment
      Simulation: Health Plans May Have Incentives to Distort Mental Health and Substance
      Abuse Coverage." Health Affairs, 35(6): 1022-1028, 2016.
Pope GC, Kautter J, Ingber JJ, Freeman S, Sekar R, and Newhart C. 2011. "Evaluation of the CMS-
      HCC Risk Adjustment Model." In Final Report, RTI Project Number 0209853.006, RTI
      International, March.
Rose S. 2016. "A Machine Learning Framework for Plan Payment Risk Adjustment." Health Services
        Research, 51(6): 2358-74.
Rose S, Bergquist SL, and Layton TJ. 2017. "Computational Health Economics for Identification of
        Unprofitable Health Care Enrollees." Biostatistics, 18(4): 682-694.




                                                                                                      29
Rose S and McGuire TG. 2019. "Limitations of p-values and R-squared for Stepwise Regression
       Building: A Fairness Demonstration in Health Policy and Risk Adjustment," The American
       Statistician, 73(S1): 152-6.
Schillo S, Lux G, Wasem J, Buchner F. 2016. "High-cost pool or high-cost groups? how to handle
       the high(est) cost cases in a risk adjustment mechanism." Health Policy. (120): 141-47. DOI:
       10.1016/j.healthpol.2016.01.003.
Shepard M. 2016. "Hospital Network Competition and Adverse Selection: Evidence from the
       Massachusetts Health Insurance Exchange." Harvard University. Unpublished.
Van Kleef R, Eijkenaar F, van Vliet RCJA, van de Ven WPMM. 2018. "Health Plan Payment in the
      Netherlands." In Risk Adjustment, Risk Sharing and Premium Regulation in Health Insurance
      Markets: Theory and Practice, edited by McGuire TG and Van Kleef RC. Elsevier.
Van Kleef RC, McGuire TG, van Vliet RCJA, van de Ven WPMM. 2017. "Improving Risk
      Equalization with Constrained Regression." The European Journal of Health Economics, 18, no. 9:
      1137-1156.
Van Kleef RC, van Vliet RCJA, and van de Ven WPMM. 2013. "Risk Equalization in The
      Netherlands: An Empirical Evaluation." Expert Review of Pharmacoeconomics & Outcomes Research
      13, no. 6: 829-839.
Van Veen SHCM, van Kleef RC, van de Ven WPMM, van Vliet RCJA. 2015. "Is There One
      Measure of Fit That Fits All? A Taxonomy and Review of Measures-Of-Fit for Risk-
      Equalization Models." Medical Care Research and Review 72, no. 2: 220-243.
Xu J, Trish E, and Joyce G. 2009. "Incorporating Prescription Drug Utilization Information into the
       Marketplace Risk Adjustment Model Improves Payment Accuracy and Reduces Adverse
       Selection Incentives." Medical Care Research and Review (August).
Zink A and Rose S. 2019. "Fair Regression for Health Care Spending." Biometrics, in press. DOI:
       10.1111/biom.13206.




                                                                                                      30
Table 1: Descriptive Statistics for 2017 Sample (N=5,000,000)

Variable          Proportion (%)          Mean Spending ($)
All                       100.0                  6,683
Sex
 Female                    52.1                   7,459
 Male                      47.9                   5,839
Age
 21-29                     18.0                   3,705
 30-39                     20.6                   4,940
 40-49                     23.7                   6,135
 50-64                     37.7                   9,397
Any HCC
 Yes                       21.1                  20,306
 No                        78.9                   3,035
Any RXC
 Yes                        6.3                  28,206
 No                        93.7                   5,230
CCS Chronic Group
 Cancer                     6.9                  19,673
 Diabetes                   9.0                  15,106
 Heart Disease              9.3                  20,154
 Mental Health             11.7                  12,293




                                                                31
Table 2: Baseline Risk Adjustment Formula and Alternative Methods Using Reinsurance
                                                  R2     PSF          Total Payment Ratio (TPR)           Improved
Method                                           (%)     (%)      Cancer Diabetes Heart Mental            CCS (%)*
Baseline                                         36.8     36.8     0.91     1.00    0.83     0.81           NA
Removing Drug Variables
 Constrained Regression (TPRs set to baseline) 40.3       55.6     0.93      1.02     0.84     0.81        23.5
 Penalized Regression                           40.0      55.4     0.92      0.98     0.83     0.90        47.1
 Constrained Regression (TPRs set to 1)         36.4      52.7     1.02      1.02     1.02     1.01        88.2
 Constrained Regression (TPRs set to 1)         37.8      53,2     1.02      1.02     1.02     1.01        88.2
Removing Drug Variables and HCCs
 Constrained Regression (TPRs set to 1)
 Age × Gender + 18 HCCs                        -25.6      6.7      1.02      1.02     1.02     1.01        76.5
 Age × Gender + 30 HCCs                         15.1      36.9     1.03      1.02     1.03     1.02        94.1
 Age × Gender + 38 HCCs                         31.8      49.3     1.02      1.02     1.02     1.01        82.4
 Age × Gender + 49 HCCs                         33.8      50.8     1.02      1.02     1.02     1.01        88.2
 Penalized Regression
 Age × Gender + 18 HCCs                         32.1      49.5     0.72      0.96     0.75     0.65         0.0
 Age × Gender + 30 HCCs                         35.5      52.0     0.86      0.97     0.77     0.72         0.0
 Age × Gender + 38 HCCs                         37.0      53.2     0.88      0.97     0.80     0.86         5.9
 Age × Gender + 49 HCCs                         38.4      54.2     0.90      0.97     0.82     0.86         5.9


*The share of CCS groups (out of 17 total) whose TPRs moved closer to 1 compared to the Baseline Formula
(see Appendix C for the list of CCS groups).
Mental health penalty is 500,000, cancer and heart penalties are 50,000, and no penalty is set for diabetes.
This method uses residual reinsurance, all other alternative methods use conventional reinsurance.


Note: All methods estimated using a sample of 5 million observations from the full sample of 10,043,052
observations. Measures calculated with 5-fold cross-validated predicted values.




                                                                                                          32
Table 3: HCCs selected under 4 variable selection methods with increasing HCCs

 18 HCCs
       Diabetes (G01)
       Immunodeficiencies and disorders of the Immune Mechanism (G08)
       Respiratory Arrest, Cardio-Respiratory Failure and Shock, Including Respiratory Distress Syndromes (G13)
       Septicemia, Sepsis, Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome/Shock (HCC002)
       Metastatic Cancer (HCC008)
       Lung, Brain, and Other Severe Cancers, Including Pediatric Acute Lymphoid Leukemia (HCC009)
       Protein-Calorie Malnutrition (HCC023)
       Inflammatory Bowel Disease (HCC048)
       Rheumatoid Arthritis and Specified Autoimmune Disorders (HCC056)
       Multiple Sclerosis (HCC118)
       Congestive Heart Failure (HCC130)
       Acute Myocardial Infarction (HCC131)
       Specified Heart Arrhythmias (HCC142)
       End Stage Renal Disease (HCC184)
       Artificial Openings for Feeding or Elimination (HCC253)
       1 if adult high cost interaction, else 0 (INT_GROUP_H)
       1 if adult medium cost interaction, else 0 (INT_GROUP_M)
       Adult severe illness 0/1 marker (SEVERE_3)
 + 12 HCCs (30 in total)
       Necrotizing Fasciitis, Bone/Joint/Muscle Infections/Necrosis (G03)
       Drug psychosis and dependence (G09)
       Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, Including Bronchiectasis, Asthma (G15)
       Completed Pregnancy (G18)
       HIV/AIDS (HCC001)
       Colorectal, Breast (Age < 50), Kidney, and Other Cancers (HCC011)
       Breast (Age 50+) and Prostate Cancer, Benign/Uncertain Brain Tumors, and Other Cancers and Tumors (HCC012)
       Intestinal Obstruction (HCC045)
       Hemophilia (HCC066)
       Myasthenia Gravis/Myoneural Disorders and Guillain-Barre Syndrome/Inflammatory and Toxic Neuropathy (HCC115)
       Respirator Dependence/Tracheostomy Status (HCC125)
       Stem Cell, Transplant Status/Complications (HCC251)
 + 8 HCCs (38 in total)
       Metabolic and endocrine disorders (G02A)
        Peritonitis/Gastrointestinal Perforation/Necrotizing Enterocolitis (HCC042)
       Coagulation Defects and Other Specified Hematological Disorders (HCC075)
       Major Depressive and Bipolar Disorders (HCC088)
       Non-Traumatic Coma, Brain Compression/Anoxic Damage (HCC122)
       Unstable Angina and Other Acute Ischemic Heart Disease (HCC132)
       Hemiplegia/Hemiparesis (HCC150)
       Kidney Transplant Status (HCC183)
 +11 HCCs (49 in total)
       Heart Assistive Device/Artificial Heart (G14)
       Chronic Viral Hepatitis C (HCC037)
       Non-Hodgkin's Lymphomas and Other Cancers and Tumors (HCC010)
       Heart Infection/Inflammation, Except Rheumatic (HCC135)
       Intracranial Hemorrhage (HCC145)
       Ischemic or Unspecified Stroke (HCC146)
       Atherosclerosis of the Extremities with Ulceration or Gangrene (HCC153)
       Vascular Disease with Complications (HCC154)
       Cystic Fibrosis (HCC159)
       Aspiration and Specified Bacterial Pneumonias and Other Severe Lung Infections (HCC163)
       Hip Fractures and Pathological Vertebral or Humerus Fractures (HCC226)



                                                                                                        33
34
35
Note: Constrained regression excludes drug variables but includes all HCCs from the baseline formula.




                                                                                                        36
Note: Constrained regression excludes drug variables but includes all HCCs from the baseline formula.




                                                                                                        37
   Appendix A: Drug Variables
               RXC                                  Definition                        Note
RXC_01                              Anti-HIV Agents
RXC_02                              Anti-Hepatitis C (HCV) Agents
RXC_03                              Antiarrhythmics
RXC_04                              Phosphate Binders
RXC_05                              Inflammatory Bowel Disease Agents
RXC_06                              Insulin                                    RXC_07 is set to 0 if
                                    Anti-Diabetic Agents, Except Insulin and   a person has
RXC_07                              Metformin                                  RXC_06
RXC_08                              Multiple Sclerosis Agents
RXC_09                              Immune Suppressants and Immunomodulators
RXC_10                              Cystic Fibrosis Agents
RXC_11                              Ammonia Detoxicants                        Not used directly in
                                                                               the model, for
RXC_12                          Diuretics, Loop and Select Potassium-Sparing   interactions only
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 01 and
RXC_01_x_HCC001                 HCC 001
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 02 and
RXC_02_x_HCC037_1_036_035_034   (HCC 037_1 or 036 or 035 or 034)
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 03 and
RXC_03_x_HCC142                 HCC 142
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 04 and
RXC_04_x_HCC184_183_187_188     (HCC 184 or 183 or 187 or 188)
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 05 and
RXC_05_x_HCC048_041             (HCC 048 or 041)
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 06 and
RXC_06_x_HCC018_019_020_021     (HCC 018 or 019 or 020 or 021)
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 07 and
RXC_07_x_HCC018_019_020_021     (HCC 018 or 019 or 020 or 021)
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 08 and
RXC_08_x_HCC118                 HCC 118
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 09 and
RXC_09_x_HCC056_057_and_048_041 (HCC 048 or 041) and (HCC 056 or 057)
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 09 and
RXC_09_x_HCC056                 HCC 056
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 09 and
RXC_09_x_HCC057                 HCC 057
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 09 and
RXC_09_x_HCC048_041             (HCC 048 or 041)
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 10 and
RXC_10_x_HCC159_158             (HCC 159 or 158)
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 11 and Removed in V0519
RXC_11_x_HCC036_035_034         (HCC 036 or 035 or 034)
                                Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 12 and
RXC_12_x_HCC130_129_128         (HCC 130 or 129 or 128)



                                                                                                38
Appendix B: Coefficients for the Baseline Formula
 Variable             Description                                                                                     Coefficient
 MAGE_LAST_25_29      Male, Age 25-29                                                                                             20
 MAGE_LAST_30_34      Male, Age 30-34                                                                                             87
 MAGE_LAST_35_39      Male, Age 35-39                                                                                            368
 MAGE_LAST_40_44      Male, Age 40-44                                                                                            646
 MAGE_LAST_45_49      Male, Age 45-49                                                                                           1033
 MAGE_LAST_50_54      Male, Age 50-54                                                                                           1608
 MAGE_LAST_55_59      Male, Age 55-59                                                                                           1969
 MAGE_LAST_60_GT      Male, Age 60+                                                                                             2375
 FAGE_LAST_21_24      Female, Age 21-24                                                                                          731
 FAGE_LAST_25_29      Female, Age 25-29                                                                                          922
 FAGE_LAST_30_34      Female, Age 30-34                                                                                         1341
 FAGE_LAST_35_39      Female, Age 35-39                                                                                         1804
 FAGE_LAST_40_44      Female, Age 40-44                                                                                         2032
 FAGE_LAST_45_49      Female, Age 45-49                                                                                         2174
 FAGE_LAST_50_54      Female, Age 50-54                                                                                         2549
 FAGE_LAST_55_59      Female, Age 55-49                                                                                         2523
 FAGE_LAST_60_GT      Female, Age 60+                                                                                           2830
 G01                  Diabetes with Acute Complications
                      Diabetes with Chronic Complications
                      Diabetes without Complication                                                                             2577
 G02A                 Mucopolysaccharidosis
                      Lipidoses and Glycogenosis
                      Amyloidosis, Porphyria, and Other Metabolic Disorders
                      Adrenal, Pituitary, and Other Significant Endocrine Disorders                                             9461
 G03                  Necrotizing Fasciitis
                      Bone/Joint/Muscle Infections/Necrosis                                                                    20142
 G04                  Osteogenesis Imperfecta and Other Osteodystrophies
                      Congenital/Developmental Skeletal and Connective Tissue Disorders                                        12714
 G06                  Myelodysplastic Syndromes and Myelofibrosis
                      Aplastic Anemia                                                                                          34243
 G07                  Acquired Hemolytic Anemia, Including Hemolytic Disease of Newborn
                      Sickle Cell Anemia (Hb-SS)
                      Thalassemia Major                                                                                        31918
 G08                  Combined and Other Severe Immunodeficiencies
                      Disorders of the Immune Mechanism                                                                        17407
 G09                  Drug Psychosis
                      Drug Dependence                                                                                          17500
 G10                  Traumatic Complete Lesion Cervical Spinal Cord
                      Quadriplegia                                                                                             48754
 G11                  Traumatic Complete Lesion Dorsal Spinal Cord
                      Paraplegia                                                                                               30981
 G12                  Muscular Dystrophy
                      Parkinson`s, Huntington`s, and Spinocerebellar Disease, and Other Neurodegenerative Disorders             8952
 G13                  Respiratory Arrest
                      Cardio-Respiratory Failure and Shock, Including Respiratory Distress Syndromes                           55039
 G14                  Heart Assistive Device/Artificial Heart
                      Heart Transplant                                                                                        102112
 G15                  Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease, Including Bronchiectasis
                      Asthma                                                                                                    4125
 G16                  Chronic Kidney Disease, Stage 5
                      Chronic Kidney Disease, Severe (Stage 4)                                                                 -1291
 G17                  Ectopic and Molar Pregnancy, Except with Renal Failure, Shock, or Embolism
                      Miscarriage with Complications
                      Miscarriage with No or Minor Complications                                                                5264
 G18                  Completed Pregnancy with Major Complications
                      Completed Pregnancy with Complications
                      Completed Pregnancy with No or Minor Complications                                                       15001
 HHS_CC037_1          Chronic Viral Hepatitis C                                                                                 3535
 HHS_CC037_2          Chronic Hepatitis, Except Chronic Viral Hepatitis C                                                       4792
 HHS_HCC001           HIV/AIDS                                                                                                  2416
 HHS_HCC002           Septicemia, Sepsis, Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome/Shock                                        50827
 HHS_HCC003           Central Nervous System Infections, Except Viral Meningitis                                               25213
 HHS_HCC004           Viral or Unspecified Meningitis                                                                          25449
 HHS_HCC006           Opportunistic Infections                                                                                 14788


                                                                                                                         39
HHS_HCC008   Metastatic Cancer                                                                                  90033
HHS_HCC009   Lung, Brain, and Other Severe Cancers, Including Pediatric Acute Lymphoid Leukemia                 51637
HHS_HCC010   Non-Hodgkin`s Lymphomas and Other Cancers and Tumors                                               21213
HHS_HCC011   Colorectal, Breast (Age < 50), Kidney, and Other Cancers                                           19147
HHS_HCC012   Breast (Age 50+) and Prostate Cancer, Benign/Uncertain Brain Tumors, and Other Cancers and
             Tumors                                                                                             11751
HHS_HCC013   Thyroid Cancer, Melanoma, Neurofibromatosis, and Other Cancers and Tumors                           4916
HHS_HCC018   Pancreas Transplant Status/Complications                                                            8300
HHS_HCC023   Protein-Calorie Malnutrition                                                                       42840
HHS_HCC034   Liver Transplant Status/Complications                                                              44407
HHS_HCC035   End-Stage Liver Disease                                                                            18472
HHS_HCC036   Cirrhosis of Liver                                                                                  7147
HHS_HCC038   Acute Liver Failure/Disease, Including Neonatal Hepatitis                                          13754
HHS_HCC041   Intestine Transplant Status/Complications                                                          61025
HHS_HCC042   Peritonitis/Gastrointestinal Perforation/Necrotizing Enterocolitis                                 27038
HHS_HCC045   Intestinal Obstruction                                                                             20611
HHS_HCC046   Chronic Pancreatitis                                                                                9284
HHS_HCC047   Acute Pancreatitis/Other Pancreatic Disorders and Intestinal Malabsorption                         11488
HHS_HCC048   Inflammatory Bowel Disease                                                                         10129
HHS_HCC056   Rheumatoid Arthritis and Specified Autoimmune Disorders                                             4944
HHS_HCC057   Systemic Lupus Erythematosus and Other Autoimmune Disorders                                         5885
HHS_HCC063   Cleft Lip/Cleft Palate                                                                            268120
HHS_HCC066   Hemophilia                                                                                         11053
HHS_HCC075   Coagulation Defects and Other Specified Hematological Disorders                                    13387
HHS_HCC087   Schizophrenia                                                                                       7784
HHS_HCC088   Major Depressive and Bipolar Disorders                                                              7537
HHS_HCC089   Reactive and Unspecified Psychosis, Delusional Disorders                                            6651
HHS_HCC090   Personality Disorders                                                                               8384
HHS_HCC094   Anorexia/Bulimia Nervosa                                                                           15636
HHS_HCC096   Prader-Willi, Patau, Edwards, and Autosomal Deletion Syndromes                                      2645
HHS_HCC097   Down Syndrome, Fragile X, Other Chromosomal Anomalies, and Congenital Malformation
             Syndromes                                                                                           4169
HHS_HCC102   Autistic Disorder                                                                                   3664
HHS_HCC103   Pervasive Developmental Disorders, Except Autistic Disorder                                        22847
HHS_HCC110   Spinal Cord Disorders/Injuries                                                                     17547
HHS_HCC111   Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Other Anterior Horn Cell Disease                                 -3214
HHS_HCC112   Quadriplegic Cerebral Palsy                                                                         2614
HHS_HCC113   Cerebral Palsy, Except Quadriplegic                                                                 4220
HHS_HCC114   Spina Bifida and Other Brain/Spinal/Nervous System Congenital Anomalies                            24955
HHS_HCC115   Myasthenia Gravis/Myoneural Disorders and Guillain-Barre Syndrome/Inflammatory and Toxic
             Neuropathy                                                                                         21369
HHS_HCC118   Multiple Sclerosis                                                                                 32041
HHS_HCC120   Seizure Disorders and Convulsions                                                                  27204
HHS_HCC121   Hydrocephalus                                                                                      50831
HHS_HCC122   Non-Traumatic Coma, Brain Compression/Anoxic Damage                                               129922
HHS_HCC125   Respirator Dependence/Tracheostomy Status                                                          11948
HHS_HCC130   Congestive Heart Failure                                                                           31179
HHS_HCC131   Acute Myocardial Infarction                                                                        24432
HHS_HCC132   Unstable Angina and Other Acute Ischemic Heart Disease                                             17394
HHS_HCC135   Heart Infection/Inflammation, Except Rheumatic                                                      7897
HHS_HCC142   Specified Heart Arrhythmias                                                                        25450
HHS_HCC145   Intracranial Hemorrhage                                                                            12016
HHS_HCC146   Ischemic or Unspecified Stroke                                                                     12430
HHS_HCC149   Cerebral Aneurysm and Arteriovenous Malformation                                                   20208
HHS_HCC150   Hemiplegia/Hemiparesis                                                                              8427
HHS_HCC151   Monoplegia, Other Paralytic Syndromes                                                              31520
HHS_HCC153   Atherosclerosis of the Extremities with Ulceration or Gangrene                                     21349
HHS_HCC154   Vascular Disease with Complications                                                                37919


                                                                                                          40
HHS_HCC156               Pulmonary Embolism and Deep Vein Thrombosis                                                   98109
HHS_HCC158               Lung Transplant Status/Complications                                                          17645
HHS_HCC159               Cystic Fibrosis                                                                                7308
HHS_HCC162               Fibrosis of Lung and Other Lung Disorders                                                     13066
HHS_HCC163               Aspiration and Specified Bacterial Pneumonias and Other Severe Lung Infections                23984
HHS_HCC183               Kidney Transplant Status                                                                      98990
HHS_HCC184               End Stage Renal Disease                                                                       10450
HHS_HCC217               Chronic Ulcer of Skin, Except Pressure                                                        41301
HHS_HCC226               Hip Fractures and Pathological Vertebral or Humerus Fractures                                 21778
HHS_HCC227               Pathological Fractures, Except of Vertebrae, Hip, or Humerus                                  83438
HHS_HCC251               Stem Cell, Including Bone Marrow, Transplant Status/Complications                             31817
HHS_HCC253               Artificial Openings for Feeding or Elimination                                                15400
HHS_HCC254               Amputation Status, Lower Limb/Amputation Complications                                         2416
INT_GROUP_H              1 if adult high cost interaction, else 0                                                     -38758
INT_GROUP_M              1 if adult medium cost interaction, else 0                                                   -17561
RXC_01                   Anti-HIV Agents                                                                               22491
RXC_02                   Anti-Hepatitis C (HCV) Agents, Direct Acting Agents                                           73318
RXC_03                   Antiarrhythmics                                                                               11405
RXC_04                   Phosphate Binders                                                                             27610
RXC_05                   Inflammatory Bowel Disease Agents                                                              9739
RXC_06                   Insulin                                                                                        9103
RXC_07                   Anti-Diabetic Agents, Except Insulin and Metformin Only                                        3198
RXC_08                   Multiple Sclerosis Agents                                                                     61265
RXC_09                   Immune Suppressants and Immunomodulators                                                      30691
RXC_10                   Cystic Fibrosis Agents                                                                        33444
RXC_01_x_HCC001          Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 01 and HCC001
                                                                                                                        7583
RXC_02_x_HCC037          Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 02 and (HCC 037_1 or 036 or 035 or 034)
_1_036_035_034                                                                                                         -2331
RXC_04_x_HCC184          Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 04 and (HCC 184 or 183 or 187 or 188)
_183_187_188                                                                                                           62833
RXC_05_x_HCC048_041      Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 05 and (HCC 048 or 041)                              -8015
RXC_06_x_HCC018          Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 06 and (HCC 018 or 019 or 020 or 021)
_019_020_021                                                                                                            1287
RXC_07_x_HCC018          Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 07 and (HCC 018 or 019 or 020 or 021)
_019_020_021                                                                                                            -298
RXC_08_x_HCC118          Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 08 and HCC 118                                      -10036
RXC_09_x_HCC048_041      Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 09 and (HCC 048 or 041)                              -1583
RXC_09_x_HCC056          Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 09 and HCC 056                                       -7208
RXC_09_x_HCC056_057      Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 09 and (HCC 048 or 041) and (HCC 056 or 057)
_and_048_041                                                                                                          -28236
RXC_09_x_HCC057          Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 09 and HCC 057                                       17662
RXC_10_x_HCC159_158      Additional effect for enrollees with RXC 10 and (HCC 159 or 158)                             109855
SEVERE_V3                Adult severe illness 0/1 marker                                                              -27696
SEVERE_V3_x_G03          1 if adult severe illness and group G03, else 0                                               27579
SEVERE_V3_x_G06          1 if adult severe illness and group G06, else 0                                               61638
SEVERE_V3_x_G08          1 if adult severe illness and group G08, else 0                                               61594
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC006   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC006, else 0                                              58234
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC008   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC008, else 0                                              64532
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC009   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC009, else 0                                              46182
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC010   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC010, else 0                                              62730
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC035   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC035, else 0                                              23233
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC038   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC038, else 0                                              33768
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC115   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC115, else 0                                              41179
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC135   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC135, else 0                                              69171
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC145   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC145, else 0                                              62251
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC153   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC153, else 0                                              33690
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC154   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC154, else 0                                              38871
SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC163   1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC163, else 0                                              34460


                                                                                                                 41
 SEVERE_V3_x_HHS_HCC253     1 if adult severe illness and HHS_HCC253, else 0                                        32119



Appendix C: Multi-Level CCS Diagnosis-Based Groups (% Overlap)*
1 Infectious and parasitic diseases (40.2)
2 Neoplasms (67.5)
3 Metabolic and immunity disorders (57.9)
4 Blood diseases (53.6)
5 Mental Illness (100)**
6 Nervous system diseases (43.1)
7 Circulatory diseases (62.2)
8 Respiratory diseases (40.3)
9 Digestive diseases (47.6)
10 Genitourinary diseases (43.3)
11 Pregnancy and childbirth complications (29.5)
12 Skin diseases (46.0)
13 Musculoskeletal diseases (42.0)
14 Congenital anomalies (59.8)
15 Perinatal conditions (32.1)
16 Injury and poisoning (42.1)
17 Other conditions (38.5)
18 Unclassified codes (50.0)
* % of individuals in the CCS group who also have one of the four chronic conditions (mental
illness, heart disease, cancer, and diabetes) considered in our penalized and constrained regressions.
**Mental illness is excluded from the group CCS measures since it is already represented separately in the table

Appendix D: HCC used in RXC x HCC interactions and their corresponding RXC
  HCC             HCC Definition                                                                           RXC
  HCC001          HIV/AIDS                                                                                 Anti-HIV Agents
  HCC018          Pancreas Transplant Status/Complications                                                 Insulin; Anti-
                  Diabetes with Acute Complications                                                        Diabetic Agents,
  HCC019
                                                                                                           Except Insulin and
  HCC020          Diabetes with Chronic Complications
                                                                                                           Metformin Only
  HCC021          Diabetes without Complication
  HCC034          Liver Transplant Status/Complications                                                    Anti-Hepatitis C
                                                                                                           (HCV) Agents,
  HCC035          End-Stage Liver Disease
                                                                                                           Direct Acting
  HCC036          Cirrhosis of Liver                                                                       Agents
  CC037_1         Chronic Viral Hepatitis C
                                                                                                           Inflammatory
                                                                                                           Bowel Disease
  HCC041          Intestine Transplant Status/Complications                                                Agents; Immune
                                                                                                           Suppressants and
  HCC048          Inflammatory Bowel Disease                                                               Immunomodulators
  HCC056          Rheumatoid Arthritis and Specified Autoimmune Disorders                                  Immune
                                                                                                           Suppressants and
  HCC057          Systemic Lupus Erythematosus and Other Autoimmune Disorders                              Immunomodulators
                                                                                                           Multiple Sclerosis
  HCC118          Multiple Sclerosis                                                                       Agents

                                                                                                               42
HCC142   Specified Heart Arrhythmias                Antiarrhythmics
                                                    Cystic Fibrosis
HCC158   Lung Transplant Status/Complications
                                                    Agents
HCC159   Cystic Fibrosis
HCC183   Kidney Transplant Status                   Phosphate Binders
HCC184   End Stage Renal Disease
HCC187   Chronic Kidney Disease, Stage 5
HCC188   Chronic Kidney Disease, Severe (Stage 4)




                                                      43
