                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    GLOBOTICS AND DEVELOPMENT:
        WHEN MANUFACTURING IS JOBLESS AND SERVICES ARE TRADABLE

                                        Richard Baldwin
                                         Rikard Forslid

                                      Working Paper 26731
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26731


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We acknowledge financial support from the UN University's WIDER; the paper was first
presented at the WIDER Development Conference in partnership with UNESCAP, 11-13
September 2019, in Bangkok, Thailand The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Richard Baldwin and Rikard Forslid. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Globotics and Development: When Manufacturing is Jobless and Services are Tradable
Richard Baldwin and Rikard Forslid
NBER Working Paper No. 26731
February 2020
JEL No. F6,F63,O1

                                         ABSTRACT

Globalization and robotics (globotics) are transforming the world economy at an explosive pace.
While much of the literature has focused on rich nations, the changes are quite likely to affect
developing nations in important ways. The premise of the paper - which should be regarded as a
thought-piece - is based on an extreme thought experiment. What does development look like
when digitech has rendered manufacturing jobless and many services freely traded? Our
conclusion is that the service-led development path may become the norm rather than the
exception; think India, not China. Since success in the service sector is based on quite different
factors than success in manufacturing, development strategies and mindsets may have to change.
This is an optimistic conclusion since it suggests that developing nations can directly export the
source of their comparative advantage - low-cost labor -without having first to make goods with
that labor.


Richard Baldwin
Graduate Institute, Geneva
Pavillard 6
CH-1009 Pully
SWITZERLAND
and CEPR
and also NBER
rbaldwin@cepr.org

Rikard Forslid
Stockholm University
Department of Economics
Stockholm University
106 91 Stockholm
Sweden
Rikard.Forslid@ne.su.se
Globotics and Development: When
Manufacturing is Jobless and Services are
Tradable
Richard Baldwin & Rikard Forslid, October 2019


1. Introduction

Globalization and robotics (globotics) are transforming the world economy at an explosive pace
since they are driven by digital technology that is advancing in phenomenal increments--
increments that get twice as large every couple of years or so. The impact of the change is likely
to be felt quite strongly in developed nations (Brynjolfsson and McAfee 2014, Baldwin 2019). 1
The change is also quite likely to transform development in important ways.

This paper ­ which should be considered as a `thought piece' ­ argues that the globotics
transformation is likely to disable the traditional manufacturing-led development `journey' of the
type China is taking, while enabling the service-led development journey of the type India is
following. Since these conjectures concern the future, they're unprovable. Nevertheless, we
believe they merit consideration.

A growing body of evidence has begun to challenge the view that manufacturing is the prime
route for development (e.g. Loungani et al. 2017; Hallward-Driemeier and Nayyar 2017). First,
many of the pro-development characteristics traditionally associated with manufacturing--
tradability, scale, innovation and learning-by-doing--are increasingly features of services (Ghani
and O'Connell 2014, Schwarzer and Stephenson et al 2019). Second, digital technology is
reshaping globalization in a way that is making services easier to trade by creating forms of
communication that make remote workers seem less remote (OECD 2019). Third, other aspects
of digital technology (`digitech') are changing the nature of manufacturing by replacing the
`manu' with robots, so that we now speak of `robofacturing', (Gilchrist 2016).

Taken together, these aspects of globotics are pulling the rug from under traditional
development strategies that equates development with industrialization. While nations may still
export robofactured goods, these sectors will be more like oil wells that create value and exports
but few jobs.

The premise of the paper is based on an extreme thought experiment. That is, we ask: what does
development look like when manufacturing becomes jobless, but most services are freely traded?
More precisely, we assume that digitech's advance has no effect on the trade costs of goods, but
a big effect on the labor-cost share for manufacturing goods. For services, we assume the




1This paper draws on previous work the authors have published; it is intended as a policy piece aimed at a broader
audience rather than a free piece of original research.



1
opposite: trade costs for services falls a lot, but the labor-cost shares are unaffected. The basic
point is illustrated in Figure A.

Figure A: Globotics and development


           "Globotics Upheaval" "Development"
                   "Globotics"

                                                                Manufacturing-led
                                 Automation                    development harder

    Digitech
                                Globalization                     Service-led
                                                               development easier


We start with a historical perspective on the current transformation (Section 2) before turning to
a consideration of the technology (Section 3) and a closer look at the economic logic that is
making manufacturing jobless and services traded (Section 4). These background considerations
are then matched with case studies that contrast the experiences of India, the Philippines, and
China (Section 5), and a more thorough consideration of a form of services trade called
telemigration (Section 6). The paper ends with a section on how we might conceptualize service-
led development (Section 7), and a consideration of how mindsets might have to change when
switching from national development strategies premised on industrialization to those premised
on service exports (Section 8). Our hope is that this thought piece inspires reflection among
policy makers as well as empirical research on the hypotheses posited.


2. The globotics transformation in historical perspective

Many believe that the economy is on the cusp of a third grand transformation; there are various
names for it--the `rise of the robots', the `Second Machine Age', and the Fourth Industrial
Revolution'­to name a few. 2 Another name for it is the globotics transformation--a
portmanteau word that stresses how the changes are being driven by both globalization and
automation. We start by putting the globotics transformation into an historical perspective to
illustrate how grand transformations naturally arise from technological breakthroughs (Table 1).

The first transformation shifted people from farms to factories and it was driven by
mechanization. The second transformation shifted people from factories to offices and it was
driven by computerization. The third has yet to happen, so its impact on jobs is harder to
encapsulate; it is driven by machine learning and communication technologies (Table 1).



2
  See E. Brynjolfsson and A. McAfee's (2014) The Second Machine Age, M. Ford's 2015 Rise of the Robots:
Technology and the Threat of a Jobless Future, K. Schwab's 2017 The Fourth Industrial Revolution, and the
2018 McKinsey Global Institute discussion paper `Notes from the AI Frontier: Modeling the Impact of AI on
the World Economy' by J. Bughin, J. Seong, J. Manyika, M. Chui, and R. Joshi.


2
Table 1: The three grand economic transformation in modern times

                                                                    Related               Related
                        Employment            Technological         automation            globalization
 Transformation         shift                 breakthrough          starts                starts

 The Great                                    Mechanical
 Transformation      From farm to             power (steam,
 (industrialization) factory                  etc.)                 1720                  1820

 The Service
 Transformation
 (post-industrial       From factory to
 society)               office                Computerization 1973                        1990

                        From service to
                        sheltered service
 The Globotics          jobs in G7; into
 Transformation         export services
 (sheltered service     in Emerging           Machine
 society)               Markets               learning              2016?                 2016?

Note: The year 2016 was chosen since Fortune and Forbes magazines dubbed it the year of artificial intelligence
(AI) (despite the phrase having been coined in the 1950s). Source: Authors' elaboration.

2.1 The Great Transformation

The first transformation--what Karl Polanyi called the `Great Transformation'­started in the
early 1700s. It moved people from the farm to the factory, and from the countryside to the
city--all while shifting the focus of value creation from land to capital.

This one really does deserve its capitalized `G'. As well as lengthening life expectancies,
eliminating plagues and pests, supporting a quantum jump in the human population, and
sparking modern economic progress and the spread of democracy, it produced two world wars,
and the Great Depression. The resolution of the backlash involved the rise of imperialism,
fascism, communism, and New Deal capitalism.

According to O'Rourke and Williamson (2001), modern globalization started around 1820. The
automation aspect of the Great Transformation started a century before when commercially
useful steam engines were first deployed. Within rich nations, the transformation eventually
lowered income and wealth inequality in a dramatic fashion--the last phase of which is called the
Great Compression (Goldin and Margo 1992). The nature of technology helps explain this.

Mechanization put massive power into the hands of manual workers and thus vastly boosted
their productivity. It also helped people who worked with their heads--think of ballpoint pens,
calculators, electric lights, and telephones. But the technology's first-order effect was to create
better tools for manual work, not for mental work. Since manual-worker wages were lower than
average to start with, the pro-manual bias of the technology was equalizing.

However, that is not what happened internationally. While equalizing within industrialized
countries, the transformation was un-equalizing cross nations. For developing nations, a key
aspect of the Great Transformation was the `Great Divergence', or what Lant Pritchett calls
`Divergence, Big Time'. Civilizations in Asia and Africa had dominated world economic,


3
political, cultural, military, religious, artistic, and social matters for over four thousand years. But
they found themselves under the thumb of previously primitive countries in the northwest
promontory of the Eurasian landmass, together with their settler offshoots (Fernandez-Armesto
1995; Frankopan 2016).

2.2 The services transformation

The second transformation, which shifted economies to a post-industrial society, might be called
the `services transformation'. It started in the early 1970s when the share of jobs in industry
peaked in many rich nations, and workers started moving from factories to offices (Touraine
1971). Urbanization continued apace, but the source of value creation started shifting from
capital to knowledge--eventually giving rise to what some call `capitalism without the capital'
(Haskel and Westlake 2018).

The automation part of this second economic transformation can be dated to 1973­the year the
computer-on-a-chip was patented. As it turned out, the combination of computer chips and
robotic arms permitted the automation of many manufacturing tasks that previously required
humans.

The globalization part came around 1990 when information and communication technology
(ICT) reach a level that allowed rich-nation firms to unbundle their factories and ship some
manufacturing stages abroad, along with chunks of their advanced manufacturing know-how
(Baldwin 2016). Globalization now meant that factories were crossing borders, not just goods
crossing borders. The big change, however, was not the offshoring of jobs. It was the ability of
rich-nation manufacturing firms to create a new form of competitiveness. Now they could make
manufactured goods using high-tech, combined with low-wage labor. Before, firms had to use
high-tech and high wages in rich nations, or low-tech and low wages in poor nations.

In industrial nations, computerization reversed the equalizing trend associated with the first
transformation (Figure 1). Computerization destroyed jobs for those who worked mostly with
their hands (in factories) while making jobs for those who mostly worked with their minds (in
offices). The ICT, in other words, created good substitutes for those working with their hands,
but better tools for those working with their heads. Since incomes of the `hand workers' were
lower than that of the `head workers', the biased technological progress drove inequality to late
19th century levels. Again, the international impact was just the opposite.

Figure 1: Equalizing and unequalizing economic transformations




Source: Baldwin (2019), which is based on data provided privately by Max Roser (Our World in Data).




4
A key implication for the developing world was a partial undoing of the Great Divergence. Once
the novel technology launched the new globalization where factories were crossing borders, it
produced what could be called the `Great Convergence' (Baldwin 2016). The advanced
economies deindustrialized and their growth diminished, while many developing nations
industrialized and their growth boomed.

The nature of the new globalization helps explain the turnaround in international inequality. The
geographic unbundling of manufacturing facilities and offshoring of some manufacturing stages
was accompanied by an unprecedented international shift of manufacturing know-how. The
Canada-based firm Bombardier, for example, started making the tails of some of their business
jets in central Mexico, but not with Mexican manufacturing know-how. Bombardier `taught'
Mexico how to make parts that would have taken the latter decades to master on its own.
Industrial offshoring, in other words, was a massive movement of technology from rich-nation
firms to facilities located in a handful of developing nations (those who got to join global value
chains).

And then the equalizing impact spread. Rapid industrialization of a handful of developing
nations triggered rapid income growth, which in turn launched a commodity super-cycle.
Commodity-exporting developing nations experienced rapid commodity-export-led development
as a result. The G7's share of world GDP, for example, fell from about two-thirds in the late
1980s to under a half today due to the fact that many emerging markets grew two to five times
faster than the G7.

2.3 The globotics transformation

The third transformation has just started, so all that follows is conjecture. Like the last one, this
transformation is likely to focus on the service sector but the impact is likely to be very
different--especially for developed nations. Workers in advanced economies are likely to shift
from service jobs to `sheltered' service jobs (Baldwin 2019). In this paper, we argue that workers
in developing nations are likely to shift from agriculture and manufacturing to export-oriented
service sectors.

Inside developed and developing nations, this is likely to be unequalizing, but the transformation
is likely to continue the `great convergence' internationally as more emerging nations emerge on
the back of service-export-led growth. Urbanization is likely to continue worldwide. Value
creation is likely to continue shifting from capital to knowledge (human capital and explicit
intellectual property).

The impact of mechanization, computerization, and now machine learning on automation are
easy to grasp. Understanding the dramatic shifts in the nature and consequences of globalization
requires some background since it does not fit within the standard paradigm that focuses on
goods crossing borders.

2.4 Understanding globalization's radical changes

Changes in globalization are a big part of how digital technology is changing the realities facing
developing nations. Since we are discussing the third big change in globalization, it is worth
putting it into a framework in which the changes all fit together in a single piece of intellectual
infrastructure. One name for this is the `three cascading constraints' view of globalization
(Baldwin 2016).




5
The framework views globalization as international arbitrage. In the first phase of globalization,
the focus is on arbitrage of goods. Goods and manufacturing know-how constitute the second
phase of globalization. And goods, know-how, and labor services make up the third phase. 3
Arbitrage in goods, know-how, and labor services is hindered by the cost of moving goods,
know-how, and people. The three phases of globalization emerged when these three costs
plummeted in sequence: first the cost of moving goods (thanks to steam power), then the cost of
moving ideas (due to ICT), and lastly face-to-face costs (owing to digital technology). We start by
considering globalization's first phase in a bit more detail.

Globalization's `first unbundling' launches the Great Divergence

Modern globalization started in the early 1800s with arbitrage in goods. Technological
breakthroughs in mechanical power radically lowered the cost of moving goods over long
distances. Once this was possible, national differences in comparative advantage made it
profitable. This was globalization's `first unbundling'­the spatial decoupling of production and
consumption of goods (before, the production of most goods was spatially bundled with their
consumption).

Lower trade costs, however, didn't make the world `flat'. In fact, the opposite happened and the
world's economic geography became lumpier. Inside industrializing nations like Britain,
manufacturing shifted from cottages to factories. Why was this?

The ability to sell to world markets shifted the advantage to firms operating at previously
unknown scales of production, which involved previously unknown levels of complexity. To
economize on coordination costs--basically communication costs--firms micro-clustered the
production into huge factories. Interestingly, this knock-on effect of globalization produced a
revolution in human affairs.

Large-scale manufacturing boosted the demand for innovation. Any firm that could make goods
better or cheaper faced a handsome reward in the world market. Simultaneously, the micro-
clustering of production boosted the supply of innovations since it meant having lots of people
in the same place thinking about similar problems. Productivity surged in today's advanced
economies and this sparked a cycle of industrialization, innovation, and income growth. But
since it was still very difficult to move know-how across borders--especially the sort of
complex, tacit knowledge it takes to run large-scale industry--the innovations stayed local.

This is why advanced-economy growth took off sooner and remained faster than it did in the
ancient civilizations in China, India/Pakistan, Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Turkey, etc. Due to the magic of
compound growth, the two centuries of income growth asymmetries produced what Kenneth
Pomeranz called `the Great Divergence' (Pomeranz 2000). For example, per capita incomes
weren't too dissimilar in the US and China in 1820, but by 1970 US income was almost 20 times
higher.

In short, mechanical power loosened the constraint on arbitrage in goods, but not the constraint
on arbitrage of know-how. The booming trade in goods combined with little trade in know-how
meant that the North industrialized and grew while the South deindustrialized and grew at a
slower pace.




3   Many other things could be added to this list, especially, financial capital.



6
Little wonder then that manufacturing-led growth became an idée-fixe in the minds of scholars
and governments. Globalization's next phase did nothing to unfix the idée.

Globalization's `second unbundling' and the Great Convergence

The constraint on moving know-how across borders loosened from the late 1980s with
revolutionary advances in ICT. Excellent, cheap, and reliable communications made it technically
feasible to geographically unbundle the micro-clustered processes across borders while still
keeping the disperse parts operating as a whole.

Once this `second unbundling' had become feasible, the vast wage gap caused by the Great
Divergence made the unbundling profitable. More precisely, it allowed firms in advanced
economies to arbitrage international differences in know-how per worker by combining their
firm-specific manufacturing know-how with low wages in developing nations.

The North-to-South flow of know-how was not an unintended consequence; it was the key to
the arbitrage. The point is that since the offshored production stages had to work together with
those left onshore, the offshoring firms had to send their marketing, managerial, and technical
know-how along with the offshored jobs. This, in turn, meant that the flows of knowledge that
used to happen only inside rich-nation factories had now become part of globalization. These
flows allowed a handful of developing nations to industrialize at a dizzying pace--and the result
was a massive shift of industry from the North to the South.

This second unbundling was ultimately responsible for the `Great Convergence' that the world
has seen since the late 1980s. But the driving force was actually the arbitrage of know-how and
not the offshoring of production stages. The point is that know-how is the key to modern
growth, so the massive flows of manufacturing know-how sparked unprecedented rates of
industrialization and income growth in the receiving nations. Since the handful of rapidly
industrializing nations accounted for a big slice of the world population, the rapid income
sparked a commodity boom, or super-cycle, that allowed many commodity-exporting nations,
e.g. in Africa, to profit from the second unbundling via commodity exports rather than
participation in international supply chains. By the same token, the offshoring of industrial jobs
amplified the loss of jobs from automation in the advanced economies.

These changes meant that the growth asymmetry from the first unbundling was flipped on its
head. Some developing nations have grown many times faster than advanced economies since
the 1990s.

Globotics and globalization's `third unbundling'

The globalization part of globotics can be thought of as a `third unbundling'--the geographic
separation of labor and labor services. Digital technology is lowering face-to-face costs at a
frenetic pace, and this, in turn, is making it easier for people to provide services internationally.
Technology is making this separation feasible. Vast wage differences are making it profitable. In
the arbitrage framework, this is international arbitrage in labor services.

We discuss this trade in services much more extensively below and give special attention to
`telemigration' which involves the sort of trade that happens when workers sitting in one nation
telecommute into offices in another. Barriers to the export of labor services are not only about
the cost of meetings; some types of service providers have to be in front of a machine to get the
job done. But digitech is changing this reality, and the introduction of 5G will only accelerate this



7
change. There are already instances of these `telerobots' being controlled at long ranges.
Telesurgery and drone operations are two examples of this.

As various forms of virtual presence technology are combined with human-controlled robots, an
expanding range of manual services could be provided at distance. At the high end, technicians
could conduct inspections or undertake repairs from remote locations, and nurses in the
Philippines could care for elderly people in Japan. At the low end, hotel rooms in Oslo could be
cleaned by robots controlled by cleaners in Kenya. Lawns in Texas could be maintained by
robots steered by gardeners sitting who live in Mexico.

As with telepresence, the widespread use of telerobots is constrained by high costs. But if it is
possible to develop systems that allow surgeons to patch people up at a distance, surely it is
possible to develop systems that allow technicians sitting in Stuttgart to fix machinery in Brazil.
Given the falling cost of manufacturing products, the rapid expansion of bandwidth, and the
reduction in latency that will come with 5G, it would seem to be only a matter of time before the
face-to-face and face-to-machine constraints are relaxed.

The implications for global economic geography are likely to be immense. Digitech will allow
developing nations to better exploit their key comparative advantage of very low-cost labor,
namely, even when quality-adjusted. So, instead of developing-nation workers having to embed
their labor in a product and then export that product to exploit this advantage, they will
increasingly be able to export labor services directly. This should keep the emerging-market
miracle going and allow it to spread. It is easy to imagine that Africa would tend to provide
services to Europe, Latin America, and North America, while Southeast Asia concentrate more
on Northeast Asia, since time zones are a more critical factor for service delivery


3. Digitech--why this time is different

Economists have a very natural and healthy tendency to view research as a linear approximation
around a steady state. Each contribution is small, and those that look like they are not, are
usually old wine in new bottles (no value creation) or, worse yet, new wine in old bottles (false
value creation). The tendency is in full swing when it comes to many economists' reaction to
digital technology. Digital technology, after all, is really just ICT that is faster and cheaper. Since
ICT has been a factor since the late 1980s or early 1990s, claims that digitech is changing the
world tend to get classified as old wine in new bottles. In this section, we make the argument
that something has radically changed.

3.1 Computers gain a new type of cognitive capacity

During the 1970s when computers became generally useful, automation crossed one cognitive
threshold. Computerization allowed the automation of many tasks that previously had to be
done by hand. The way today's robot arms in automobile assembly plants sense and interact with
chassis as they pass down the line would look very much like magic to a 1950s worker--or, at
the very least, like science fiction.

But the range of tasks that can be automated is, even today, highly restricted compared to the
vast range of tasks done by all workers in all occupations. Mostly, the automation affected
routine, repetitive, manual tasks like those found in assembly-line factories. Indeed, a very large
share of industrial robots work in the automotive sector. This limitation was not due to a lack of
creativity on the part of factory designers and there was a very clear structural reason for the
limited automation.


8
Computers back then were just following an explicit set of logical steps called a computer
program. Automation was limited by computer programming, and machines were strictly
obedient to the computer code written by a human. And since a human could only program in
the type of thinking that people understand, the cognitive capabilities of computers were limited
to a narrow range of human thinking. This cognitive limitation created Moravec's Paradox.

Hans Moravec wrote: `It is comparatively easy to make computers exhibit adult level
performance on intelligence tests or play checkers, but difficult or impossible to give them the
skills of a one-year-old when it comes to perception and mobility' (Moravec 1988). In short,
computers were good at doing the tasks that humans found hard, but bad at executing tasks that
humans found easy. And the reason was all down to the nature of classical computer
programming.

Humans have been using computer programs to teach computers how to carry out tasks. But
this meant that computers could only perform tasks where we actually understand how the
human mind carries the task. This ruled out a vast range of mental tasks. As Marvin Minsky put
it, humans are: `least aware of what our minds do best'. Machine learning--which really came
into its stride around 2016--solved this paradox by skipping the programming. The Nobel-
winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman characterized Minsky's distinction between the thinking
we do best and the thinking we are aware of as `thinking slow and fast'.

With machine learning, computers started to be able to do some types of fast thinking as well as
the slow thinking they'd been doing since the beginning. With machine learning, computers
could do some of the things that human brains do well, but where it was impossible to write a
classic computer program because humans are unaware of how they perform the task (like
recognizing a cat in a photo). How does machine learning do this?

It is significant that computer scientists use the word `training' instead of the word
`programming' when they develop computer programs to perform thinking-fast tasks. Machine
learning `trains' a very large statistical model that is designed to guess solutions to particular
problems. This requires very large amounts of data and huge amounts of computing power to
invert the matrices needed to `train', i.e. estimate, the computer model.

With this new way of `programming' computers, white-collar robots (i.e. artificial intelligence, or
AI, software) can perform as well as humans in many new mental tasks, like photo recognition,
handwriting recognition, or language translation. This is one key reason that this time is
different. Software robots can perform a whole range of mental tasks that they were not capable
of before 2016. Of course, this breakthrough was incremental and based on advancing ICT
(gathering, storing, process, and transmitting information), but the result was quite discrete. Most
people in developing nations are using vastly more AI-enabled services without even knowing it.

As it turned out, many of the new mental capacities gained by computers are useful in the office
and service jobs. So many new service-sector tasks are more automatable now than previously
and this is one reason digital technology is more than just better ICT.

As far as development is concerned, the upshot is that many manufacturing tasks that previously
required a human hand can now be automated with robots. And many office tasks involving
information `assembly-line' work can be automated by robotic process automation (RPA) suites,
virtual assistants, and the like. This matters in offices, but the trend means that factories are
requiring significantly fewer manual workers.




9
3.2 Globalization and automation are also affecting the service sector

To date, the gains and pains of globalization and automation have been mostly felt by the
manufacturing sector or commodity-producing sectors--both in developed and developing
nations. But in future, these gains and pains will also be felt by professional and service-sector
jobs. However, since most services are underpriced in developing nations compared to
developed nations, it is likely that this will mostly represent an export opportunity for developing
nations and an import opportunity for developed nations. The basic point here is that in the past
service jobs were shielded by high face-to-face costs. But as digital technology tears down those
barriers, the difference between the wages of an accountant in, say, the UK and Kenya will
narrow.

Another big difference between today's transformation and the last two is timing. During the
Great Transformation, globalization started a century after automation (1820 versus 1720). For
the service transformation, the lag was two decades (1970 versus 1990). However, today's
globotics transformation is seeing new forms of globalization, and automation taking off at the
same time.

3.3 A different physics applies

Speed is another reason that it's different this time. Globalization and automation in the past two
transformations were mostly about physical goods in the manufacturing, mining, and farm
sectors. The globotics transformation will have its main impact on the movement and
automation of the manipulation of digitized ideas, i.e. data and services. The big difference lies in
the fact that the laws of physics for data and goods are very different.

To illustrate this difference, we observe that it would be physically impossible to double imports
and exports in 24 months. World information flows, by contrast, have doubled every two years
for decades, and they are projected to continue doubling every couple of years for a decade at
least. Electrons can ignore many of the laws of physics that slow down globalization and
automation in industry and agriculture. This is why historical lessons must be treated with great
care when applied to the third transformation.

The next section considers in more depth how digitech is making manufacturing jobless and
nontraded while making services freely traded.


4. Globotics are making manufactures less traded and services more traded

Every economic theory starts with a handful of bold and useful--but incorrect--distinctions
and assumptions. Or as Krugman (1994) put it when describing Albert Hirschman's theorizing:
`You make a set of clearly untrue simplifications to get the system down to something you can
handle; those simplifications are dictated partly by guesses about what is important, partly by the
modeling techniques available. And the end result, if the model is a good one, is an improved
insight into why the vastly more complex real system behaves the way it does.'

When it comes to trade theory, one of the most useful--but most incorrect--distinctions has
been to separate things into traded and nontraded categories. When using simple models to talk
about reality--where services often make up a very thick wedge of the economy's total
production, consumption, and trade--the standard approach is to take all services as nontraded
and all goods as traded. The usual justification is that the trade costs for services are many times




10
higher than they are for goods, since many services require face-to-face interactions, and moving
people is very expensive.

Since digitech is shifting the ground when it comes to automation of goods production and the
cost that remoteness engenders for services, we review the basic economics of tradability as the
first step toward organizing our thinking on how digitech will affect the tradability of goods and
services.

4.1 Production-cost differences versus trade costs

We start from the simple proposition that goods will be traded if international differences in
production costs (using a very broad definition of production costs) exceed international
`separation' costs (using a very broad definition of separation costs), i.e. the cost of moving
goods, ideas, people, capital, and services from sellers in one nation to buyers in another.
Operationalizing this point requires more specificity.

We conceptualize the cost of production of a given good or service as consisting of two
components: the unit labor cost and the unit cost of all other inputs. The unit labor cost in
sector i in a typical country consists of a unit-labor input coefficient, ai, and the wage, so that the
unit labor cost is wai. The non-labor costs, which we denote as ri, consists of machines,
intermediate inputs, and the like. For simplicity, we assume labor is perfectly nontraded, but all
non-labor factors are freely traded and so cost the same in all nations (thus ri has no country
superscript). The unit production cost for good or service i in typical industry nation n is thus:

 =   
      + 

The proportional difference between the production cost of i in two nations (denoted by the
superscripts n and s, short for `North' and `South') is:
  
 -                   
       =  1 -   
                       


where  is the labour-cost share in North.

In words, this equation says that the cost difference depends upon the relative labor cost in the
two nations and the importance of labor in total costs. A good or service is traded if the
proportional production-cost differences exceed the proportional separation cost. In the
extreme, a labor-cost share of zero would imply a zero production-cost differential across
countries since all other factors of production are freely traded.

The endogeneity of tradability, and how digitech changes it, requires us to look across all goods
and services. To this end, we employ a modified version of the Dornbusch, Fisher, and
Samuelson (1977) analysis. To start simply, we initially ignore trade costs and focus only on
comparative advantage, which means, in a trading equilibrium, comparative costs.

4.2 Comparative advantage and trade costs in a simple diagram

Comparative advantage analysis starts with a comparison of nations' sector-by-sector
competitiveness. For simplicity's sakes, we limit ourselves to two nations, North and South.
North is at the technological frontier while South is not, in the sense that Northern labor is more
productive in every sector. We also assume that North's technological edge is greater in some




11
sectors than others. Since North labor is more productive in every sector, the Northern wage, in
equilibrium, exceeds the Southern wage (measured in terms of the numeraire).

As is well-known from standard comparative advantage analysis, equilibrium wages will be such
that the North's comparative advantage sectors are those where its technological strengths are
most marked. For the South, its comparative-advantage sectors are those where its technological
weaknesses are the least telling. A simple way to illustrate this is to plot the proportional
production-cost difference for each sector, namely (cs-cn)/cs, having d the sectors so that the
differences are declining as in the diagram (Figure 2).

Figure 2: Endogenous tradability diagram




Source: Authors' elaboration.

The horizontal axis of the diagram lists the sectors--denoted by the shorthand A, B, C, etc.,
recalling that the sectors are labeled such that the North's cost advantage over South is highest in
A and lowest in H. Think of sector A as, say, a high-tech capital good, and sector G as, say,
cotton shirts.

North exports the goods/services where its technology edge outweighs its higher wage, i.e.
where the South's proportional cost difference is positive (sectors A to D); South exports the
other sectors. As a matter of convention, we assume that there is no production-cost difference
in Sector E. Note that the North-South wage ratio is endogenous and not addressed in the
diagram. We know, however, that in equilibrium, the wages must adjust such that North exports
some goods and South exports others. Since the point of this conceptualization is to examine the
determinants of tradability, we introduce trade costs.

Even in today's world, trade costs are quite substantial for most manufactured goods. One
often-cited estimate by Anderson and Van Wincoop (2004) puts the ad valorem cost at 170% on
average. More recent work indicates that these costs have fallen, but not much; trade costs are
still adding something like 100% to the price of imported goods on average. Allowing for trade
cost is simple in the figure. The trade costs are represented by the dashed horizontal lines.

Consider a sector, like D, where South's proportional production cost is higher than North's but
the gap is less than the per-unit trade cost (i.e. D is below the upper horizontal dashed line). In


12
this case, Northern goods will not be cost-competitive in South, given that they must bear the
trade costs. By the same token, Southern D goods are uncompetitive in North, so each nation
makes its own D. Good D is thus endogenously nontraded; its production is fully localized. Or
to put it in unbundling terms, production and consumption are fully bundled in the D sector.
The same holds for the E and F sectors.

This setup allows us to focus on two determinants of tradability--the trade costs and the labor-
cost share. Automation is rapidly lowering the latter.

4.3 Digitech drives manufacturing automation and lowers service-trade costs 4

All around the world--including in developing nations--machines are taking over tasks that
used to be performed by factory workers. The result has been a significant drop in the number
of workers involved in manufacturing and thus a drop in the labor-cost share (see, for example,
Dinlersoz and Wolf 2018 or Dauth et al. 2018). Whereas jobs in developing countries are still
less exposed to automation by ICT, this is now changing with rising exposures in developing
economies and falling exposures in developed countries (Das and Hilgenstock 2018). The
resulting reduction in labor-cost shares dampens comparative advantage based on international
differences in technology and wages.

A core premise in this paper is the claim that advancing digitech is lowering trade costs as well as
labor-cost shares in both goods and services, but not at the same pace. For services, digitech is
radically lowering trade costs, but lowering the labor-cost share only marginally (since robotic
automation is still mostly focused on manufacturing). For manufactured goods, digitech is only
marginally lowering trade costs (the big steps came with containerization and air cargo), but
radically lowering the labor-cost share via robotics.

We simplify to clarify by positing extreme assumptions. We assume that digitech's advance has
no effect on the cost of trading goods, but a big effect on labor-cost share in goods production.
For services, we assume the opposite: digitech has a big downward effect on the cost of trading
services, but an insignificant impact on the labor-cost shares in services. The effects of these
assumptions are easy to study in the diagram (Figure 3).




4   This section draws heavily on Baldwin and Forslid (2014) and Baldwin (2016, Chapter 7).



13
Figure 3: Digitech's impact on the tradability of goods and services




Source: Authors' elaboration.

In the left panel, which represents the impact of digitech on services trade, the dashed horizontal
lines both approach zero. The result is that more services become tradable. Specifically, sectors
B, C, G, and H switch from nontraded to traded. In the right panel, which represents digitech's
impact on goods sectors, the reduced labor-cost shares rotate the relative cost-competitiveness
line counter-clockwise (the fact that it rotates on sector E was chosen as a matter of
convenience). The obvious impact is that additional goods-producing sectors switch from traded
to nontraded.

Intuitively, the pair of results from the left and right panels says that when labor-cost differences
are the key to international competitiveness, labor-saving automation dampens international
production-cost differences. Given constant trade costs, the result is a `rebundling' of
consumption and production. But when digitech primarily lowers trade costs and has little effect
on trade-cost shares, the result is that more types of services are being traded. Obviously, our
extreme assumption on labor-cost shares and trade costs could be softened, and the impact on
endogenous tradability would depend upon the balance of the two changes.

This analysis puts aside a whole range of important factors. For one, there is not free trade in
services (Borchert, Batshur and Mattoo (2012). At least as important is the endogeneity of the
relative wages. A massive reshuffling of tradability of goods and services would surely have a
massive impact on relative wages--just as globalization's first and second unbundlings did. We
do not account for that in this diagram, but it would be simple to include. In the diagram, a
relative wage change would show up as a secondary shifting down in the cost-competitiveness
lines--assuming that the extra service-export opportunities would boost the productivity of
Southern labor more than it would boost the productivity of Northern labor. While allowing for
such considerations will be important in a more formal presentation of the theory, it is clear that
the shift of the trade-cost line for services and a relative cost-curve rotation for goods would lead
to qualitatively identical outcomes--services would become more tradable and remain labor-
intensive, while manufactured goods would become less tradable and less labor-intensive.

The effect of digitech on goods trade can already be seen in data. For example, Artuc et al.
(2018) find that robotization leads to a significant reduction in net imports from less-developed
countries within the same sector.


14
Labor-service arbitrage in a CAGE

The sorts of trade costs that come to mind when using this diagram are largely related to
shipping costs and policy barriers. But these are not the only costs that matter, especially when it
comes to services. Business professor Pankaj Ghemawat has captured many aspects of this point
with his CAGE framework, stressing that cultural, administrative, geographic, and economic
(CAGE) differences between countries create barriers to international commerce (Ghemawat
2001).

Digital technology can help lower some of these barriers, but not all. As we shall see in the case
study of the Philippine service-export industry, one factor that is commonly cited as an
advantage for the country is the ability of Filipinos to understand Western, especially American,
ways of thinking. This is not the place to delve deeply into the implications of broader
constraints on labor services crossing borders, but it is worth noting that digitech alone will
never produce a completely level playing field across advanced- and emerging-economy labor
markets.

We turn next to case studies of three countries that have followed different development routes.


5. Three case studies: India and the Philippines versus China

Since at least the 1950s, development theory has stressed industrialization as a key to
development. China is perhaps the classic example of this trade-and-development paradigm,
although a very different development journey was taken by India--at least de facto. Most of the
policy and scholarly thinking about India's experience remained firmly focused on
manufacturing, but facts on the ground have turned out differently. For example, Basu (2018)
describes it as: `What India saw subsequently was a most unusual growth pattern for a
developing country. It was not the manufacturing sector that led India's growth but the services
sector.'

Two charts help illustrate the stark contrast between China which `did it' based on
manufacturing, and India, which `did it' based on services. The first chart (Figure 5) shows the
sectoral contribution to overall GDP growth stemming from each of the three sectors--
agriculture, manufacturing, and services. China's overall growth was much higher than India's,
showing 10.3% versus 6.7%. However, the chart also clearly shows that while manufacturing was
the dominant sector in terms of growth in China, services were the driving sector in India.

Figure 5: Contribution of different sectors to total GDP growth rate, 1990­2012




Source: Based on data from Ghani and O'Connor (2014)



15
Figure 6: Evolution of net trade positions, India and China




Source: Elaboration by authors based on online World Bank Data.

The second chart (Figure 6) shows the evolution of net trade positions of the two nations in
goods versus services. Since neither India nor China is a major commodity exporter, most of the
goods exported are manufactured goods. The rapid growth period from around 1990 was
associated with India becoming a substantial net exporter of services and a net importer of
goods. The Chinese experience was just the opposite. China's balance of trade in goods swung to
the positive--suggesting that it has a comparative advantage in goods--while its balance in
services swung into negative territory.

Behind this rather stark, macro-level contrast are two enticingly similar development stories. We
start with India's.

5.1 India's trade-and-development journey

India threw off the yolk of British imperialism in 1947 and settled into a development strategy
based on classic 1950s principles. It sought to drive development via rapid industrialization, and
that drive was marked by heavy-handed state intervention combined with an explicit anti-trade
and anti-international investment bias.

Rapid industrialization was the goal. The path was cleared by five-year plans that guided the
central planning body to focus massive resources on the creation and expansion of large
industrial state-owned enterprises. This led to inefficiencies of the type characteristic of centrally
planned systems, but with Indian attributes.

One telling example is that of the Haldia fertilizer plant case (Das 2000). This facility was
established in the 1970s, employed some 1,500 workers and was considered somewhat of a
success. Employees and managers were diligent, showed up to work, and kept the facilities in
good shape. Many were housed in a nearby newly built township that had excellent roads,
schools, and homes. However, the problem was that the plant never produced even an ounce of
fertilizer due to a whole series of problems. This went on for 21 years.

State-owned enterprises, however, were not the only problem. A particularly notable element of
central planning was the tight leash held by planners over private industry. These pervasive
strictures came to be known as the `license Raj' and required firms to have permits for almost
everything. To keep private firms aligned with the plan, firms need a government license to
expand, produce new goods, change the input combination, import inputs or move production


16
plants. On top of this heavy-handed intervention, hiring manufacturing workers was (and still is)
a risky business in India given its extreme employment protection laws, which, even today, are
stricter than those of many Southern European nations. The result was widespread shortages,
delays, and bottlenecks resulting in Indians having to to wait eight years to buy a scooter for
example.

The development results of this strategy were modest. Industry's share of GDP rose from about
15% to about 25% in the period between 1950­1969, although the share has risen only a couple
of percentage points more in the subsequent five decades. On average, overall growth
performance was low and highly variable, at least in part since agriculture's high GDP share
(over 40%) held the economy hostage to weather shocks.

This development strategy started to change in the 1980s with a mild loosening of the licensing
regime and foreign trade and investment restrictions (Panagariya 2004, Rodrik and Subramanian
2005). Average growth rates rose, but part of this stemmed from fiscal spending that turned out
to be unsustainable--a fact that became clear after the 1991 Gulf War debt shock. The shock
raised the cost of imported fuel at the same time as it crushed remittances from Indians working
in Gulf states.

To stave off a foreign exchange crisis, India turned to the International Monetary Fund in 1991
for credit lines. But this credit had strings attached ­ namely reform. By this time, thinking in
India and around the world had shifted away from the old, statist, path of self-reliance toward a
wider embrace of markets and openness. There are many causes of this shift in development
thinking, but the stark contrast between the collapse of the ultimate planned economy--the
USSR--and the roaring success of East-Asian export-dependent economies was surely critical in
changing many minds (planning was important in East Asia, but manufacturing was aimed at
export markets, not just domestic markets).

In cooperation with the International Monetary Fund, the Indian government dismantled the
license Raj, lifted price and entry controls on private firms, sold off several of the old state-
owned enterprises, welcomed foreign investors, lowered domestic tax rates, and cut import
tariffs unilaterally. Areas that remained largely untouched by reforms in the 1990s included the
labor market, small-scale reservations (where there has been some movement only in the last 4­5
years), privatization of both non-financial enterprises and of banks, as well as further agricultural
sector reforms.

The liberalization of investment restrictions was particularly noteworthy. Before 1991, foreign
firms were limited to a 40% ownership ceiling, but once this ceiling was removed, many
multinationals increased their ownership stakes. The outcome was a several-fold increase in
foreign direct investment in just three years (Gosai 2013).

Many G7 firms shifted part of their research and development departments to India, mostly to
reduce costs and/or overcome talent shortages). Likewise, the unbundling of services benefited
India middle-income workers as the country attracted outsourced call centers, medical billing
back-office services, business administration services, and an array of skilled labor-intensive,
insurance-related services.




17
Figure 7: Indian GDP growth rate, 1950­2017




Source: Authors' elaboration based on UNDP Global Multidimensional Poverty Index.

Foreign investment, combined with local information technology (IT) and engineering expertise,
produced masses of new good jobs and triggered the growth of a thriving middle class. In turn,
this new mass domestic market primed the growth pump by attracting more foreign investment
and stimulating job and firm creation that rose to meet the rise in Indian consumer demand.

These reforms helped the overall growth rate to rise from its sub-4% performance for most of
the post-independence period. In recent years, India has become one of the great growth success
stories of the 21st century, lifting hundreds of millions of people out of abject poverty. From the
1980s, and especially from the 1990s, India's growth shifted into higher gear. Now, an annual
growth rate of over 8% is expected by many (see Figure 7), and poverty rates have dropped by
half (from 55% to 28%) between 2005 and 2015 according to UNDPs multidimensional poverty
index.

Note that the connection between the reforms in the 1980s and 1990s, and the resulting growth
take-off has been questioned by Rodrik and Subramanian (2005). They argue that the growth
was not the outcome of economic or policy changes, but rather due to social-psychological
factors that they call `an attitudinal shift' toward a pro-business stance. As they put it: `the trigger
for India's economic growth was an attitudinal shift on the part of the national government ...
that unleashed the animal spirits of the Indian private sector'. Panagariya (2004) disputes their
conclusions, arguing for a more traditional policy-linked explanation, where trade liberalization
and relaxation of industrial controls had a major role.

The service sector and export boom

The post-reform growth pattern, however, was not what many were expecting. The received
wisdom was that adopting the `Washington Consensus' reforms would unleash rapid
industrialization and manufacturing-led-export growth. In India, however, it was the services
sector that led the way (Murthy 2005; Nayyar 2012; Basu 2015). Conventional thinking about
development, especially trade and development, has largely ignored services in general and
service exports in particular, so this outcome was unexpected.



18
The canonical treatment about what we should expect from services in the course of economic
development is highlighted in the study by Eichengreen and Gupta (2009). They document two
distinct phases where the service sector is important in development. First, when an economy
moves from low-income to middle-income, various informal services sectors grow rapidly.
Second, when it moves beyond middle-income, more sophisticated services sectors become
important, such as information technology and finance.

India's post-1991 growth performance was, in essence, the early arrival of the second phase in
the Eichengreen-Gupta story. Basu (2015) describes it as: `this second-stage services sector
growth that happened in India, rather early and with a vigor rarely seen anywhere else'. Even
more intriguing was the fact that the leading service sectors were those of the `knowledge
economy'--a set of activities that were `traditionally viewed as the preserve of advanced
economies'. But perhaps the outcome should not have been so unexpected given the constraints
on Indian manufacturing production and trade.

The Indian education sector has long favored high-quality universities, especially in science,
technology, and engineering disciplines. As a result, it presented an abundance of well-trained
and talented technological workers. However, while this might have fostered manufacturing as it
did in Germany and Switzerland, the policy environment did not allow it. And while reforms
removed some of the barriers, key limitations continued to restrict Indian manufacturing. A poor
transportation infrastructure as well as a great distance to the manufacturing giants (US,
Germany, Japan, and China) tended to shelter the Indian market from foreign competition. And
while this might have fostered production, it also made India an unlikely participant in the global
value chains that had become essential to competitiveness since the late 1980s.

Services, by contrast, were largely unaffected by these constraints. The service sector, especially
the IT services sector, was untouched by transportation issues, faced no explicit import or export
barriers and in addition remained largely untaxed. In short, what Basu (2015) calls `India's over-
production of engineers throughout the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s' matched Silicon Valley's
booming demand for tech workers (and the US's underproduction of engineers).

For a variety of reasons (see Weiner 1991), India spent, and still spends, relatively far more
resources on higher education than on primary education. In 2000, the country spent 86% of per
capita GDP on each student in tertiary education, compared to 14% of per capita GDP per
student in primary education. By contrast, China was spending 10.7% and 12.1% of per capita
GDP per student in tertiary and primary education respectively. And the Indian students coming
through this system were world-class, receiving over 50% of US non-immigrant work visas
requiring specialized skills.

While it is impossible to identify the causes with certainty, the outcome was plain for all to see.
India had become a magnet for IT and knowledge-based jobs that were offshored from
advanced economies, and Western firms were shifting their research and development activities
to the country in order to reduce costs and avoid talent shortages. India was becoming host to
outsourced call centers and many so-called business process outsourcing (BPO) activities,
including many back-office jobs like medical billing, business administration, and labor-intensive
insurance-related services. And this rapid development of the sector was accompanied by the rise
of several world-beating multinationals like Infosys, HCL, and Wipro.

5.2 The Philippines

`I couldn't do my job without her and I tell her that', relates Alison De Kleuver when she was
finance and operations director for the global company EY. Referring to Sandy, her Manila-


19
based remote assistant, De Kleuver continues: `She helps to optimize my time, both in what she
does for me but also in organizing my schedule, and that is invaluable to me' (Tadros 2018). And
it is cheaper. `The key number we're finding with this model is that an offshore [executive
assistant] costs approximately 40% of an onshore executive assistant', according to De Kleuver.
That is a big saving as the firm used to spend between US$50,000 and US$95,000 for an
executive assistant in Sydney or Melbourne. This is not an unusual story.

The Philippines has also reaped the benefits of the technological-led freeing of service-sector
trade. `Rarely has a new industry traced the trajectory from concept to prime economic driver as
quickly as business process outsourcing (BPO) has in the Philippines', noted a report by the
consultancy Oxford Business Group (2016). The sector, in particular the call center industry has
seen stellar growth, soaring from 2,400 employees across just four operations in 2,400 in 2000 to
375,5000 employees across 425 call center operations in 2012 (Chang and Huynh 2016).

In 2000, the IT-based business process outsourcing (IT-BPO) sector was contributing almost
nothing to the nation's GDP. By 2016 it had accounted for about 7% of GDP and was
employing over 1.1 million; 1,000% more than in 2004 (IBPAP 2016). Indeed, IT-BPO is the
country's largest private employer of white-collar workers. The industry projects the creation of
over 600,000 new jobs in the sector by 2022. And these are good jobs, with IT-BPO employees
typically earning twice the national average in the Philippines.

A bit on the history

So, why the Philippines? The answer lies partly in factor `endowments' and partly in government
policy. The international BPO industry was attracted by the country's youthful, literate
population, armed with good English-language communication skills. Some analysts also cite
Filipinos' strong customer-service orientation as well as the country's adaptability to consumers'
Western culture as an advantage (IBPAP 2016). It also helped that the government set up special
economic zones in 1995 that provided tax incentives to call center operators.

While this push was led by call centers, the availability of talented, low-cost service workers also
attracted multinationals interested in setting up `shared services offices'. These are offices where
a variety of the company's operations, such as accounting, payroll, human resources, and various
legal and IT services are clustered together and offshored to reduce the wage bill. Companies
engaging in these activities include HSBC, Standard Chartered, Capital One, Citibank, and JP
Morgan as well as Accenture, Oracle, Microsoft, and Dell.

Originally, the industry was initially clustered near Manila but it has more recently started to
spread further afield, thus stimulating regional economic development in the Philippines. The
industry is expanding into what they call Next Wave Cities such as Baguio, Bacolod, and
Cagayan de Oro.

International freelancing, while not as large as BPO activities, is also important. While there is no
official data on freelancing, a recent PayPal survey suggests that freelancing is booming in the
Philippines. The firm estimates that there are approximately 1.5 million freelancers in the
country and most of them were expecting to continue freelancing in the future. Many of them
are young, with 90% of respondents under 40 years old. 61% were women. In terms of services
provided, about a third engaged in data entry or internet research, and a large share, about 60%,
were working for US-based clients. Most lined up work via internet freelancing platforms such as
Upwork.com, Freelancer.com, or Shutterstock.com (PayPal Global Freelancer Insights Report 2018 as
cited in Esmael 2018).



20
Policy support

The country initially launched into labor-service exports via call centers, where Filipinos
answered phone-in questions. Since then, the Philippines has experienced a very clear
`upgrading' in their labor-service exports and the country's activities are moving up the
skill/wage scale into what is known as knowledge process outsourcing. This includes back-office
services such as health-care processing and coding, legal transcription, IT outsourcing, and more
recently, animation and game development. The sector is increasing the provision of high-end
services such as data analytics, business and financial research, mortgage servicing, software
development, legal process and patent research as well as engineering. It is estimated that there
are already 200,000 Filipinos working in these higher-paid knowledge process outsourcing jobs
(Oxford Business Group 2016).

The IT-BPM Roadmap 2022 (IBPAP 2016), classifies these jobs under four main headings with
a number of sub-headings, namely:

     ·   Contact Center and BPO subsector
             o Engineering Services Outsourcing (ESO)
             o Data Analytics
             o Performance Management
             o Legal Process Outsourcing (LPO)
     ·   Information Technology (IT) Services subsector
             o Application Development Management (ADM)
             o System Integration
             o Automation Enablement
             o IoT-Enablement languages
     ·   Health Information Management (HIM) subsector
             o Preventive Health
             o Remote Healthcare Management
             o Provider Services
     ·   Animation and Game Development subsector
             o 3D animation
             o Augmented & Virtual Reality (AR/VR)
             o Gamification

This move into higher-value-added IT-based services depended critically on two key laws: the
Data Privacy Act of 2012, which established penalties for unauthorized use or disclosure of
personal information, and the Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012, which set up a legal
framework to identify, prevent and punish cybercrime.

Education policy has also been supportive. The `machinery' of IT-BPO are not machines, but
humans, and education and training programs are critical for the continued expansion and
evolution of the industry. Noting this, the leading industry association, IBPAP, worked with the
government's Commission on Higher Education to maintain the flow of skilled service-sector
workers. One notable output of the cooperation was the Service Management Program, which
offers specialized courses for students of business administration, management, or IT, with the
goal of placing them in entry-level IT-BPO positions. The program also funds a `train the
teachers' initiative, again focusing on teaching IT-BPO subjects at the industry's standards. The
effort has spread across the country and now includes 17 state universities and colleges.




21
The future is looking bright, according to the IT-BPM Roadmap 2022. By 2022, the sector is
projected to account for 7.6 million direct and indirect jobs--a half million of which would be
outside the Manila area. Of these, a million jobs are projected to be in higher-value areas. To
support this growth, the government created a Department of Information and Communication
Technology.

In terms of policies to support future growth, the industry has concentrated on three action
areas: (1) widening and deepening human capital by scaling up industry public-private
partnerships; (2) bolstering the attractiveness of the Philippines as an investment destination
through advocacy activities; and (3) building the Philippine IT-BPM brand globally through
marketing programs.

Automation poses challenges

Globally, automation is creating displacement in both the service and manufacturing sector.
While the biggest impact is likely to be in advanced economies, the trend is affecting the
Philippine service-export sector. A global network of shared-service and outsourcing
professionals, called SSON, has produced a report that looks into some of the challenges
(Shared Services and Outsourcing Network 2018). It notes: `While local Shared Services
providing global enterprise support will continue to play their role, there is no denying the signs
that robotic process automation (RPA) is emerging as a solution that will impact the offshore
services equation.' RPA is a widespread form of service-task automation that is spreading to
offices around the world. It allows computers to take over some `knowledge assembly-line' tasks
that used to require humans until machine learning became commercially viable.

Some of the Philippines-based companies in the sector have started to embrace RPA solutions as
part of their services offering to advanced-economy firms. For example, they can offer RPA-
based automation with humans that can deal with the inevitable exceptions that the RPA cannot
manage. One consulting firm active in the area relates the example of Philippine outsourcing
firms leveraging chatbots, machine learning, and natural language processing in the contact
centers to enhance the capacities and productivity of their human workers in handling customer
interactions (Karthik and Kala 2019).

5.3 The Chinese case

The People's Republic of China was founded on 1 October 1949 by the Communist Party of
China under the leadership of Mao Zedong, ending the long chaotic period that followed the
1911 overthrow of the Qing dynasty. Industrialization was shallow in 1949 and remained largely
a coastal phenomenon. In 1952, the secondary sector produced 8% of GDP and employed 7%
of the labor force compared with the primary sector, which produced 74% of GDP and
employed 84% of the workforce. The coastal provinces retained 72% of fixed assets and
accounted for 69% of the gross value of industrial output (Yang 1997). Naturally, the
Communist Party at its accession to power in 1949 regarded industrialization as its most
important economic task .

A large share of the country's economic output was directed and controlled by the state, which
set production goals, controlled prices and allocated resources throughout most of the economy.
During the 1950s, all of China's individual household farms were collectivized into large
communes. To support rapid industrialization during the 1960s and 1970s, the central
government undertook large-scale investments in physical and human capital. As a result, by
1978 nearly 75% of industrial production was in the hands of centrally controlled, state-owned



22
enterprises that followed centrally-planned output targets. Private enterprises and foreign-
invested firms were generally barred.

A central goal of the Chinese government was to make China's economy relatively self-sufficient
and foreign trade was generally limited to obtaining those goods that could not be made or
obtained in China. The State Planning Commission's import plan covered more than 90% of all
imports, with the export plan being similarly comprehensive, specifying the physical quantities of
more than 3,000 individual commodities. Prior to 1978, a handful of foreign trade corporations
owned and controlled by the Ministry of Foreign Trade were responsible for carrying out the
import and export plans. The volume of Chinese trade, relative to world trade, declined sharply
from 1.5% in 1953 to 0.6% in 1977 (Lardy 1994: 2).

In 1978, things changed. China decided to break with its Soviet-style economic policies by
gradually reforming the economy and sequentially opening up trade and investment with the
West, in line with free-market principles, and in the hope that this would significantly increase
economic growth and raise living standards. As Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping, the architect of
China's economic reforms, famously put it: `Black cat, white cat, what does it matter what color
the cat is as long as it catches mice?'

(Growth accounting reveals that) Much of China's rapid economic growth after 1979 can be
attributed to two main factors: large-scale capital investment, financed by large domestic savings
and foreign investment), and rapid productivity growth (Bosworth and Collins 2008). This
coincided with a massive reallocation of labor from agriculture to non-agriculture, made possible
by a green revolution in agriculture that sharply increased productivity in this sector. The share
of the labor force in agriculture fell from 75% in 1977 to 33% in 2012, while the share of value-
added produced in the agricultural sector fell from 30% to 5%.

China also gradually reformed its trade regime and these reforms led China's foreign trade to
soar from US$21 billion in 1978, when China was, at best, a marginal player in global trade, to
more than US$2.2 trillion today when China has become the world's largest exporter (National
Bureau of Statistics 2005: 161; World Bank Data).

The Open Door Policy

An important piece of China's trade reforms was the Open Door Policy that consisted of
attracting foreign direct investment and promoting foreign trade in targeted areas. This opening
up was initially limited to two southern provinces (Guangdong and Fujian), and then gradually
was extended to larger geographical regions: first along the coast and then to the inland
provinces. The open economic zones provided investors with various preferential tax treatments
and exemptions on duties and from labor regulations. The leading role of this selective open
door policy in regional growth has been emphasized by a great number of studies (e.g. Mody and
Wang 1997; Berthélemy and Démurger 2000; Chen and Feng 2000)

Foreign direct investment inflows did not occur immediately in large volumes in response to the
establishment of special economic zones in Guangdong (1979) and in Fujian (1980), partly out
of caution and partly because the liberal regulatory framework only began to be introduced in
1982. Foreign direct investment started pouring in only from 1984 onward (when it doubled
from US$0.6 billion in 1983 to US$1.3 billion in 1984). The second large acceleration of foreign
direct investment inflow occurred in 1992, expanding from US$4.4 billion in 1991 to US$11
billion in 1992.




23
China's international trade expanded steadily along with China's share in global trade. The export
basket diversified from light manufacturing to heavy manufacturing and electronics. Global value
chains in the country expanded rapidly, starting in the early 1990s--a trend that was accelerated
by the lock-in provided by China's World Trade Organization membership in 2001.


6. Telemigration

Companies in G7 nations are turning to remote workers to perform an increasingly wide range
of tasks. For the most part, these remote workers are in the same nation as the companies.
Hence, it is less globalization and more wage differences and talent shortages that are driving an
increasing number of companies to turn to foreign-based online service workers, or
`telemigrants' (Baldwin 2019). A recent study of Upwork contracts found that the top three
nations hiring telemigrants were the high-wage English-speaking nations of US, Australia, and
the UK. Conversely, the three biggest sources of telemigrants were the Philippines, India, and
Bangladesh (Horton et al. 2017). The US was the only high-wage nation that was both a major
buyer and seller of this sort of online remote labor.

When it comes certain service professions such as accountants, computer programmers,
engineers, nurses, and many others, complete replacement of a domestic worker with a
telemigrant would be impossible. However some substitution of low-cost foreign remote
workers for high-cost domestic workers would surely save money.

Who are today's foreign freelancers? The online payments company, Payoneer.com, queried
23,000 freelancers worldwide. About 25% respondents were in Latin America and Asia, 20% in
Central and Eastern Europe, and about 15% in both the Mideast and Africa (Sukman 2015). The
vast majority of freelancers surveyed are in their 20s and 30s (about 85%). A bit more than half
had university educations. The companies paying for their services were about half in North
America and Europe (split equally), about 15% in both Latin America and Asia, and 7% in
Australia and New Zealand.

How fast will telemigration grow? The answer will differ across the various types of service
sectors since some lend themselves much more easily to integrating remote workers or have
more widely accepted standards. Government regulation will also surely play a large role.

6.1 Factors driving telemigration

There are four factors suggesting that telemigration will grow faster than most think across
almost all sectors. Perhaps the most remarkable is how fast digitech is lowering the language
barrier.

Machine translation now rivals average human translation for language pairs where large, hand-
translated datasets are available. According to Google research, which uses humans to score
machine translations on a scale from zero (complete nonsense) to six (perfect), in 2015 Google
Translate received a grade of 3.6--far worse than the average human translator who receives
scores like 5.1; by 2016, Google Translate had hit numbers like 5.

Today, machine translation is on smartphones, laptops, and tablets. Free apps like Google
Translate and iTranslate Voice are now quite good across the major language pairs, and machine
translation has been widely adopted. Google carries out a billion translations a day for online
users. YouTube has instant machine translation for many foreign-language YouTube videos,




24
showing instantaneous results in the form of English subtitles. Instant and free-spoken
translation is also possible with the Skype Translator add-on option.

Computing power and massive new datasets are the reasons why machine translation has
become so good, so fast. Machine learning trained AI-systems can now recognize language
patterns well enough to carry out human-level translation, with the real constraint being the lack
of human-translated sentences. For language pairs where the data is available, translation is good.
For others it is poor.

The switch came in 2016 when Jeff Dean switched Google Translate AI team from hands-on
programming to machine learning. The data constraint was relaxed when the UN posted online a
dataset with nearly 800,000 documents that had been manually translated into the six official UN
languages: Arabic, English, Spanish, French, Russian, and Chinese. The EU has also released
huge datasets along with the EU Parliament. The Canadian parliament has also followed suit.
With data and the requisite computer power to process it, the Google Translation app improved
more in a month than it had in the previous four years.

Machine translation will fundamentally alter the global supply of service workers. About 400
million people speak English as their first language, and if one includes proficient second-
language speakers, there are something like a billion people who could sell services in English
online. It would seem that machine translation might multiply this number by two or three,
creating a tidal wave of online talent.

6.2 Work reorganization and telecoms

Another factor that is accelerating the trend toward remote work is the way in which US and
European companies are reorganizing themselves to facilitate slotting in telecommuting workers.
These companies are now using new collaborative platforms such as Business Skype, Slack,
Trello, Basecamp, and others that help organize communication among team members.

These new collaborative platforms are designed to facilitate all manner of team communication,
ranging from text chats, emails, and discussion groups to phone calls, Facebook posts, and
multi-person video calls with screen sharing. Technology has also facilitated telemigration via
better communication.

Telecommunications are an essential ingredient in the globotics transformation and have been
improving in line with the explosive pace in the improvement of digital technology. This started
out with telephone calls becoming cheaper. Later, mobile phones became universal. And once
cheap and widely-available broadband had become more reliable, Skype and other video-
enabled communication technologies further stimulated the explosion. But in recent years, things
have gone even further.

Recently, new technologies have been creating more options between talking on the phone and a
face-to-face meeting. These new options are a long way from perfect, they may never replace
physical human contact, but they nevertheless present far cheaper and faster options than
physical meetings, and at the same time deliver much higher quality than standard phone calls.
The main new communication technology is called `telepresence' and is already widely used by
big banks, consultancies, law firms, and governments. Telepresence makes it seem, or almost
seem, as if people are in the same place, even when they are not.




25
Augmented and virtual reality devices

One telecommunication technology that is advancing fast uses augmented reality or the
projection of a digital image onto reality via a headset, glasses or even a smartphone screen. The
two key supporting technologies are augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR). Many
companies, both start-ups and giants like IBM, are using AR and VR to improve remote
collaboration. They are redefining what it means to work side-by-side with someone and are
going a long way toward taking the `remote' out of remote work.

The big selling point of AR is that it allows an expert sitting somewhere else to `augment' the
reality you are looking at through a video screen on your phone, tablet, or laptop. They can
explain what you need to do almost as if they were standing by your side. They do this by placing
computer graphics on your screen in a way that looks like it is part of the reality you are looking
at. Instead of `talk you through it', they show you with arrows, circles, and the like. There is no
need for the remote expert to `paint a word picture' of what needs to be done since both
workers are looking at the same reality on the screen, augmented by things added by the expert.

Virtual reality is a far more immersive experience than AR. It completely hijacks your visual and
audio channels, replacing them with a computer-generated reality. It is a little disorienting since
you have no direct connection with where you are actually sitting. To date, the images are too
grainy to fully convey micro-expressions and the like, but body language has amazing effects on
how you perceive people.

There are other forms of telecommunication technology in early testing stages such as
`holographic telepresence'. This projects real-time, three-dimensional images of people (along
with audio) in a way that makes it seem as if the remote person is right next to you. This is the
stuff of science fiction, but it is not unimaginable--having been used in the 2017 French
presidential election and the 2014 Indian election.


7. What globotics and telemigration means for development strategies:
    Conceptualization

If the automation of manufacturing means localized, jobless manufacturing, then many national
development strategies will need rethinking. The changes may not appear for 10 or 20 years, but
this is in line with the timeline of most national industrialization strategies, and so looking ahead
is of vital importance.

The changing nature of manufacturing is not a new point. `A nascent yet growing body of
evidence has begun to challenge the long-held tenets of economic development that
industrialization is the prime engine of growth', write Loungani et al. (2017). This message is also
clear in Hallward-Driemeier and Nayyar (2017): `Globalization and new technologies are
impacting the desirability and feasibility of what has historically been the most successful
development strategy', namely manufacturing. `Many of the pro-development characteristics
traditionally associated with manufacturing--tradability, scale, innovation, learning-by-doing--
are increasingly features of services.' As Schwarzer and Stephenson (2019) put it: "While
industrial development has played a key role in export-led development trajectories in the past,
... ICT-enabled services in particular offer potential for export diversification that defy the logic
of traditional paradigms by relying purely on electronic cross-border delivery, making it
accessible even to countries with underdeveloped physical trade infrastructure."




26
This section explores conceptualization issues and asks the question: how may switching to
service-led development change thinking about national development strategies? Before turning
to the economic logic of a service-led development strategy, we review why manufacturing was
the linchpin of so many countries' development strategies.

7.1 Why industry was viewed as so important to development

Most of today's rich nations became rich by industrializing. Since 1970 or so, the same nations
have been deindustrializing due to globotics, but their historical growth take-offs were closely
associated with a rapid structural transformation that shifted workers from farms to factories.
The intense industrialization-growth correlation continued in the post-war period with the four
`tigers' (Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan) and a few second-generation tigers such as
Thailand, Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia. For these nations, industrialization
was closely linked to export-led manufacturing, not just manufacturing.

This plain-as-day evidence is explained by a number of well-known mechanisms that made
manufacturing-led development particularly attractive for developing-nation governments. First,
rising manufacturing absorbed a lot of unskilled workers with minimal formal education,
especially in unskilled-labor-intensive sectors such as clothing and footwear. They could, as it
were, walk off the farm and into factories. In countries with growing masses of relatively
uneducated young people and few jobs outside of subsistence agriculture, manufacturing was a
blessing for social and political stability.

Second, manufacturing activities were development `escalators'. Marked by scale economies and
technology spillovers, each extra manufacturing job was viewed as helping the nation and not
just the individual worker. At least since the massive opening embraced by developing nations as
part of the second unbundling, these manufacturing jobs were tied to flows of international
trade, investment and know-how as rich-nation firms offshored production (and manufacturing
know-how) to nearby developing nations (Baldwin 2014).

This knowledge transfer aspect was especially powerful in East Asia where proximity of
technology leaders like Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore fostered such
offshoring. Today, for example, about 40% of world manufacturing is done in countries that are
touched by the Beijing, Tokyo and Hong Kong triangle. This region is quite simply one of the
most attractive locations for offshoring stages of manufacturing. The mechanisms--mostly
involving global value chains linking trade, investment, manufacturing, and productivity growth
included alleviation of supply bottlenecks, elimination of small-market demand constraints,
transfer of know-how, and connection to worldwide sales networks (Taglioni and Winkler 2016).
As an empirical matter, productivity in developing-country manufacturing seems to converge
toward that of rich nations with the global technological frontier, regardless of policy and
institutional determinants (Rodrik 2013). Development theorists wove these facts into elegant
intellectual frameworks.

7.2 Manufacturing-led development theory

The conceptualizations behind manufacturing-led development have a distinguished pedigree
starting with the glory days of what Krugman called `high development theory', namely from
Rosenstein-Rodan (1943) to Hirschman (1958). We should probably add in the contributions
from New Economic Geography as exemplified by Krugman and Venables (1995).

In these frameworks, development is viewed as a virtuous cycle driven by external economies,
with each turn of the wheel providing economic momentum for the next turn. The self-


27
reinforcement came from an interaction between economies of scale at the level of the individual
producer and the size of the market. The concept came in two main fashions: `Big Push' and
`Leading Sectors'.

Paul Rosenstein-Rodan argued for an economy-wide `Big Push' effort by governments to break
out of underdevelopment. Productivity and incomes were higher in industry than agriculture, but
poor-nation firms failed to industrialize spontaneously because they could not attain the
minimum efficient scale in the face of lackluster local demand. The lack of local demand,
however, was due to the low incomes stemming from the lack of industry.

Albert Hirschman advocated instead for pushing for growth in particular sectors which would--
via `backward' and `forward' linkages--ignite growth in the rest of the economy. As theories go,
these were just about perfect in terms of shaping the thinking of policymakers around the world.
They were simple but not simplistic. And they were optimistic. Any nation could do it. But as is
often the case, ideas were the easy part. Implementation was the hard part.

A key problem was the demand-creation part, regardless of whether it was to be created by an
economy-wide push or sector-specific policies. In the initial post-war decades, import protection
was the go-to policy. `All present-day industrial and developing countries protected their
incipient manufacturing industries producing for the domestic market', wrote Bela Balassa in his
1981 book, The Newly Industrializing Countries in the World Economy.

In this so-called import-substitution industrialization (ISI) strategy, importing was necessary for
key inputs, but the output was headed for the local market. Early thinkers like Raul Prebisch,
touting `export pessimism', doubted that a developing nation could rely on export to gin up the
necessary demand for the output of their factories, especially since many Northern markets were
still heavily protected. While a very small number of developing nations managed to trigger what
looked like a self-fueled virtuous cycle in manufacturing (e.g., Korea and Taiwan), ISI failed in
most places. More precisely, it created jobs in labor-intensive sectors like footwear, clothing, and
furniture, but the step to starting competitive heavy industries proved too much for the dozens
of nations who tried it. The 1980s debt crises drew a line under ISI.

Attention then turned to a new twist of manufacturing-led development--the `Washington
Consensus'. This leaned on Hirschman-Rosenstein-Rodan conceptualizations of the sale-scales
conundrum (need scale for sales, but need sales for scale), but sought to overcome it with
different tactics. Governments and markets would do the job, and exports were critical to
achieving scale. Import-competition took on a new positive role as a way to avoid abuse of
dominant positions in the domestic market. This too passed. By 2002, few of those that tried it
managed to launch their industry on an upward trajectory.

7.3 A stylized `old-school' development journey

To set the stage for a consideration of service-led development, it may be useful to present a
stylized version of development challenges and stages that manufacturing-led development
strategies were meant to address in the Hirschman-Rosenstein-Rodan-Prebisch
conceptualization.

The externalities and spillovers critical to these accounts are economically beneficial for low-
income countries who can seize them. But the same features make industry `lumpy'. That, in
turn, makes it hard to start industrialization and keep it going. The basic notion is that a country
could be good at industry if only it had more industry. It is a classic multiple equilibrium
problem. A nation with an industrial base can be globally competitive in a wide range of final


28
goods. The competitiveness, in turn, provides the sales necessary to justify that industrial base. A
classic manufacturing-export-led development story involves a shift from the agrarian to the
industrial equilibrium and all that this entails. Investment in capital and skills booms, exports
rise, foreign investment grows, infrastructure is constructed since it is regarded as a worthwhile
investment, people migrate from farms toward urban areas, and young people find education
attractive, etc. Here we depict the canonical development journey graphically to spotlight the key
role of external economies of scale.

Colonialism and underdevelopment

Our stylized development journey opens in the colonial period when the nation under study
either has never had industry or was deindustrialized during colonialism. That is, we start with
the nation completely specialized in agriculture goods in the sense that all labor in the trade
sectors (manufacturing and agriculture) are in the agrarian sector. This is point E0 in the diagram
(Figure 9).

There is a nontrade service sector, which employs LS workers, but this doesn't yet enter the
analysis. The labor needed to provide the services demanded at the equilibrium price (which is LS
in the diagram) are just subtracted from the nation's labor endowment, , and the remainder is
divided between the traded sectors, agriculture, and manufacturing. For simplicity, manufactured
and agricultural goods are freely traded under colonialism.

Given the external economies in manufacturing and the assumed constant returns in agriculture,
industry is marked by an upward sloped value of marginal product for labor in manufacturing
(VMPLM) and a flat value of marginal product for labor in agriculture (VMPLA). The VMPL
curves are equal to the price (which is fixed by free trade) and a physical marginal product of
labor, MPL. In manufacturing, it is upward sloped due to external economies of scale (i.e., the
marginal cost of production falls with the economy-wide level of production, but individual
firms perceive constant returns with respect to their own output). In agriculture, the VMPL is
flat due to assumed constant returns. 5




5Making agriculture subject to diminishing returns is a simple but unenlightening extension, as long as the model
displays multiple equilibriums in manufacturing.



29
Figure 9: Schematic diagram of manufacturing-led development

 Euros


               VMPLMNT
                                                           VMPLMFT
                                                      E'
                   h                                        w=VMPLAFT



                   E1
                                                           labour
          E0                               
     LS

Source: Authors' elaboration.

This setup has two stable equilibriums. In one equilibrium, all workers are in industry, so the
VMPLM is higher than VMPLA and thus the wages are higher in manufacturing (point E'). This
is a stable outcome since the higher wage keeps all the workers in manufacturing. In the other
equilibrium (point E0), no one works in manufacturing, so the wages in manufacturing are lower
than they are in agriculture. This too is stable.

A critical point for the analysis is the level of employment in manufacturing, where the two
VMPLs intersect (      in the diagram). Here, the `B' stands for `breakpoint' since if somehow LM
arrived above the breakpoint, industrialization would be self-sustaining (as shown by the right-
pointing arrows). Any change in LM that pushes it to a point to the right of the break point will,
eventually, result in workers leaving industry for agriculture (as shown by the left-pointing
arrows). The breakpoint,     , might also be called the `minimum efficient scale'.

To think about this, note that if VMPLM were above w, the country would be price-competitive
in the world market for manufactured goods when paying the wage, w. More specifically, if firms
paid w for labor but had MPL corresponding to the VMPLM above the line at world prices, the
firms could break even by charging a price below the world price.

Independence and import substitution

In the next phase of the development journey, the nation gains independence and shuts out
foreign manufactured goods in an effort to get the virtuous cycle spinning. The VMPLM now
depends on the domestic price and the domestic price falls as output rises. Assuming the right
combination of demand and scale elasticities, the new curve for industry is VMPLMNT and it is
downward sloped (NT stands for nontraded). The result is that some labor moves into
manufacturing, namely, it rises to  where the superscript stands for `import substitution
industrialization'.

The critical issue for manufacturing-led development is whether         is above or below the
breakpoint level,     . If it is above, then import substitution will produce a self-sustaining
industrialization with an endpoint of E' (all labor in manufacturing). If it is below the breakpoint,


30
the ISI strategy will lead to stagnation. If the nation liberalizes imports, it will deindustrialize
back to E0 since with open trade, the upward sloped VMPLM is the relevant one.

One strategy would be to try a `Big Push' into industry, with the government pushing or pulling
labor into manufacturing. If the effort isn't big enough, and let's say the effort takes the
economy to point      where the superscript stands for `big push', then the economy becomes
stuck. And all efforts to expand industry will result in losses. If the push takes the economy
beyond the breakpoint, the `Big Push' is successful and industrial development becomes self-
sustaining. Clearly a large home market is helpful here.

Washington Consensus and export-led industrialization

For many nations, the ISI and BP efforts failed to spark endogenous industrialization. In the
next phase, our template developing nation tries the Washington Consensus. This involves
improving institutions and lowering barriers to trade and investment.

Improved institutions are reflected in two ways in the diagram (Figure 10). On the demand-
enhancement side, it shifts out the VMPLMNT curve since the better institutions it effectively
increases the size of the domestic market (less waste, better contracting, etc.). What this does is
raise   . On the supply side, it rotates the VMPLM line counter-clockwise. This is due, on
                                                      FT

one hand, to improvements in production efficiency that come with imported know-how, etc.
This raises the MPL part. On the other hand, openness and international integration also result
in a higher net-of-costs price for domestic firms (this affects the p part of VMPL). The p-
                                                                                       
enhancing aspects and MPL-enhancing aspects bring the breakpoint,          , closer to  .

Figure 10: The effect of better institutions




Source: Authors' elaboration.

As with ISI, these reforms may or may not be enough to get our template nation over the hump
and send it on its way to a pro-market outward-oriented take-off in exports, industrialization,
and economic growth. As history would have it, for a few countries, the policy reforms got     
past    , but for many,  it didn't.

If the group of `it was not enough' nations applying the Washington Consensus is sufficiently
large, the Washington Consensus itself would be viewed as a failure by empirical economists
who are unfamiliar with multiple equilibrium economics. The next step would be to conclude
that no `big idea' is working in development (Lindauer and Pritchett 2002).



31
Note that since the VMPLMFT depends upon the price received by domestic manufacturers
(rather than the price paid by customers abroad), remoteness plays an important role in the
position of the VMPLMFT curve. Countries that are remote from large markets, as measured by,
for example, market potential, would find it expensive to import essential materials, intermediate
inputs, and capital equipment. They would also find it difficult to acquire and sustain
relationships with their foreign customers. And finally, the distance would discourage advanced-
economy firms viewing the faraway nation as a good place to locate offshored stages of
production.

In all phases of this stylized development journey, the key challenge to sparking manufacturing-
led development was getting past the hump (the point       ). Beyond this point, industrialization
became a self-driving mechanism. Before it, nothing worked. Since industry was marked by scale
economies, it was very difficult, and usually impossible, for all but the largest nations or those
with excellent `market potential' due to their geographical location, to get over the hump with
import-substitution policies, `Big Push' policies, or Washington Consensus policies.

The source of this failure might be hard to detect with the usual empirical approaches. If one
runs linear regressions of ISI and Washington Consensus policies on development outcomes--
treating all nations as random draws from a single distribution--the results may be confusing.
The policies could all be `working' in the sense of narrowing the gap between the employment
level and the breakpoint, but not working in the sense of triggering industrialization. As is well-
known, standard econometrics has trouble estimating threshold effects without really big data
sets. Since so few developing nations have managed to industrialize rapidly, such data is
unattainable.

In a nutshell, the key determinants in our recounting of this development journey are domestic
market size, institutions, and remoteness. For small remote nations with bad institutions, neither
ISI nor the Washington Consensus would work. For big favorably-located nations, both
development strategies could work.

The service sector was left completely in the background since that was where it was put in most
traditional thinking on national development strategies.

The traditional (minor) role of services in development

Development economics has long relegated services to the side-lines or ignored them altogether.
Loungani and Mishra (2014) call it a deeply rooted prejudice against the service sector. Adam
Smith in his famous tome cast aspersion on the social value of service provided such as
`churchmen, lawyers, physicians, men of letters of all kinds, players, buffoons, musicians, opera-
singers, opera-dancers, etc.' (cited in Loungani and Mishra 2014). Karl Marx considered many
types of services as `faux frais' of production--activities that were incurred in the productive use
of capital but which do not themselves create any value-added. This was picked up on Soviet
planning where services were downplayed compared to heavy industry--and it was the success
of this planning up to the late 1950s that inspired many of the early post-war development
thinkers. Similarly, Baumol (1967) fostered the view that services are a sector resistant to
improvements in productivity. The same message came through in Ghani (2010)--a whole book
devoted to illuminating the service-led growth in South Asia.

More formally, Eichengreen and Gupta (2013) noted that the structural transformation literature,
which is intimately tied to that of development strategies, downplayed the role of services:




32
The pioneers of the literature on structural change, such as Fisher (1939) and Clark (1940),
emphasized the shift from agriculture to industry in the course of economic growth and they in
fact said little about the share of services. Kuznets (1953) concluded that the share of services in
national product did not vary significantly with per capita income. Chenery and Syrquin (1975)
regressed the service-sector share of output on per capita income and per capita income squared,
concluding that the relationship was concave to the origin--that it rose with per capita incomes
but at a decelerating rate.

7.4 Can service exports spark a virtuous cycle?

Services played almost no role in the stylized development journey discussed above since
services were traditionally viewed as being marked by no scale economies, no positive
externalities, and few opportunities for export or inward foreign knowledge transfers. Without
these things, services cannot start a classic development spiral where an expanding sector creates
forces that encourage further expansion. But is this really true? Are services really bereft of these
features?

First, consider the possibility of exports and growth promotion. Service exports are, as we
showed above, growing, and growing faster than the export of goods. There is also some
evidence that exporting more sophisticated services is pro-growth (Mishra et al. 2011).

What about Baumol's disease? The lack of productivity growth in services, or as Baumol phrased
it: one still needs four people to play a quartet despite centuries of technological progress. That
too turns out to be untrue, at least in its baldest form. In the US, Triplett and Bosworth (2004)
estimated that services accounted for over 70% of labor productivity growth in the New
Economy boom of the late 1990s. Ghani (2010) documents that after 2000, labor productivity in
India, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka grew faster in services than in manufacturing.

Figure 11 shows a decomposition of growth by sector in India and China. In China, factor
productivity was a big driver in manufacturing (as would happen in the case of external
economies and self-sustaining industrialization), but not so much in services. In India, the order
is reversed, even if India's growth was slower overall. At the least, this suggests that services, like
manufacturing, can be a source of progress.

Some services also seem subject to external economies of scale. Inside nations, the notion that
service sectors are subject to agglomeration economies or external economies of scale is widely
taken as received wisdom, at least by urban economists. In advanced-economy cities, the
existence of a substantial wage premium is well documented (Combes and Gobillon 2015). 6
These sorts of premiums are the hallmark of external economies as they indicate that the whole
is more than the sum of the parts. More to the point, in our development journey story, the
whole of getting more workers in manufacturing was to be able to sustain higher wages. In terms
of theory, authors such as Duranton and Venables (2018) draw an upward sloped VMPL for
cities that looks exactly like the VMPLMFT in the diagrams.




6 Combes and Gobillon (2015) review the empirical literature and find the elasticity of wages with respect to city
population is typically around 8­10% but much of that relationship is driven by the sorting of more skilled
individuals into larger cities. Correcting for these biases leads to smaller elasticities of 2­5%. It is also the case that
workers may learn more over time in larger cities.



33
Figure 11: Sources of growth, India and China, 1993­2004




Source: Based on data from Bosworth and Collins (2008).

The assumption that services are subject to something akin to external economies is indeed the
heart of urban economics (Black and Henderson 1999) and the facts behind this assumption are
quite undeniable. The economies of the richest cities in the world are based almost entirely on
services and often service exports. The people in the service sectors earn wages far beyond the
average. Moreover, the cities themselves seem to be marked by external economies of scale
judging from the high price of apartments in city centers. The good jobs are in big-city service
sectors since cities are where the talented people are. As Ed Glaeser puts it, smart people move
to cities and make each other smarter. In terms of explicit modeling, Robert-Nicoud (2008) is a
clear example of incorporating trade in services into a standard New Economic Geography
model.

Overall, national development strategies in the digital era may do well to look to urban
economics and New Economic Geography for inspiration and guidance.


8. Globotics and development mindsets

The hardest aspects of development are only marginally changed by globotics for the very simple
reason that the trade-and-development component of development is not the hardest part. Even
in quite open economies, most economic activity is by and for local citizens. Getting it to work
requires all sorts of difficult things like good roads and ports, good institutions, good education,
good healthcare, trust among citizens, trust by citizens of government, and much more.

But the globotics transformation is likely to radically change the way we think about
development--if the posited thought experiment comes true. If labor-cost-based trade in
manufactured goods comes to an end and services become freely traded, ways of thinking about
development will have to change. This is not a novel thought.

The Pathways for Prosperity Commission's 2018 report Charting Pathways for Inclusive Growth lists
`Global trade in services' as its Pathway Three. The report lists the main ways to unlock the
pathways, the most relevant of which is about how governments and businesses can create a
digital-ready country. Many of the recommendations are akin to those suggested by UNCTAD in


34
its many publications on e-readiness that stress five pillars: enabling digital infrastructure,
enabling legal and regulatory frameworks, enabling human capital, enabling finance, and enabling
coordination. Mattoo (2018) discusses what the new emphasis on services means for
international cooperation efforts, and Heuser et al (2017) look at the role of services in global
value chains.

A study that focuses on creating digitally-enabled jobs for African youths (Mastercard
Foundation 2019) suggests a few `no regret' measures that policymakers could take. These
include the collection of better data locally, close monitoring of international developments, the
provision of training for local policymakers on digital economy matters, promoting the provision
of digital `soft' commerce skills (such as digital marketing and relationship management) as well
as hard skills (such as coding), and embracing a `test-and-learn approach' to deal with the
uncertainties and rapid pace of change. The 2016 ECLAC report Innovation and Internationalization
of Latin American Services presents many ideas for how governments should think about and
prepare for digitech's impact on development (Hernández et al. 2016).

Here we do not repeat or even catalogue the suggestions. Rather, we attempt to focus attention
on how services are different when it comes to development mindsets.

8.1 How are services different?

There are two critical shifts in thinking when it comes to service-led development that we can
summarize in two pity aphorisms.

        Stop thinking factories, capital equipment and technology. Start thinking cities,
        people and training.

The key to industrialization was the ability to have the right equipment and technology in place
and to line up the factories with sufficiently large customer bases. In the traditional development
strategy, labor in the manufacturing sector is not viewed as a relevant constraint. It is a bit of a
sideshow since one of the great features of manufacturing is the ability of workers to practically
walk out of the rice fields into a factory and to start being productive with very little preparation.
This scenario is not true of modern services.

When it comes to modern services, the people are the `capital equipment', so to speak. And
people do not come with embedded technology, unlike a robot welder from Germany. Foreign
know-how may be important, but for many types of export services, for example coding,
copyediting, or project management, the technology represents a sideshow. It is the skills and
experiences of the people, the service providers, that are the real constraint.

Joining service value-added chains require less of a great push than the development of an
industrial base. However, the accumulation of human capital may take a longer amount of time,
compared to the accumulation of physical capital.

Secondly,

        Stop thinking factories and start thinking of cities as productive platforms.

Cities are where people meet and form local networks for face-to-face connections, where
people exchange ideas, and competition among ideas plays out. Cities facilitate matching
between service workers and service firms. As the economic geographer Enrico Moretti puts it,




35
cities become `brain hubs' (Moretti 2013). Workers and firms implicitly benefit from each other's
knowledge creation via face-to-face interaction and social networking. This point is not new.

In 2010, the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis wrote a study of how the
Netherlands could future-proof its economy and the answer was: cities. `At the beginning of the
twentieth century, manufacturing firms settled near each other in order to benefit from
knowledge spillovers in the development of electricity. Cities should not be thought of as mere
collections of people, but rather as complex workspaces that generate new ideas and new ways
of doing things' (Bas ter Weel et a. 2010).

Governments should start thinking of cities as production hubs, not just living quarters. Cities
should be conceptualized as geographic centers for face-to-face interactions that foster the
production of export-oriented services. Winning cities will attract high-quality jobs and lock
them in with agglomeration forces.

Another change in thinking is actually a continuation of the thinking about manufacturing. We
are all by now familiar with the notion of the role of the second unbundling in manufacturing-
led development. The idea that a developing nation can join a value chain is clear. The same can
be held true in services.


9. Concluding remarks

This paper seeks to think through some of the implications that digital technology may have for
developing nations, for their development strategies and for the broader world. Our conclusion
is that the service-led development path, such as the path that India took, may actually become
the norm rather than the exception. Since success in the service sector is based on quite different
factors than success in manufacturing, our conclusion suggests that development strategies and
mindsets will have to change. While change is always hard, this is a fundamentally optimistic
conclusion for developing nations for a very simple reason.

Digitech will allow many emerging markets to directly export the source of their comparative
advantage (i.e. labor which is low cost given its productivity) without having first to make goods
with that labor and then export the goods. One way of thinking about comparative advantage
trade in a Ricardian model is that trade in goods is a veil for trade in labor services. Digital
technology is merely pulling back the veil. The resulting expansion in service trade is likely to be
an overall net export gain for emerging markets and an overall net import gain for developed
economies.




36
References

Anderson, J., and E. Van Wincoop (2004). `Trade Costs'. Journal of Economic Literature, 42(3): 691­
751.

Artuc, E., P. Bastos, and B. Rijkers (2018). `Robots, Tasks and Trade'. World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper 8674. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Arvis, J.-F., Y. Duval, B. Shepherd, C. Utoktham, and A. Raj (2015). `Trade Costs in the
Developing World: 1995­2012'. Developing Trade Consultants Working Paper DTC-2015-2.
Available at https://developing-trade.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/Working-Paper-
DTC-2015-2.pdf (accessed on 22 October 2019).

Balassa, B. (1981). The Newly Industrializing Countries in the World Economy. Oxford: Pergamon
Press.

Baldwin, R. (2006). `Globalisation: The Great Unbundling(s)'. Helsinki: Economic Council of
Finland. Available at http://repository.graduateinstitute.ch/record/295612/files/Baldwin_06-
09-20.pdf (accessed 22 October 2019).

Baldwin, R. (2014), `Trade and Industrialization after Globalization's Second Unbundling: How
Building and Joining a Supply Chain Are Different and Why It Matters'. In R. Feenstra and A.
Taylor (eds), Globalization in an Age of Crisis: Multilateral Economic Cooperation in the Twenty-First
Century. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Baldwin, R. (2016). The Great Convergence. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Baldwin, R. (2019). The Globotics Upheaval: Globalization, Robotics, and the Future of Work. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

Baldwin, R., and R. Forslid (2014). `The Development and Future of Factory Asia'. In D.
Hummels and B. Ferrarini (eds), Asia and Global Production Networks. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar
Publishing Ltd.

Barnard A., S. Howell, and R. Smith (2011). The Effects of Taxes and Benefits on Household Income,
2009/10. UK Office for National Statistics. Available at
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/household-income/the-effects-of-taxes-and-benefits-on-
household-income/2009-2010/index.html (accessed 22 October 2019).

Bas ter Weel & Albert van der Horst & George Gelauff, 2010. `Strengthen cities to prepare the
Netherlands for the future,' CPB Special Publication 88, CPB Netherlands Bureau for Economic
Policy Analysis.

Basu, K. (2015). An Economist in the Real World: The Art of Policymaking in India. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Basu, K. (2018). A short history of India's economy: A chapter in the Asian drama (No. 2018/124).
WIDER Working Paper.
Baumol, W.J., and W.G. Bowen (1966). Performing Arts, The Economic Dilemma: A Study of Problems
Common to Theater, Opera, Music, and Dance. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Bergin, P.R., and R. Glick (2007). `Tradability, Productivity, and International Economic
Integration'. Journal of International Economics, 73(1): 128­51.


37
Berthélemy, J. C., & Demurger, S. (2000). Foreign direct investment and economic growth:
theory and application to China. Review of development economics, 4(2), 140-155.
Bloom, N., L. Garicano, R. Sadun, and J. Van Reenen (2014). `The Distinct Effects of
Information Technology and Communication Technology on Firm Organization'. Management
Science, 60(12): 2859­85.

Borchert, Ingo; Gootiiz, Batshur; Mattoo, Aaditya. 2012. Policy barriers to international trade in
services : evidence from a new database (English). Policy Research working paper; no. WPS
6109. Washington, DC: World Bank.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/277401468331247210/Policy-barriers-to-
international-trade-in-services-evidence-from-a-new-database

Bosworth, B., and S.M. Collins (2008). `Accounting for Growth: Comparing China and India'.
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 22(1): 45­66.

Branstetter, L., and N. Lardy (2006). `China's Embrace of Globalization'. NBER Working Paper
w12373. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Brynjolfsson, Erik and Andrew McAfee (2014). The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and
Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies, W. W. Norton & Company, New York.

Bughin, J., Seong, J., Manyika, J., Chui, M., & Joshi, R. (2018). Notes from the AI frontier:
Modeling the impact of AI on the world economy. McKinsey Global Institute, Brussels, San Francisco,
Shanghai, Stockholm.
Chang, J. H., & Huynh, P. (2016). ASEAN in transformation the future of jobs at risk of
automation (No. 994906463402676). International Labour Organization.
Chen, B., & Feng, Y. (2000). Determinants of economic growth in China: Private enterprise,
education, and openness. China Economic Review, 11(1), 1-15.
Combes, P.P., and L. Gobillon (2015). `The Empirics of Agglomeration Economies'. In G.
Duranton, V. Henderson, and W. Strange (eds), Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics Vol. 5.
North Holland: Elsevier.

Das, G. (2000). India Unbound: From Independence to Information Age. New Delhi: Penguin Books
India.

Das, M.M., and B. Hilgenstock (2018). The Exposure to Routinization: Labor Market Implications for
Developed and Developing Economies. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

Dauth, W., S. Findeisen, J. Suedekum, and N. Woessner (2018). `Adjusting to Robots: Worker-
Level Evidence'. Working Paper 13. Minneapolis: Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,
Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute.

Démurger, S., J.D. Sachs, W.T. Woo, S. Bao, G. Chang, and A. Mellinger (2002). `Geography,
Economic Policy, and Regional Development in China'. Asian Economic Papers, 1(1): 146­97.

Dinlersoz, E., and Z. Wolf (2018). `Automation, Labour Share, and Productivity: Plant-Level
Evidence from US Manufacturing'. Working Papers 18­39. Washington, DC: Center for
Economic Studies, US Census Bureau.

Dornbusch, R., S. Fisher, and P. Samuelson (1977). `Comparative Advantage, Trade, and
Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods'. American Economic Review, 67: 823­
39.


38
Duranton, G., and A.J. Venables (2018). `Place-Based Policies for Development'. NBER
Working Paper 24562. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Eichengreen, B., and P. Gupta (2013). `The Two Waves of Service-Sector Growth'. Oxford
Economic Papers, 65(1): 96­123.

Esmael, M.L.K. (2018). `PayPal bullish on PH as freelance work grows'. The Manila Times, 28
March. Available at https://www.manilatimes.net/2018/03/28/business/paypal-bullish-on-ph-
as-freelance-work-grows/389032/ (accessed on 21 October 2019).

Fernandez-Armesto, F. (1995). Millennium: A History of the Last Thousand Years. New York:
Scribner.

Ford, M. (2015). Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of a Jobless Future. Basic Books.
Frankopan, P. (2016). The Silk Roads: A New History of the World. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

Ghani E. (ed) (2010). The Service Revolution in South Asia. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.

Ghani, E., and S. O'Connor (2014). `Can Service Be a Growth Escalator in Low Income
Countries?'. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6971. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Available at http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/823731468002999348/Can-service-
be-a-growth-escalator-in-low-income-countries (accessed on 22 October 2019).

Ghemawat, P. (2001). `Distance Still Matters'. Harvard Business Review, 79(8): 1­11.

Gilchrist, Alasdair (2016). Industry 4.0 : the industrial internet of things, Berkeley, CA : Apress.

Goldin, C., and R.A. Margo (1992). `The Great Compression: The Wage Structure in the United
States at Mid-Century'. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1): 1­34.

Gosai, D. (2013). `History of Economic Growth in India'. International Policy Digest, 24 April.
Available at https://intpolicydigest.org/2013/04/24/history-of-economic-growth-in-india/
(accessed on 22 October 2019).

Hallward-Driemeier, M., and G. Nayyar (2017). Trouble in the Making?: The Future of Manufacturing-
Led Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/27946 (accessed on 22 October 2019).

Haskel, J., and S. Westlake (2018). Capitalism without Capital: The Rise of the Intangible Economy.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Hernández, R.A., A. Hualde, N. Mulder, and P. Sauvé (eds) (2016). Innovation and
Internationalization of Latin American Services. Santiago, Chile: Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). Available at
https://www.cepal.org/en/publications/40301-innovation-and-internationalization-latin-
american-services (accessed on 21 October 2019).

Heuser,Cecilia & Mattoo,Aaditya & Heuser,Cecilia & Mattoo,Aaditya, 2017. "Services trade and
global value chains," Policy Research Working Paper Series 8126, The World Bank.

Horton, J., W.R. Kerr, and C. Stanton (2017). `Digital Labour Markets and Global Talent Flows'.
NBER Working Paper 23398. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.



39
IBPAP (2016). Accelerate PH: Future-Ready 2022 Executive Summary. Available at
http://boi.gov.ph/wp-content/uploads/2018/03/Executive-Summary-Accelerate-PH-Future-
Ready-Roadmap-2022_with-corrections.pdf (accessed 21 October 2019).

Karthik, H., and P. Kala (2019). `Redefining the Future of Work Human Plus Technology: An
Evaluation of Service Delivery Attractiveness with Humans and Technology Working Together'.
Everest Group. Available at https://www2.everestgrp.com/reportaction/EGR-2019-37-V-
3035/Marketing (accessed on 21 October 2019).

Kochhar, K., U. Kumar, R. Rajan, A. Subramanian, and I. Tokatlidis (2006). `India's Pattern of
Development: What Happened, What Follows?'. Journal of Monetary Economics, 53(5): 981­1019.

Kohli, A. (2006). `Politics of Economic Growth in India, 1980­2005: Part I: The 1980s'. Economic
and Political Weekly, 41(13): 1251­9.

Kohli, A. (2006). Politics of Economic Growth in India, 1980­2005: Part II: The 1990s and
Beyond. Economic and Political Weekly, 41(14):1361­70.

Krugman, P. (1994). `The Fall and Rise of Development Economics'. In L. Rodwin and D.A.
Schon (eds), Rethinking the Development Experience: Essays Provoked by the Work of Albert O.
Hirschman. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.

Krugman, P., and A. J. Venables (1995). `Globalization and the Inequality of Nations'. NBER
Working Paper 5098. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Lanz, R., and M. Andreas (2015). `Services and Global Value Chains: Servicification of
Manufacturing and Services Networks'. Journal of International Commerce, Economics and Policy, 6(3):
1­18.

Lardy, N. (1994). China in the World Economy. Washington, DC: Institute for International
Economics.

Lindauer, D. L., Pritchett, L., Rodrik, D., & Eckaus, R. S. (2002). What's the Big Idea? The Third
Generation of Policies for Economic Growth [with Comments]. Economia, 3(1), 1-39.
Loungani, P., and S. Mishra (2014). `Not Your Father's Service Sector'. Finance and Development,
51(2). Available at https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2014/06/pdf/fd0614.pdf
(accessed on 22 October 2019).

Loungani, P., S. Mishra, C. Papageorgiou, and K. Wang (2017). `World Trade in Services;
Evidence from a New Dataset'. IMF Working Papers 17/77. Washington, DC: International
Monetary Fund. Available at
https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2017/03/29/World-Trade-in-Services-
Evidence-from-A-New-Dataset-44776 (accessed on 22 October 2019).

Mastercard Foundation (2019). Digital Commerce and Youth Employment in Africa. Toronto:
Mastercard Foundation. Available at https://mastercardfdn.org/research/digitalcommerce/
(accessed on 21 October 2019).

Mattoo, Aaditya (2018). Services Globalization in an Age of Insecurity : Rethinking Trade
Cooperation (English). Policy Research working paper; no. WPS 8579. Washington, D.C. :
World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/340741536670011626/Services-Globalization-in-
an-Age-of-Insecurity-Rethinking-Trade-Cooperation


40
Milanovic, L., P.H. Lindert, and J. Williamson (2011). `Pre-Industrial Inequality'. The Economic
Journal, 121(551): 255­72.

Mody, A., & Wang, F. Y. (1997). Explaining industrial growth in coastal China: economic
reforms... and what else? The World Bank Economic Review, 11(2), 293-325.
Moravec, H. (1988). Mind Children: The Future of Robot and Human Intelligence. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

Moretti, E. (2013). The New Geography of Jobs. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.

O'Rourke, K.H., and J.G. Williamson (2001). Globalization and History: The Evolution of a Nineteenth-
Century Atlantic Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press Books.

OECD (2019), "Trade in the Digital Era", OECD Going Digital Policy Note, OECD, Paris,
www.oecd.org/going-digital/trade-in-the-digitalera.pdf.

Oxford Business Group (2016). `The Philippines' Business Process Outsourcing Sector Expands
into High-Value Services'. The Report: The Philippines 2016. Available at
https://oxfordbusinessgroup.com/overview/strength-strength-sector-continues-expand-higher-
value-services (accessed 21 October 2019).

Panagariya, A. (2004). `India in the 1980s and 1990s: A Triumph of Reforms'. IMF Working
Paper No. 04/43. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund. Available at
https://ssrn.com/abstract=878866 (accessed 22 October 2019).

Pathways for Prosperity Commission (2018). Charting Pathways for Inclusive Growth. Oxford:
Pathways for Prosperity Commission. Available at
https://pathwayscommission.bsg.ox.ac.uk/charting-pathways-report (accessed on 21 October
2019).

Pomeranz, K. (2000). The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern World
Economy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Pritchett, L. (1999). Divergence, big time. The World Bank.
Rath, B.N. (2018). `Productivity Growth and Efficiency Change: Comparing Manufacturing-and
Service-Based Firms in India'. Economic Modelling, 70: 447-57.

Robert-Nicoud, F. (2008). `Offshoring of Routine Tasks and Deindustrialisation: Threat or
Opportunity--and for Whom?'. Journal of Urban Economics, 63(2): 517-35

Rodrik, D. (2013). `Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing'. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
128(1): 165­204.

Rodrik, D., and A. Subramanian (2005). From `Hindu Growth' to Productivity Surge: The
Mystery of the Indian Growth Transition. IMF Staff Papers, 52(2): 193­228.

Rosenstein-Rodan, P.N. (1943). `Problems of Industrialization of Eastern and South Eastern
Europe'. Economic Journal, 53.

Schwab, K. (2017). The fourth industrial revolution. Currency.
Schwarzer, Johannes, Sherry Stephenson et al (2019). "Services Trade for Sustainable, Balanced
and Inclusive Growth", Policy Brief produced for the T20 Task Force on Trade, Investment and



41
Globalization, available at https://t20japan.org/policy-brief-services-trade-sustainable-inclusive-
growth.

Shared Services and Outsourcing Network (2018). State of the Shared Services and Outsourcing
Industry: The Philippines Market Report 2018. London: Shared Services and Outsourcing Network.
Available at https://www.ssonetwork.com/talent-management-leadership-and-
culture/reports/state-of-the-shared-services-outsourcing-industry-report-the-philippines
(accessed on 21 October 2019).

Sukman, M. (2015). The Payoneer Freelancer Income Survey 2015. New York: Payoneer. Available at
http://blog.payoneer.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/freelancer-report-en-2015.pdf
(accessed on 21 October 2019).

Tadros, E. (2018). `EY Moves to Offshore Executive Assistants'. Australian Financial Review, 6
February. Available at https://www.afr.com/companies/professional-services/ey-moves-to-
offshore-executive-assistants-20180126-h0ovdn (accessed 21 October 2019).

Taglioni, D., and D.E. Winkler (2016). Making Global Value Chains Work for Development (English).
Trade and Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/450521467989506537/Making-global-value-
chains-work-for-development (accessed 22 October 2019).

Touraine, A. (1971). The Post-Industrial Society. Tomorrow's Social History: Classes, Conflicts and Culture
in the Programmed Society. New York: Random House.

Triplett, J.E., and B.P. Bosworth (2004). Services Productivity in the United States: New Sources of
Economic Growth. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.

Virmani, A. (2005). `Policy Regimes, Growth and Poverty in India: Lessons of Government
Failure and Entrepreneurial Success!'. ICRIER Working Paper 170. New Delhi: Indian Council
for Research on International Economic Relations. Available at
http://icrier.org/pdf/WP170GrPov11.pdf (accessed on 22 October 2019).

Weiner, M. (1991). The Child and the State in India: Child Labor and Education Policy in Comparative
Perspective. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Wu, Y., et al. (2016). Google's Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and
Machine Translation. Technical Report. Available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.08144 (accessed
on 21 October 2019).

Yang, D.L. (1997). Beyond Beijing--Liberalization and the Regions in China. London: Routledge.




42
