                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          NOT PLAYING FAVORITES:
              AN EXPERIMENT ON PARENTAL FAIRNESS PREFERENCES

                                         James Berry
                                      Rebecca Dizon-Ross
                                        Maulik Jagnani

                                      Working Paper 26732
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26732


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020


This study was funded by the J-PAL Post-Primary Initiative, the Charles E. Merrill Faculty
Research Fund at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, and the University of
Delaware. The study protocols received approval from the IRBs of Innovations for Poverty
Action, the University of Chicago, and the National Commission for Science and Technology in
Malawi. We thank Faith Millongo and Marumbo Munyenyembe for leading the fieldwork, and
Lea Dousset and Yashna Nandan for excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Sabrin Beg,
Marianne Bertrand, Esther Duflo, Pascaline Dupas, Richard Hornbeck, Seema Jayachandran,
Michael Kremer, Maria Rueda, Laura Schechter, and Jeremy Tobacman for helpful conversations
and feedback. We are also grateful for feedback from seminar participants at University of
Chicago (Booth GSB), MIT, University of Namur, Toulouse School of Economics, Aix-Marseille
University, University of Texas, and University of Melbourne, as well as conference participants
at the 2018 Advances in Field Experiments Conference, 2019 NBER Spring Education Meetings,
2019 RISE, 2019 SEEDEC, 2019 SITE, 2019 NEUDC, and 2019 MWIEDC. All errors are our
own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by James Berry, Rebecca Dizon-Ross, and Maulik Jagnani. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Not Playing Favorites: An Experiment on Parental Fairness Preferences
James Berry, Rebecca Dizon-Ross, and Maulik Jagnani
NBER Working Paper No. 26732
February 2020
JEL No. I20,J13

                                          ABSTRACT

We conduct a lab-in-the-field experiment to identify parents' preferences for investing in their
children. The experiment exogenously varied the short-run returns to educational investments to
identify how much parents care about maximizing total household earnings, minimizing cross-
sibling inequality in "outcomes" (child-level earnings), and minimizing cross-sibling inequality in
"inputs" (child-level investments). We show that while parents place some weight on maximizing
earnings, they also display a strong preference for equality in inputs, forgoing roughly 40% of
their potential earnings or 90% of a day's wage to equalize inputs. We find no evidence that
parents care about equalizing outcomes.

James Berry                                      Maulik Jagnani
Department of Economics                          Economic Growth Center
University of Delaware                           Department of Economics
jimberry@udel.edu                                Yale University
                                                 27 Hillhouse Avenue
Rebecca Dizon-Ross                               New Haven, CT 06511
Booth School of Business                         maulik.jagnani@yale.edu
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
rdr@chicagobooth.edu
1     Introduction
     What are parents' preferences for allocating resources across their children? Although
a large and influential literature has documented the profound importance of parental in-
vestments for children's outcomes (e.g., Cunha and Heckman, 2007; Cunha et al., 2006), our
current understanding of parents' preferences is limited. On the one hand, parents could treat
investments in their children as standard investment goods, investing to maximize returns
but potentially generating inequality across siblings. On the other hand, parents may be
averse to cross-sibling inequality, an aversion which could take multiple forms. They could be
averse to inequality in their children's outcomes (the amount the children ultimately earn).
Alternatively, they could be averse to inequality in inputs (the amount spent on each child's
schooling), an idea absent from the literature on parents' preferences for investment (e.g.,
Behrman et al., 1982) but with ties to the fairness and bequests literatures (e.g., Andreoni
and Bernheim, 2009).1 Each of these preferences have different predictions for behavior and
ultimately, for policy.
     Estimating parental preferences is challenging for three main reasons. First, to estimate
preferences from observed behavior, one needs to know the full perceived production function
mapping inputs to outcomes. For example, if a parent invests more in her high-ability child
than her low-ability child, she could be choosing what she thinks is the returns-maximizing
action, or she could be balancing a preference for maximizing returns with a preference
for, say, equalizing inputs. Second, it is hard to distinguish a preference for equality from
risk aversion. If parents choose to invest more equally across their children than returns
maximization without uncertainty would predict, it could reflect a preference for equal inputs,
or it could reflect risk-averse parents hedging their investments in the face of uncertainty.
The final challenge is identification: one needs multiple exogenous shocks to investment
returns to separately identify the weights parents put on different types of preferences.
     To overcome these challenges, we designed a lab-in-the-field experiment to identify par-
ents' preferences. Our experiment sampled parents in rural Malawi with two children enrolled
   1
     Consistent with this idea, raw educational expenditure data from our experimental sample suggest that
many parents spend exactly equal amounts on their different children (Figure A.1). American Time Use
Survey data also show that many parents spend roughly equal time with each of their children (Price, 2008).



                                                    1
in grades 5 to 7. We first asked each child to take a test. Based on his or her test score, each
child received a direct monetary payment. The child's monetary payment is our measure
of his or her outcome. (In the broader literature on parents' investments, the child's future
income is typically thought of as the outcome.) The experiment varied the child-specific
payment functions mapping test scores to payments, providing exogenous variation that we
use for identification.
       Before the test, parents received an input to divide between their children: tutoring
before the test. Each parent received 10 lottery tickets that she could allocate across her
children. One of these 10 tickets was randomly chosen, and the child whose ticket was selected
received one hour of tutoring. Therefore, a parent could choose which of her children would
receive tutoring by allocating all of her tickets to that child. To measure the perceived
production function, we elicited parents' beliefs about each of their children's test scores
without tutoring, and their expectations of how much each child's test score would increase
if he or she received tutoring.
       This setup yields a clean prediction about parents' behavior: a returns-maximizing
parent will give all of her tickets to the child she thinks provides greater returns to the in-
vestment, and none to the other. She should only deviate from an "all-or-nothing" allocation
if she is averse to inequality in the (expected) inputs she gives her children or to inequality
in her children's expected outcomes. Importantly, as we discuss later, this sharp prediction
holds even if there is uncertainty and parents are risk-averse, thus allowing us to sidestep
production uncertainty as a confound for identification.
       To identify preferences, we varied the child-specific payment functions in ways that have
qualitatively different predictions depending on parents' preferences for returns maximiza-
tion, equality in inputs, and equality in outcomes. For example, certain payment functions
provided the same payment per test score point to both children, whereas others delivered
a higher payment to the perceived higher-performer.2 If parents are returns-maximizers, in-
creasing the payment-per-test-score-point for the perceived higher-performing sibling would
cause parents to give that child more inputs (lottery tickets) because his or her expected
   2
    We used the "strategy method" and elicited parents' choices under every pair of child-specific payment
functions used in the experiment before randomly selecting one pair of payment functions to implement for
each parent.


                                                    2
payment gains from tutoring have increased. In contrast, if parents are averse to inequality
in outcomes, they would do the opposite: since the perceived lower-performing sibling's ex-
pected payments have decreased relative to his or her sibling's, parents who want to equalize
their children's expected payments would reallocate inputs to the perceived lower-performer
to help her catch up to her sibling.
       Our headline result is that parents display a quantitatively important preference for
equality in inputs, which causes them to leave substantial payments on the table. We
first test and reject the hypothesis that parents care only about maximizing returns. Only
45% of allocations were "all-or-nothing," assigning all tickets to one child and none to the
other, which is the prediction for returns-maximizers in our lottery environment. We next
establish that parents are averse to input inequality in particular, and that this preference
represents the primary reason they deviated from returns maximization. Parents chose to
equalize inputs in roughly 35% of their choices. Even when we substantially increased the
expected payment gains from maximizing returns--offering 10 times higher returns per point
to one child or the other--at least 30% of parents still equalized. This preference for equal
inputs meaningfully decreases earnings: the average parent earned roughly 40% less than
the maximum possible amount.3 Using a structural model to identify parents' preferences,
we find that parents are willing to give up an average of 1,300 MWK--90% of an adult's
daily wage--in order to invest equally in our experiment.4
       Our experimental design also allows us to estimate the preference weights parents place
on returns maximization and inequality aversion over outcomes. We find that parents place
some weight on maximizing returns, as they consistently invest more in a child when the
returns to tutoring for that child increase. By contrast, we fail to find any evidence that
parents care about equalizing outcomes. Our most direct evidence against inequality aver-
sion over outcomes comes from payment functions that exogenously delivered a lump sum
payment to one child only. If parents are inequality averse over outcomes, they should re-
spond to the lump sum by giving more tickets to the child's sibling to help close the gap in
   3
     These statistics represent forgone expected earnings as a percent of the expected earnings parents con-
trolled; in all scenarios, children received base expected payments that were inframarginal to parents' allo-
cations.
   4
     At the time of the study, the exchange rate was 715 MWK : 1 USD.



                                                     3
outcomes. However, we find no evidence that parents respond in this way.5
       We perform several supplementary analyses to rule out potential confounds to interpre-
tation. We show input equalization in our experiment does not reflect a lack of understanding
of how to maximize returns. We also present evidence that parents did not diverge from
"all-or-nothing" allocations due to uncertainty about children's performance or indifference
about which child should receive the tutoring. To mitigate concerns about demand effects
(i.e., that parents did not want to equalize but did it because they thought surveyors wanted
them to), we used high monetary stakes, enabled by the fact that we conducted our experi-
ment in a low-income setting. Finally, we ensured children in our experiment were not aware
their parents played a role in tutoring allocation. This allays concerns that input inequality
might be more visible to children in our experiment than elsewhere.
       Our findings have important policy implications. Many policies, such as gifted and
talented programs and remedial education programs, may only target one sibling within a
given household. The programs can thus have spillover effects, either positive or negative,
on non-targeted siblings. Our results suggest that policymakers may be able to promote
positive spillovers by leveraging parents' aversion to inequality in inputs. For example, if a
gifted and talented program often only affects one child per household, providing parents
with information about the high level of inputs provided to one of their children through
the program may encourage parents to spend more on their other children to mitigate the
inequality. Our findings thus suggest policy approaches that could be rigorously tested in
the future.
       This paper contributes to two main bodies of work in economics: the literature on
parental investment in children and the literature on preferences for fairness. Within the
research on parental investments, our primary contribution is to a classic economics literature
that characterizes parents' preferences for investing in their children and the balance between
returns-maximization and inequality aversion (e.g., Behrman et al., 1982, 1986; Pitt et al.,
1990). These papers rely primarily on functional form assumptions for identification; we
   5
     We follow the literature (e.g., Behrman et al. (1982)) and define inequality aversion over outcomes
as inequality aversion over income, not consumption. In contrast, if parents are inequality averse over con-
sumption, they could maximize returns at the investment stage and redistribute income after the experiment.
However, we show that most parents do not reallocate earnings ex post.



                                                     4
contribute by using exogenous variation to uncover parents' preferences. In addition, the
economics literature has always tested for aversion to inequality in outcomes ; our paper is the
first empirical economics paper to test for an aversion to inequality in inputs, which we show
is the dominant preference in our setting.6 In contrast, other disciplines often conceptualize
parents' preferences for fairness as preferences for equal treatment or equality in inputs (see
Trivers, 1974 in biology and Hertwig et al., 2002 in psychology). We build on this work by
devising a clean test for inequality aversion over inputs and quantifying its role relative to
other parental concerns.
       Our work relates to two other strands within the literature on parental investment. First,
several recent papers examine how parents' investments depend on their children's baseline
endowments, and whether parents prefer to reinforce these endowments by investing more
in their higher-endowment children, or to compensate by investing less. The findings are
mixed, with responses ranging from reinforcing, to zero, to compensatory (see Almond and
Mazumder, 2013, for a review). These papers, however, generally do not identify parents'
preferences themselves, as investments reflect the interaction between preferences and the
(unobserved) perceived production function. It is important to note that our result that
parents are inequality averse over inputs is not inconsistent with studies finding that parents
spend differently on their children. Indeed, we also find differential spending across children,
but that parents balance their desire to spend unequally to maximize returns with their desire
to equalize inputs, causing their choices to be more equal, not necessarily fully equal.
       Second, we relate to papers showing that parents often equally divide bequests among
their children.7 However, bequests differ from investments in several important ways. Unlike
investments, equally dividing bequests may have no efficiency costs. Investment-based con-
cepts of inputs and outcomes inequality also do not carry over to the bequests domain.
       We also contribute to the extensive literature that has examined fairness preferences
and has shown that people are averse to inequalities.8 The vast majority of this literature
   6
      From a theoretical perspective, Farmer and Tiefenthaler (1995) outlines different potential concepts of
fairness in intrahousehold allocation of resources, with explicit consideration for parents' preferences for
equality in both outcomes and inputs.
    7
      See, e.g., Bernheim and Severinov (2003); Menchik (1980); Wilhelm (1996).
    8
      Key contributions include Bolton and Ockenfels, 2000; Charness and Rabin, 2002; Fehr and Schmidt,
1999; Forsythe et al., 1994.



                                                     5
examines preferences over the distribution of final payoffs. In contrast, our study also exam-
ines preferences over the distribution of inputs to production, which generate a different type
of inefficiency. While preferences for redistributing final payoffs may generate inefficiencies
through moral hazard (since individuals do not keep the full fruits of their labor), prefer-
ences for equality at the production stage instead generate inefficiencies by directly causing
misallocation in inputs.
       Within the fairness literature, we tie most closely to three streams. First, we relate to
recent papers that examine whether, in risky situations, people care about equalizing payoffs
from an ex ante perspective (i.e., equalizing expected payoffs before the risk is realized) or
from an ex post perspective (i.e., after risk is realized). These papers find evidence for both
ex ante and ex post preferences, with ex ante preferences more prevalent upfront (Andreoni
et al., 2018; Brock et al., 2013; Cappelen et al., 2013; Krawczyk and Le Lec, 2010); for
example, the modal experimental participant in Andreoni et al. (2018) chose an ex ante fair
allocation ex ante and an ex post fair allocation ex post. In contrast, we focus on ex ante
preferences only and examine what type of ex ante fairness people care about, distinguishing
between notions of inputs and outcomes equality.9 The prior work also tests for ex ante
fairness concerns in lab settings; we extend this work to a high-stakes field setting. Second,
our work relates to papers documenting the widespread use of a "50-50" norm for dividing
monetary rewards and costs (Agrawal, 2002; Andreoni and Bernheim, 2009; Dasgupta and
Tao, 1998). These papers primarily examine settings where there is no efficiency cost of
adopting one sharing rule or another; in contrast, we show that the 50-50 norm extends to a
production setting where dividing inputs equally has large potential efficiency costs. Third,
we relate to papers examining preferences about the redistribution of income ex post, which
find that some people believe that inequalities in earned income are fair even if inequalities
in unearned income are not (e.g., Cherry et al., 2002; Fahr and Irlenbusch, 2000; Jakiela,
2015; Konow, 2003). This attitude may help explain why parents in our experiment do not
equalize outcomes (i.e., expected earnings), which may be seen as earned income.
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a conceptual framework
   9
    In the previous papers, all individuals are equally skilled at translating inputs to outcomes and hence
there are not multiple notions of ex ante fairness, whereas for us, ex ante equality in inputs and outcomes
diverge since some children are better at translating inputs into outcomes.


                                                    6
of parents' preferences. Section 3 describes the experimental design, and Section 4 presents
the results. Section 5 concludes.


2       Conceptual Framework
       Consider a utility maximizing parent with two children indexed by i  [1, 2]. The
parent is choosing the level of educational investment in each child, x1 and x2 . Investments
in child i weakly increase his or her present discounted lifetime earnings, with the relationship
determined by the earnings function: Ri (xi )  R(xi , ai , i ). Child i's earnings also depend
on her "endowment" or ability ai , which we define as her earnings potential or earnings when
xi = 0, and on i , a mean-0 noise term capturing uncertainty in the production of earnings.
When parents choose x1 and x2 , they know a1 and a2 , as well as the joint distribution of 1
and 2 but not their realizations.
       Parents' utility functions incorporate three main quantities: i) total expected house-
hold earnings (representing returns-maximization), ii) the absolute gap between children's
expected earnings (entering negatively, representing inequality aversion in outcomes),10 and
iii) the absolute gap between the inputs allocated to each child (entering negatively, repre-
senting inequality aversion in inputs). We also incorporate a preference for spending more
on one child or the other (e.g., a preference for a son over a daughter). The utility function
is a weighted sum of these quantities:11


                                 U (x1 , x2 ) = [ER1 (x1 ) + ER1 (x2 )]

                                               -  ER1 (x1 ) - ER2 (x2 )                                     (1)

                                               -  x1 - x2

                                               +  (z1 , z2 ) (x1 - x2 )
  10
      Note that this formulation, in which parents care about |ER1 (x1 ) - ER2 (x2 )|, captures aversion to
inequality in ex ante expected earnings. An alternate formulation might stipulate that parents are averse
only to inequalities in the final ex post distribution of outcomes (E |R1 (x1 ) - R2 (x2 )|). We adopt the ex
ante formulation since we study the decisions parents make from the ex ante perspective and because the
literature generally finds that people care about ex ante fairness from an ex ante perspective (Andreoni
et al., 2018; Brock et al., 2013; Cappelen et al., 2013; Krawczyk and Le Lec, 2010).
   11
      This weighted-sum formulation embeds two important assumptions: separability across the different
terms, and linearity in the inequality aversion terms. We make these assumptions for simplicity and (later)
ease of estimation, but our results are robust to relaxing them. The formulation also assumes the returns
maximization term is linear in earnings; this more substantively affects certain results, and we relax it below.

                                                       7
 is the weight on returns maximization and  and  are the weights on inequality aversion
of outcomes and of inputs. , , and  are all weakly positive.  (z1 , z2 ) is the parents'
relative preference for investing in child 1 relative to child 2; it depends on a vector of each
child's characteristics zi (e.g., gender, age) and can be positive or negative.
     The parent's problem is to choose x1 and x2 to maximize U (x1 , x2 ) subject to the budget
constraint x1 + x2  y , with y denoting the total educational budget.

Comparative Statics. To develop the basic predictions from the model, we consider cases
in which the parent places full weight on one of the components and zero on the others. In
these cases, the first-order conditions yield the following intuitive predictions:
     Returns Maximization ( > 0,  = 0,  = 0,  = 0). The parent invests to equalize the
                                            ER1 (x1 )       ER2 (x2 )
returns to investment across children:       x1
                                                        =    x2
                                                                      .   If there is no interior solution, she
gives all of her inputs to one child. Depending on the complementarity between x and the
children's endowments, she could invest more in the higher- or lower-endowment child.
     Inequality Aversion in Outcomes ( = 0,  > 0,  = 0,  = 0). The parent invests
first in the lower-endowment child so that that child's earnings "catch up" with those of the
higher-endowment child. At a sufficiently high y , she may begin to invest a positive amount
in the higher-endowment child since that child's earnings may then begin to lag behind the
lower-endowment child's earnings. If investments and endowments are complements, she will
always invest more in total in the lower-endowment child.
     Inequality Aversion in Inputs ( = 0,  = 0,  > 0,  = 0). The parent seeks to equalize
x1 and x2 , regardless of the shape of R1 (x1 ) and R2 (x2 ).
     Child-specific Preferences ( = 0,  = 0,  = 0,  = 0). The parent gives more inputs to
child 1 if  (z1 , z2 ) > 0 and to child 2 if  (z1 , z2 ) < 0.

Identification of Equation (1). We aim to estimate , , and  from observed data on
x1 and x2 . To do so, we need to know the full perceived earnings functions, ER1 (x1 ) and
ERx (x2 ), and observe how investments respond to multiple exogenous "shocks" to these
functions (e.g., shocks that increase the returns for the lower-endowment child relative to
the higher-endowment child).
     We also want our identification strategy to be robust to different functional forms for



                                                    8
utility. Although for simplicity we model the returns-maximization term as linear in total
earnings, our strategy should be robust to nonlinearity (e.g., if the first term in equation
(1) became Eu (R1 (x1 ) + R2 (x2 )) for some concave u(·)). Nonlinearity complicates identi-
fication because it means that returns-maximizing parents are risk averse, and risk aversion
may "look like" inequality aversion in the data: risk-averse parents may choose more equal
investments than the investments that maximize expected household earnings even if the
parents are pure returns-maximizers.
     One can sidestep this identification challenge by considering how parents choose to
allocate "probabilistic investments." Consider a case where a parent is choosing how to
allocate a single free binary investment (in our case: one indivisible tutoring class) between
her children. Since the investment is binary, xi  {0, 1}. To determine who receives the
investment, the parent receives n lottery tickets to allocate between her children, where each
                                             1
ticket has the same chance of being chosen ( n ), exactly one ticket is chosen per household,
and the child whose ticket is chosen receives the binary investment.
     The lottery setup yields a sharp test for inequality aversion: parents who do not care
about inequality aversion ( = 0,  = 0) will choose "all-or-nothing" allocations of lottery
tickets, giving all tickets to one child or the other. If parents choose "split" allocations, giving
positive allocations to both children, it must be that either  = 0 or  = 0, or that it is the
knife's edge (and hence empirically unlikely) case that the parent is exactly indifferent about
which child receives the binary investment. The prediction that split allocations generally
imply inequality aversion holds even with risk aversion and uncertainty in the production
of earnings. The prediction follows from the fact that, with  = 0,  = 0, expected utility
is linear in lottery tickets, but also holds with many preferences that are non-linear in
probability (e.g., prospect theory preferences; Kahneman et al., 2016). See Appendix B
for additional discussion. The intuition for this all-or-nothing prediction is straightforward:
since only one child ultimately receives the binary investment, if parents are not averse to
inequality, they should simply choose which child they want to receive it and give all tickets
to that child.
     The all-or-nothing test for inequality aversion is a test for caring about a specific type



                                                 9
of inequality: inequality in ex ante or expected inputs and outcomes.12 If some parents are
only averse to inequalities in the final ex post distribution of inputs or outcomes (i.e., if
a parent cares only about whether her children ultimately receive unequal inputs) but not
about the ex ante expected input distribution, our test will categorize them as not averse to
inequality. In that way, the test is conservative or shaded towards the "null" of the standard
returns-maximizing model.13


3       Design and Procedures
       Our goal is to identify the preference weights , , and  . We use a lab-in-the-field
experiment to shock children's short-run earnings and estimate these preferences.
       We recruited roughly 300 parents with two children enrolled in grade 5 through grade
7 in government schools in southern Malawi during December of 2017. Both children were
asked to take a math test,14 and a monetary payment was delivered directly to the children
based on their test scores. The monetary payment is our measure of the outcome (the R(·)
function), which, in the literature, generally represents the earnings from education. Parents
were given an input: 10 lottery tickets to be allocated across their children, where one ticket
would be chosen per household and the lottery winner would receive one hour of tutoring on
the material covered on the test. Thus--if they wanted to--parents could guarantee which of
their children would receive tutoring by giving all tickets to that child. We measured parents'
beliefs of each child's test score without the tutoring and of the amount each child's test score
would increase with tutoring. We denote Child L and Child H as the child who the parent
believed would have lower and higher test scores without tutoring, respectively.15
  12
     On the inputs side, this means that the third term of equation (1) becomes - Ex1 - Ex2 .
  13
     That said, it is not always the case that a parent who chooses to split expected inputs would also choose
to split actual inputs; for example, if the input has convex returns (and therefore lower total returns when
split across children), the parent might split expected inputs but not actual inputs. See, e.g., Andreoni et al.
(2018); Brock et al. (2013); Cappelen et al. (2013); Krawczyk and Le Lec (2010) for further discussion of the
distinction between ex ante and ex post notions of fairness. Our notion of aversion to inequality in ex ante
expected inputs can be seen as a form of "procedural" fairness (e.g., Krawczyk and Le Lec 2010), wherein
people care not just about the ex post outcome but also the procedure that produced it. A classic example of
similar preferences comes from Machina (1989), who observes that a parent may be indifferent about which
of her children receive an indivisible good but may strictly prefer to randomize which receives it.
  14
     We focused on math to increase the reliability of the test and improve parents' ability to guess their
children's scores.
  15
     If parents' beliefs about both their children's test scores were equal, we arbitrarily defined Child L as
the child whose first name comes first alphabetically.


                                                      10
       Our identification comes from exogenously varying the payment functions that mapped
child-specific scores to payments. For example, one payment function awarded both children
the same payment per test-score-point, whereas another gave one child a higher payment
than his or her sibling. We describe the payment functions in detail in Section 3.2 below.
In order to maximize statistical power, we used the "strategy method": we presented each
parent with five scenarios for what the payment functions might be, each parent chose
allocations under each of the five scenarios, and then one scenario was randomly chosen to
be implemented for each parent. Lottery tickets were assigned to both children based on
their parents' allocation for that scenario.16
       The elicitation used real stakes. Children were selected for (and received) real tutoring
based on the lottery tickets chosen by their parents. Children then took the test and received
cash payments based on their test scores and the randomly selected payment functions.
       Because cash is potentially transferable within the household, the use of a cash re-
ward could in theory bias us towards finding returns-maximization;17 our experiment is thus
conservative in rejecting the null of the "standard model" of returns maximization. To inves-
tigate whether the cash is in fact transferred within the households, we conduct a follow-up
survey after the experiment and find limited evidence that it is, thus mitigating concerns
about this bias, as described in Section 4.3.

3.1      Experimental Procedures
       Figure A.2 presents a visual representation of the process for the experiment. Roughly
a week prior to the experiment, participating parents completed a survey that elicited de-
  16
     This adds a second layer of uncertainty: in addition to there being a lottery within scenarios about
which ticket would be chosen, there is also a lottery across scenarios determining which scenario would be
chosen. Since inequality aversion in our model is over expected inputs and outcomes, this raises a question
regarding the level at which parents evaluate the expectation. We assume that parents "narrowly bracket"
and try to equalize expected inputs and outcomes within scenarios; Exley and Kessler (2019) show that
people generally narrowly bracket equity concerns. This assumption is conservative for estimating inequality
aversion: if instead parents try to minimize expected inputs and outcomes across scenarios, that would bias
us away from detecting inequality aversion.
  17
     In particular, parents who are averse to inequalities in consumption but not earnings might returns
maximize at the investment stage and then reallocate ex post. Since we aim to identify inequality aversion
over earnings, not over consumption, the ability to reallocate ex post does not itself create bias. The bias
would only arise if it is easier for parents to reallocate ex post in our experiment than other settings, thus
decreasing the likelihood that they equalize outcomes ex ante in our experiment because they know they can
easily equalize ex post.



                                                     11
mographic information, investments, and attitudes regarding their children's education. At
this time, surveyors also described the math test that the children would take and measured
parents' beliefs about each of their children's expected test score without tutoring and ex-
pected test score gains from tutoring, as well as the certainty of their beliefs. On the day of
the experiment, parents were reminded of their beliefs and given a chance to change their
responses if they wished. Surveyors then described the experimental design and conducted
the experiment.
       Because the experiment involves a number of steps, we took multiple measures during
the explanation of the design to ensure understanding. We began the experimental design
explanation with a "placebo" lottery designed to verify whether parents understood how to
maximize monetary returns in a lottery environment; for the very few parents who did not
understand, we then explained how to do so. Next, we gave parents a detailed overview of
the full experimental design, walking them through two "practice" (hypothetical) scenarios;
the practice scenarios used different payment functions than those used in the actual exper-
iment but were explained in the same way as the experimental scenarios. After the practice
scenarios, surveyors also walked parents through a sample "scenario lottery" to explain how
the strategy method worked in this context. During the lottery explanation, surveyors also
told parents that their children would not be told that their parents had any influence over
which child received tutoring. Children were told only that tutoring was allocated by a
random lottery.
       For both the practice scenarios and those used in the experiment, surveyors explained
the procedure as follows.18 They began by describing the payment function for that scenario.
They then walked parents through two visual aids, one graphical and one table-based. These
displayed, for each ticket allocation the parents could choose, the expected payments for
each child as well as (in the graphical version) the total expected payments across both
children. Surveyors drew the graphs based on instructions from their tablets, which used
parents' beliefs and the specific scenario to calculate expected payoffs under each ticket
allocation. The graph clearly displayed the total expected payments as well as child-specific
expected payments for each potential allocation (allowing the parent to observe the returns-
 18
      See Appendix D for sample scripts and visual aids for Scenario 1.


                                                     12
maximizing and outcomes-inequality-minimizing allocations), but did not display anything
about the gap in inputs.
       As part of the explanations, surveyors told parents how to allocate their tickets if they
wanted to maximize returns (total expected experimental earnings) or equalize outcomes
(child-specific experimental earnings) or inputs in each scenario. Although this explanation
could be seen as leading, we prioritized parental understanding of the experiment; we wanted
to ensure that departures from returns maximization did not reflect poor understanding.
Parents were also told that they could simply choose which child they wanted to receive
tutoring by allocating all tickets to that child. Finally, after each practice scenario, surveyors
asked parents questions to test their understanding of how to allocate tickets to achieve each
of the goals above; no such questions were asked after the real experimental scenarios.
       After the practice scenarios and explanation of the lottery, parents made their actual ex-
perimental allocations. Surveyors explained each scenario following the procedure described
above, and parents made their selections.19 We then conducted the lottery using the fol-
lowing steps: (1) surveyors' tablets randomly selected one scenario; (2) surveyors assigned
the 10 tickets to children based on their parents' allocation for that scenario; and (3) the
parents were asked to pick a ticket based on the ticket allocation for the selected scenario.
For example, if the parent had allocated five tickets to each child for the selected scenario,
the surveyor entered the initials of each child on five out of the ten tickets, and asked the
parent to pick a ticket out of a hat to select the winner of the lottery.
       Once the experiment was completed, a short survey was administered to gauge parental
understanding about the experiment and address confounds. The "winning" child was then
provided an hour of tutoring, after which all children took the test, with all children at a
given school taking the test at the same time. Immediately after the test, cash earnings were
delivered directly to the children in individual envelopes.20
  19
     To ensure parent understanding, when surveyors explained a new scenario, they would not just explain
the payment function but also specify what had changed relative to the payment function from the previous
scenario. To keep this explanation uniform and easy for surveyors to master, we did not randomize the
order in which scenarios were presented. However, because the payment function parameters do not move
montonically with the order in which they were presented, it is unlikely that order effects drive our results.
  20
     To deliver the cash, all the children and the remaining parents gathered in a classroom after the test.
Surveyors called children up to the front of the room to receive their cash envelope. The amounts were not
announced publicly.



                                                     13
3.2     Scenarios and Predictions
      We now describe the payment functions for each scenario in the experiment and how
they allow us to identify the parameters of the parental utility function specified in Section 2.
The payment function for child i  {L, H } from household k in scenario j can be expressed
as the sum of a lump-sum transfer Bij plus a reward of Cij per point on the test:


                         Pijk = Bij + Cij (T estScoreik - T hresholdk )


Pijk is the child's payment if she receives a score of T estScoreik on the test (test scores
are percentage scores out of 100). T hresholdk equals parent k 's belief about child L's test
score without tutoring, rounded down to the nearest 10. We use the same threshold for both
children in household k ; we reward performance above this value in order to implement steep
payment functions while keeping total payments reasonable. We suppress the k index going
forward.
      Figure 1 presents the five payment function scenarios used in the experiment as well as
the predictions for how parents would allocate their tickets in each scenario if their utility
functions only weighted (a) returns-maximization, (b) inequality aversion over outcomes, or
(c) inequality aversion over inputs. We generate the predictions as follows. In each sce-
nario, the returns-maximizing strategy is to give all tickets to the child with larger expected
payment gains from tutoring, calculated as the parent's belief about each child's test score
gains from tutoring (denoted Ri ) multiplied by the child's scenario-specific payment func-
tion slope Cij . Thus, of the payment function parameters, only Cij matters, not the lump
sum amount Bij . In contrast, the outcomes-inequality-minimizing strategy is to minimize
the cross-child expected payment gap, which depends on both Bij and Cij because both de-
termine expected payments. Finally, the inputs-inequality-minimizing strategy is to equate
tickets across children regardless of Bij or Cij .
      Figure 1 shows the predictions for each scenario separately, but only for ease of illus-
tration: our analysis primarily uses cross-scenario variation for identification. The cross-
scenario (i.e., within-child) variation originates from the experimental variation in the pay-
ment functions, and controls for the endogenous child- and parent-level factors affecting


                                                14
                                                Figure 1: Payment Function Scenarios and Predictions

                   Payment Function Scenarios                                        Predictions: Would parents give more tickets
       Child i's payment = Bi + Ci (T estScorei - T hreshold1 )                      to Child L, Child H, or give equally to both?
                                            Child L2         Child H
                                                                                                                   Inequality               Inequality
                                                                                   Returns
       Scenario                            BL       CL      BH      CH                                              Aversion                 Aversion
                                                                                 Maximization3
                                                                                                                  of Outcomes                of Inputs
                                                                                                                  If RL < RH : L
                                                                                 If RL < RH : H
                                                                                                                 If RL = RH : L4
       1. Base Case                         0       10       0       10    If RL = RH : No prediction                                          Equal
                                                                                                              If RL > RH : Depends
                                                                                 If RL > RH : L
                                                                                                                  on parameters5

       2. Higher Returns
                                            0       10       0      100                   H6                              L                    Equal
          to Child H
15




       3. Higher Returns
                                            0      100       0       10                   L7                             H8                    Equal
          to Child L


                                                                                 If RL < RH : H
       4. Lump Sum to
                                          1000      10       0       10    If RL = RH : No prediction                     H                    Equal
          Child L
                                                                                 If RL > RH : L

       5. Higher Returns
          to Child L & Lump                 0      100     6000      10                   L6                              L                    Equal
          Sum to Child H
     Notes: 1. Threshold is the parent's belief about Child L's test score without tutoring, rounded down to the nearest 10.
     2. Child L (lower-performing child) defined as the one whom the parent perceived would have a (weakly) lower test score without tutoring.
     3. Ri = parent's belief about child i's score without tutoring - belief about child i's score without tutoring.
     66% of parents believed RL < RH , 19% believed RL = RH , and 14% believed RL > RH .
     4. Assumes test score for Child L without tutoring is strictly less than for Child H without tutoring. If equal, no prediction.
     5. Defining Si as the test score without tutoring, tickets to L = 10(SH - SL + RH )/(RL + RH ) (unless that falls outside of the 0-10 range).
     6. For 96% of parents.
     7. For 95% of parents.
     8. For 98% of parents.
choices, such as parents' beliefs about the benefits for tutoring for each of their children,
Ri . In addition, although the predictions shown in Figure 1 assume that the only value
of the tutoring to parents is the short-run monetary payments their children will receive
(and thus that parents ignore any potential long-run or non-monetary benefits of tutoring),
this assumption is again only for expositional purposes.21 The cross-scenario predictions we
take to the data are robust to parents believing that tutoring has additional value, as they
difference out any considerations that are constant across scenarios.22
        Note that there is one important hypothesis test we perform that does not depend on
cross-scenario variation: the test of whether parents only choose all-or-nothing allocations (a
test for pure returns maximization). The test does not require cross-scenario variation be-
cause it holds regardless of parents' beliefs about their children's test scores or the additional
value to tutoring, obviating the need for cross-scenario variation to control for beliefs.
        In our Base Case scenario (Scenario 1), the payment functions for both children are the
same: both children receive MWK 10 worth of rewards for each test score point above the
threshold (CL = CH = 10), with no lump-sum transfers (BL = BH = 0). The other four
scenarios are variations on the base case designed to identify the utility function parame-
ters.
        We designed two scenarios to yield opposite predictions for returns-maximization and
inequality aversion over outcomes, thus letting us test which preference parents weigh more
heavily on average. Scenario 2, Higher Returns to Child H, gives Child H a ten times higher
per-point reward than Child L: CH is 100 MWK while CL is 10 MWK. Neither child receives a
lump sum. Increasing CH has two effects. First, it increases the returns to receiving tutoring
for Child H relative to Child L enough that, for 96% of households in our sample, the returns-
maximizing strategy (for experimental earnings) is to give all inputs to Child H. Second, it
increases Child H's expected payments for any ticket allocation that the parent could choose.
As a result, the outcomes-inequality-minimizing choice (for experimental earnings) is to give
all inputs to Child L. Scenario 3, Higher Returns to Child L, exchanges the payment functions
  21
     The assumption is also consistent with survey data: Over 92% parents said they were only thinking about
the short-run monetary payment returns to tutoring when making their experimental ticket allocations.
  22
     We also assume away child-specific preferences when discussing these predictions. Because these prefer-
ences are constant across scenarios, they are also differenced out in cross-scenario comparisons.



                                                    16
used in Higher Returns to Child H between Child L and Child H. Relative to Higher Returns
to Child H, returns-maximizing parents would now reallocate to Child L, whereas outcomes-
inequality-minimizing parents would do the opposite.
       Our next scenario, Lump Sum to Child L (Scenario 4), was designed specifically to test
for inequality aversion over outcomes. Relative to the Base Case, Lump Sum to Child L
delivers a lump sum transfer, BL , of MWK 1000 to Child L while delivering no lump sum
transfer to Child H. For both children, the per-point rewards Ci remain the same as in the
Base Case : 10 MWK per point. Increasing Child L's lump sum transfer, BL , should not
change his or her expected cash rewards from receiving tutoring, RL CL , and thus does not
affect parents' returns-maximizing choices; nor does it affect their input-equalizing choices.
However, lump sum transfers do affect the outcomes-equalizing choice: since giving a lump
sum transfer to one child increases his or her expected payments, an outcomes-equalizing
parent would respond by reallocating inputs to that child's sibling to increase the sibling's
expected payments.
       In both the Higher Returns to Child H and Higher Returns to Child L scenarios, both
the outcomes-inequality-minimizing and the returns-maximizing choices are all-or-nothing
allocations. However, in both cases, they are different all-or-nothing allocations (i.e., the
child a returns-maximizing parent would choose is the opposite of the child an outcomes-
inequality-minimizing parent would choose). Thus, if parents' preferences place positive
weight on both returns maximization and inequality aversion over outcomes, it could cause
parents to choose split allocations.23
       To shed light on whether split allocations reflect inequality aversion over inputs, we
introduce a final scenario, Higher Returns to Child L & Lump Sum to Child H (Scenario
5), that adjusts the payment functions so that the child a returns-maximizing parent would
choose is the same as the child a outcomes-inequality-minimizing parent would choose (both
are Child L). As a result, if we see similar numbers of parents choosing split allocations in
that scenario, it is unlikely that the splitting reflects a balance between inequality aversion
over outcomes and returns maximization; instead, it suggests parents care directly about
  23
    While this is technically only true in the case where the utility function is nonlinear in the various terms
instead of linear as in equation (1), since with linear terms the solution will be at a corner, we want our
predictions to be robust to nonlinearity.


                                                      17
minimizing inequality in inputs.24
       Another distinctive prediction of inequality aversion over inputs--testable using any
of our scenarios--is that there should be excess mass (relative to a smooth distribution)
in the density of choices at the equal allocation point. No other theories should produce
this excess mass, since all other factors (e.g., outcomes inequality or expected returns) are
smooth through the equal-allocation point.
       Figure 2 depicts the scenarios and identifying variation graphically. For each scenario,
there are two bars, with the left bar showing the case where parents give all 10 tickets to
Child H and the right bar showing the case where parents give all 10 tickets to Child L. The
height of each bar represents expected household earnings in that case (i.e., the sum of Child
L's and Child H's expected earnings), averaged across all households in the sample.

                        Figure 2: Expected Earnings Vary Within and Across Scenarios

                                                                                                                  8261
                                      8,000




                                                                                                           7278
              Expected Earnings (MWK)
                               6,000




                                                             3914
                      4,000




                                                                    2570
                                                                                    2261
              2,000




                                                                                            1472   1439
                                                                             1278
                                               472   439
                           0




                                              10 H 10 L      10 H 10 L       10 H 10 L      10 H 10 L      10 H 10 L
                                              1. Base Case    2. Higher      3. Higher     4. Lump Sum 5. Higher Returns
                                                             Returns to H   Returns to L        to L         to L &
                                                                                                          Lump Sum
                                                                                                              to H
                                                                             Scenario
                                                                Child H Earnings            Child L Earnings


Notes: This figure presents, for each scenario, the mean perceived expected experimental earnings for Child
L and Child H in the cases when all ten tickets are given to Child L and when all ten tickets are given to
Child H.

       There are a few takeaways from Figure 2. First, in the scenarios where the payment per
  24
    Note that this prediction depends on parents not having important child-specific preferences for Child
H, or beliefs that Child H has higher non-monetary or additional benefits from tutoring than Child L. To
assess this possibility, we also test the prediction excluding parents who appear to have preferences for Child
H, as noted in footnote 29 of Section 4.3.

                                                                             18
test score point Ci varies substantially across children (Scenarios 2, 3, and 5), there are large
within-scenario differences in expected household earnings depending on whom the parent
gives tickets to. For example, in Scenario 2 (Higher Returns to Child H ), parents on average
would sacrifice MWK 1,344, or 96% of an adult's daily wage, if they allocate all of their tickets
to Child L instead of Child H.25 Thus, it is costly for parents to not maximize returns.
Second, there are meaningful differences across scenarios in terms of the total earnings,
earnings distribution, and which child is the higher-return child. Third, although in several
scenarios the average parent cannot perfectly equalize Child L's and Child H's expected
payments, parents' allocations can still make meaningful headway towards equality. For
example, in scenario 1, the average parent will decrease payment inequality between Child
L and H by 88%, from 292 MWK to 35 MWK, if she allocates all tickets to Child L instead
of Child H. Across all scenarios, the average parent will decrease payment inequality by 50%
if she always chooses the outcome-inequality-minimizing allocation instead of the opposite.
Finally, much of our identification requires that parents believe that tutoring increases test
scores. The figure implicitly shows that parents on average believe this--if not, the left and
right bars for each scenario would have the same height. In the next subsection we also show
that nearly all parents believe this as well.
       Our experiment identifies preferences based on parents' beliefs about their children's
scores, which other work shows are often inaccurate (Banerji et al., 2017; Dizon-Ross, 2019).
Fortunately, whether parents' beliefs are accurate is not important for our identification:
we are identifying parents' preferences conditional on their beliefs. Potential inaccuracies
should only affect our estimation if parents' beliefs distributions are uncertain and if that
uncertainty affects their allocations; as we discuss later in Section 4.3, this does not appear
to be the case here.

3.3      Validation of Method and Respondent Understanding
       Since our experimental design involves a number of steps, it is important to validate that
parents indeed understood the set-up and how to maximize returns. We present multiple
  25
   The daily wage for adults was estimated to be 1,400 MWK by field staff at the time of the study.
Gross Domestic Product per capita in Malawi was 260,501 MWK, or 364 USD in 2017 (World Bank, 2020).
Assuming a working year of 275 days (based on a six-day workweek minus time off), this is equivalent to 947
MWK, or 1.32 USD per work day, so our experimental stakes are even higher relative to that benchmark.


                                                    19
pieces of evidence that they did. First, in the placebo lottery, we asked parents to allocate
10 lottery tickets between two (hypothetical) prizes just like they did with real stakes in the
main experiment; however, here the two prizes were monetary prizes to be given directly to
the parent: 50 MWK (0.07 USD) or 100 MWK. As shown in Figure 3, 97% (280/289) of
parents allocated 100% of the tickets to the larger 100 MWK prize, suggesting that the vast
majority of parents understand how to maximize returns in a lottery.
           Figure 3: Nearly All Parents Maximized Returns in the Placebo Lottery
                                   100




                                                                                          96.9%
                                   80
                      Percentage
                                   60
                                   40
                                   20




                                         0.3%                      1.4%
                                   0




                                          0     1   2     3    4    5     6   7   8   9    10
                                                        Tickets to Larger Prize


      Second, for each scenario, after we elicited ticket allocations, we asked parents about the
rationale behind their chosen allocation. In Appendix Table A.1, we show that the stated
rationales correlate well with the actual choices. Thus, parents appear to have correctly
understood the experimental setup.

3.4     Summary Statistics
      Table 1 reports selected summary statistics from our sample. Roughly 85% of all re-
spondents are female. Fifty-five percent of the child sample is female. The average parent
in our sample spends roughly MWK 8400/year (11.75 USD) on education for each of her
children. On average, parents believe that Child H's score on the test will be 11 percentage
points (pp) higher than Child L's. Our experiment depends on parents perceiving that the
test score returns to tutoring are positive; critically, 99% of parents thought it would have
positive returns for at least one of their children and 93% thought it would have positive
returns for both. Parents generally believed that tutoring would have higher score returns

                                                              20
for Child H than Child L, increasing Child L's score by 11pp and Child H's by 18pp, on
average.

                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics

 A. Respondent Characteristics:
 Completed Grade 8                                                                                      0.33
                                                                                                       (0.47)
 Female                                                                                                 0.85
                                                                                                       (0.36)
 Believed tutoring had positive returns for at least one child                                          0.99
                                                                                                       (0.08)
 Believed tutoring had positive returns for both children                                               0.93
                                                                                                       (0.26)
 B. Child Characteristics:                                                             Child L     Child H
 Grade 5                                                                                 0.40        0.38
                                                                                        (0.49)      (0.49)
 Grade 6                                                                                 0.32        0.36
                                                                                        (0.47)      (0.48)
 Grade 7                                                                                 0.27        0.26
                                                                                        (0.45)      (0.44)
 Female                                                                                  0.55        0.56
                                                                                        (0.50)      (0.50)
 Annual household education expenditure (MWK)                                            8412           8372
                                                                                        (9316)         (9020)
 Parent believed child had positive returns to tutoring                                  0.96           0.96
                                                                                        (0.20)         (0.19)
 Parent's belief of score without tutoring (out of 100)                                 53.14           67.87
                                                                                       (13.26)         (13.48)
 Parent's belief of score with tutoring (out of 100)                                    64.43           82.43
                                                                                       (14.02)         (12.76)
 Parent believed child had strictly higher returns to tutoring than sibling              0.14            0.66
                                                                                        (0.35)          (0.47)
 Math test score (out of 100)                                                           41.91           44.14
                                                                                       (25.16)         (24.23)
 Received tutoring                                                                       0.43            0.57
                                                                                        (0.50)          (0.50)
 Total Households                                                                                289
Notes: This table presents baseline summary statistics for the sample. All statistics are proportions unless
otherwise indicated. Standard deviations are in parentheses. "Returns" to tutoring is defined as the difference
between beliefs of the test scores with and without tutoring.




                                                      21
4      Experimental Results
      This section presents the main results of the experiment. We begin by analyzing the
raw data and comparing the results across our experimental scenarios to provide qualitative
evidence on the preference parameters. We then estimate the magnitudes of the prefer-
ence parameters using structural estimation. Finally, we present evidence against possible
confounds and rule out alternative explanations for our findings.

4.1     Qualitative Evidence for Each Type of Preference
Returns Maximization: We first test whether parents only value maximizing returns. If
so, they should allocate their tickets in an all-or-nothing fashion. Instead, Figure 4 shows
that only 44% of allocations were all-or nothing. In 56% of allocations, both children received
non-zero tickets. Thus, parents appear to not be pure returns-maximizers but rather to also
care about equality and fairness.

           Figure 4: Parents Often Did Not Maximize Returns in the Experiment


                               H0: 0=5                                                    H0: 10=5
                          40




                               p-value=0.001                                         p-value<0.001


                                                                   37%
                          30
                  Percentage
                          20




                                25%
                                                                                           19%
                          10
                          0




                                 0     1       2   3      4         5    6   7   8    9     10
                                                       Tickets to Child L

Notes: This figure presents the allocation of experimental lottery tickets across children, pooled across
scenarios 1-5, and 95% confidence intervals.


      Although parents are not pure returns-maximizers, Figure 5 presents evidence that par-
ents do still place positive weight on returns maximization. Panel (a) of Figure 5 compares
Scenario 2 (Higher Returns to Child H ) and Scenario 3 (Higher Returns to Child L). Switch-

                                                              22
ing from Scenario 2 to Scenario 3 increases the payment per test score point for Child L
relative to Child H. As a result, returns maximization suggests parents should reallocate
tickets to Child L, as indicated by the "Returns Maximization" arrow. In contrast, increas-
ing the payment per test score point for Child L also effectively makes Child L richer; if
parents were inequality averse over outcomes, they would thus reallocate in the opposite
direction, as indicated by the "IA Outcomes" arrow. Consistent with returns-maximization,
we find that parents increase their allocations to Child L by a statistically significant 1.6
tickets (Figure 6), with over 20 percentage points (pp) fewer parents giving all of their tickets
to Child H, and 10 pp more parents giving all tickets to Child L (Figure 5(a)).

Figure 5: Consistent with Returns Maximization, When the Per-Point Reward for a Child
Increased, Parents Shifted Inputs Toward That Child

                                    IA Outcomes     Returns Maximization                                                   IA Outcomes      Returns Maximization
            50




                                                                                                   50
                       40




                                                                                                              40
   Percent of Allocations




                                                                                          Percent of Allocations
                30




                                                                                                       30
         20




                                                                                                20
   10




                                                                                          10
            0




                                                                                                   0




                            0   1     2   3      4     5   6     7   8     9   10                                  0   1     2    3      4     5   6     7   8     9     10
                                              Tickets to Child L                                                                      Tickets to Child L
                                Higher returns to H            Higher returns to L                                           Higher returns to H             Base case


 (a) Scenario 2 (Higher Returns to Child H ) vs. Sce- (b) Scenario 2 (Higher Returns to Child H ) vs. Sce-
 nario 3 (Higher Returns to Child L)                  nario 1 (Base Case )

Notes: Each of these figures present the allocation of lottery tickets for two separate scenarios. The arrow
labeled "Returns Maximization" shows the direction that returns maximization predicts allocations would
move when going from the solid scenario to the outlined scenario, and the arrow labeled "IA Outcomes"
shows the direction that inequality aversion over outcomes predicts allocations would move when going from
the solid to the outlined scenario.


             Although these shifts in allocations are meaningful, it is important to note that they are
still quite muted relative to a pure returns-maximizing response. If parents were maximizing
experimental earnings, the share of parents giving all tickets to Child L in Figure 5(a) should
go from 0 to 100%, not 15% to 25%. The fact that parents deviate from returns maximization
may be particularly surprising given that the potential costs are large. For example, Child L's
average expected experimental gains from tutoring are a whole 983 MWK--70% of a day's


                                                                                     23
             Figure 6: The Tickets Allocated to Child L Varied Across Scenarios




                          10
                                                                           H0: (1)=(3)
                                                                          p-value<0.01
              Number of Tickets to Child L
                                         8                H0: (1)=(2)      H0: (2)=(3)      H0: (1)=(4)    H0: (3)=(5)
                                                         p-value<0.01     p-value<0.01     p-value=0.04   p-value=0.07
                      4        6




                                               4.39           3.85             5.46            4.73            5.11
              2           0




                                                (1)            (2)              (3)            (4)              (5)
                                             Base Case   Higher Returns   Higher Returns   Lump Sum       Higher Returns
                                                           to Child H       to Child L     to Child L      to Child L &
                                                                                                            Lump Sum
                                                                                                            to Child H
                                                                             Scenario

Notes: This figure presents average lottery tickets allocated (out of 10) to Child L, and 95% confidence
intervals. P-values correspond to the null hypotheses of equal ticket allocation between given scenarios.


wage--higher than Child H's in Scenario 2, and the differences are even larger in Scenario
3. This suggests that parents also place high weight on preference components other than
returns maximization, a point we return to below.
     Panel (b) of Figure 5 presents a similar comparison between Scenarios 3 (Higher Returns
to Child L) and 1 (Base Case ). The magnitudes of the shifts are smaller due to the smaller
variation across payment functions, but the takeaway is the same: parents place positive
weight on maximizing returns and, on average, their desire to maximize returns dominates
any potential desire to equalize outcomes.

Inequality Aversion over Outcomes. Next, we test whether parents place positive
weight on inequality aversion over outcomes ( > 0). Relative to the Base Case (Scenario
1), the Lump Sum to Child L scenario (Scenario 4) delivers a lump sum to Child L without
changing the per-point rewards for either child. The only theory that predicts parents will
react to this change is inequality aversion in outcomes, which predicts that parents would
reallocate towards Child H. Note that the lump sum is large enough--at MWK 1000 (1.40
USD), or 70% of a day's wage --that if parents did care about inequality in outcomes, we

                                                                            24
would expect to see meaningful responses. However, in aggregate, we fail to find evidence for
reallocation towards Child H (Figure 7, Panel (a)). If anything, parents, on average, slightly
reallocate in the opposite direction. Turning to individual-level changes, equal numbers of
parents reallocate to and away from Child L, suggesting the reallocations primarily represent
noise (Figure A.3). Figure 7(b) shows similar findings from comparing Higher Returns to
Child L (Scenario 3) and Higher Returns to Child L & Lump Sum to Child H (Scenario 5).
These scenarios were included in the design for other reasons but the only difference between
them is again the lump sum.

Figure 7: Inconsistent With Inequality Aversion in Outcomes, When One Child Received a
Lump Sum, Parents Did Not Reallocate to His or Her Sibling.

                                                   IA Outcomes                                                                       IA Outcomes
                50




                                                                                                     50
                                                                                            Percent of Allocations
                                                                                             10 20 30 40
                           40
       Percent of Allocations
       10    20     30




                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                     0   1   2   3      4     5   6     7   8   9   10
                0




                                0   1   2      3      4     5   6     7   8   9   10                                                 Tickets to Child L
                                                   Tickets to Child L
                                                                                                                             Higher returns to L \& Lump sum to H
                                            Base case            Lump sum to L                                               Higher returns to L


      (a) Scenario 1 (Base Case ) vs. Scenario 4                                        (b) Scenario 5 (Higher Returns to Child L &
      (Lump Sum to Child L)                                                             Lump Sum to Child H ) vs. Scenario 3 (Higher
                                                                                        Returns to Child L)

Notes: Each of these figures present the allocation of lottery tickets for two separate scenarios. The arrow
"IA Outcomes" shows the direction that inequality aversion over outcomes predicts allocations would move
when going from the solid to the outlined scenario.



Inequality Aversion over Inputs. Taken together, the evidence presented so far sug-
gests that, first, parents value both returns-maximization and some form of equality, and
second, they do not value equality in outcomes. This suggests that they likely value equality
in inputs. We now substantiate this conclusion with additional analysis. In particular, in-
equality aversion over inputs is the only theory that predicts excess mass at 50%. Consistent
with this, visual inspection of the data in Figure 4 shows a notable spike at equal allocation,
with parents choosing exactly equal inputs in roughly 37% of the scenarios. Moreover, we
can easily reject that the ticket distribution is smooth around the 5/5 point. Figure 8 shows

                                                                                       25
                            Figure 8: Parents Equalized Inputs in All Scenarios




                                  50
                                  40
                             Percentage                                        42%
                             20      30


                                            25%
                                  10




                                                                                                                     13%
                                  0




                                                0   1       2       3      4     5    6    7             8       9    10
                                                                        Tickets to Child L

                                                    (a) Scenario 1 (Base Case )
     50




                                                                                      50
     40




                                                                                      40




                                                                                                                        42%
 Percentage




                                                                                  Percentage
         30




                                                                                          30




              36%
                                          30%
 20




                                                                                  20




                                                                                                                                                25%
     10




                                                                                      10




                                                                    14%                        15%
     0




                                                                                      0




               0    1   2   3      4     5    6    7    8       9       10                      0    1   2   3      4     5    6    7   8   9   10
                                Tickets to Child L                                                               Tickets to Child L


(b) Scenario 2 (Higher Returns                                                (c) Scenario 3 (Higher Returns
to Child H )                                                                  to Child L)
     50




                                                                                      50
     40




                                                                                      40
 Percentage




                                                                                  Percentage
         30




                                                                                          30




                                          36%
                                                                                                                        33%
 20




                                                                                  20




              24%                                                                              24%                                              25%
     10




                                                                                      10




                                                                    17%
     0




                                                                                      0




               0    1   2   3      4     5    6    7    8       9       10                      0    1   2   3      4     5    6    7   8   9   10
                                Tickets to Child L                                                               Tickets to Child L


 (d) Scenario 4 (Lump Sum to Child L) (e) Scenario 5 (Higher Returns
                                                                              to Child L & Lump Sum to Child H )



                                                                             26
that a substantial share of parents choose equal inputs in every single scenario, even the
scenarios where there are large differences in expected earnings across children. The desire
to equate also appears to be widespread across parents, with 58% of parents equalizing at
least once. Section 4.3 discusses and rules out other potential explanations for equal splitting
and other threats to interpretation of our results.

Child-Specific Preferences Interestingly, many of parents' choices diverge from either
the returns-maximizing, outcome-inequality-minimizing, or input-inequality-minimizing choices,
suggesting that parents may also care about something else. For example, 24% percent of
parents in Scenario 5 allocated all of their tickets to Child H despite the fact that both
returns maximization and inequality aversion over outcomes suggest they should give all to
Child L.26 Appendix Figure A.5 provides evidence that this behavior represents child-specific
preferences that vary across parents. Parents who allocated all tickets to Child H or Child L
in the Base Case scenario (which featured symmetric payment functions) were substantially
more likely to allocate all tickets to that same child in all the other scenarios, explaining most
of the deviations we described above from the other strategies. Note that the "child-specific
preferences" that we are identifying here incorporate both actual child-specific preferences
(e.g., preferences for a certain gender) and also beliefs about cross-child differences in the
non-experimental benefits of tutoring (e.g., non-monetary or long-run benefits). Both of
these factors could lead parents to prefer one child over the other and do not vary across
scenarios.

Forgone Earnings from Equalizing Inputs Finally, we show that parents' deviations
from returns maximization have significant earnings implications. For each family × sce-
nario, we calculate the sum of expected earnings for both children under parents' chosen
ticket allocations in the experiment ("chosen earnings") and compare those with expected
earnings if parents had instead chosen to maximize the sum of their children's payments
("returns-maximizing earnings") or minimize the sum of their children's payments ("returns-
minimizing"). Figure 9 then plots forgone earnings (returns-maximizing earnings minus
chosen earnings), both in absolute terms and as a percent of "potential earnings" (returns-
  26
    Technically these predictions for Scenario 5 only hold for 95% of parents but the same 24% statistic
holds in that 95% sample as well.


                                                  27
maximizing minus returns-minimizing earnings). On average, across scenarios, parents for-
went roughly 40% of their potential (non-inframarginal) earnings. The experimental stakes
are substantial; the forgone expected payment amounts are correspondingly large, especially
for Scenarios 2, 3, and 5 where we exogenously varied the returns to tutoring across chil-
dren.
                                           Figure 9: Parents Forgo Substantial Experimental Earnings
                                                                 N=1,445

                                                                                                                                                                          N=1,445
                             600
        Foregone Earnings (MWK)




                                                                                                  0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5
                                                                                                    Foregone Earnings as
                                                                                                    % Potential Earnings
              200      400




                                      27         510         434        28         467                                       33%         38%        45%        34%        48%
        0




                                      (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)                                       (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)        (5)
                                   Base Case    Higher     Higher Lump Sum Higher                                          Base Case    Higher     Higher Lump Sum Higher
                                               Returns to Returns to to Child L Returns to                                             Returns to Returns to to Child L Returns to
                                                Child H    Child L              Child L &                                               Child H    Child L              Child L &
                                                                                Lump Sum                                                                                Lump Sum
                                                                                to Child H                                                                              to Child H
                                                          Scenario                                                                                Scenario


                                           (a) Forgone Earnings                               (b) Forgone Earnings as Percent of Potential
                                                                                              Earnings


Notes: Panel (a) presents income forgone by parents and 95% confidence intervals. Panel (b) presents forgone
income, and 95% confidence intervals, as a percentage of potential earnings. Forgone earnings are calculated
as the difference between expected income if parents were maximizing returns and expected income based
on their preferred lottery ticket allocation.




4.2         The Value of Equal Allocation
      This section uses our experimental results to estimate parents' preference weights from
Section 2: , ,  , and  . We use a structural approach to numerically estimate these
parameters. This strategy is identified from variation across parents' potential choices in ex-
pected inputs and payments. The majority of this variation comes from our experimentally-
generated cross-scenario variation in the payment functions. However, since parents' beliefs
were one input into the payment functions, there are potential concerns about endogeneity.
For example, in Scenario 1, households who perceive the same gain from tutoring for both
children will not forgo earnings if they equalize inputs, while parents who perceive different
gains from tutoring across their children will. As a result, we also present results that take
advantage of a control-function approach to isolate the experimental variation.

                                                                                             28
    We use a mixed logit regression model to estimate parents' preference parameters. The
mixed logit allows the preference parameters to vary across the population and avoids the
independence of irrelevant alternatives assumption (IIA) entailed by a simpler conditional
logit approach. Following equation (1), we assume that parent i has the following utility in
scenario j from choosing ticket allocation k :


           uijk =i T otalP ayijk - i OutcomeInequalityijk - i InputInequalityijk

                   + i InputsT oChildLvsHijk + ijk                                         (2)


where T otalP ayijk is the total expected combined earnings across both children under alloca-
tion k , measured in 100's of MWK (the returns-maximization term); OutcomeInequalityijk
is the absolute difference between parent i's children's expected earnings under allocation k
measured in 100's of MWK (the inequality aversion in outcomes term); InputInequalityijk
is the absolute difference in expected inputs (lottery tickets) between parent i's children
under allocation k (the inequality aversion in inputs term); and InputsT oChildLvsHijk is
the number of tickets given to Child L relative to Child H in allocation k (the child-specific
preference term; note that since i can be positive or negative, parents can prefer either of
their children).
    We also estimate variations on this specification. Because the earlier reduced form
evidence suggests that the primary utility cost from not giving equal inputs is binary instead
of continuous, we model the utility cost associated with unequal inputs as binary in addition
to the continuous measure defined above. In the binary specification, InputInequalityijk is a
dummy that equals 1 if allocation k does not give the two children an equal number of tickets
and 0 otherwise. In addition, to facilitate interpretation, in an alternative specification, we
model T otalP ayijk as the log of the total expected combined earnings across both children
under allocation k .
    We allow for the preference parameters (, , ,  ) to vary for each parent i; we assume
that each preference parameter is distributed normally with a standard deviation estimated
using the regression model. We also allow for correlations across all preference parameters
and again estimate the correlations within the regression procedure. Finally, the error term


                                                 29
ijk is assumed to be Type I extreme value, independent across i, j , and k .27 In each scenario
j , parent i is assumed to choose the allocation k with the highest utility.
       To correct for potential endogeneity, we also adopt the control function approach of
Petrin and Train (2010). In particular, in the first stage, we estimate two regressions,
regressing the dependent variables T otalP ayijk and OutcomeInequalityijk on our exogenous
instruments (indicators for the scenario × ticket allocation, jk ) and on the other endogenous
regressors from equation (2). We denote ^ijk and µ
                                                 ^ijk as the residuals from those regressions.
In the second stage, we then include these residuals linearly in the utility function, allowing
them to enter with normally-distributed random coefficients i and i :


             uijk =i T otalP ayijk - i OutcomeInequalityijk - i InputInequalityijk

                    + i InputsT oChildLvsHijk + i ^ijk + i µ
                                                           ^ijk + ijk                                      (3)


       Intuitively, this approach leverages the fact that conditional on the linear control func-
tion i ^ijk +i µ
               ^ijk --which captures all of the potentially-endogenous components of T otalP ayijk
and OutcomeInequalityijk --T otalP ayijk and OutcomeInequalityijk should no longer be cor-
related with the unobserved component of the decision ijk .
       The mixed logit estimates of the means of the parameter distributions are shown in
Column 1 of Table 2. Consistent with the Section 4.1 results, we find that parents are more
likely to choose a ticket allocation when the monetary returns (total expected payments)
associated with that allocation increase. We also find no evidence of aversion to inequality
in outcomes: the absolute difference in child-level earnings does not influence choices, with
the coefficient not statistically significant, small in magnitude, and wrong-signed. However,
parents have a strong preference for equalizing inputs: they are significantly more likely to
  27
    Allowing each choice to have a separate logit error may seem strange here given that there is a relatively
natural numeric ordering between the allocations. Indeed, if the options were "fully ordered" in the sense
that, if a parent ranked her preferences, her first choice would always be adjacent to her second choice in the
ordering, then this specification would be very unreasonable. However, although choices take on numeric
values here, they are not in fact fully-ordered. For example, if a parent's first choice would be to give all
tickets to child 1, it does not mean her second choice is necessarily to give 9 tickets to child 1; her second
choice might instead be to split 5/5 because she has a high utility from splitting, or to give all tickets to
child 2 because she likes to make all-or-nothing allocations. This means that allowing different choices to
have separate logit errors is more plausible here than in settings where the choices are fully-ordered, i.e.,
where knowing a parent's first choice means we know her second choice.



                                                      30
 Table 2: Mixed Logit Estimates Suggest Parents Place High Weight on Equalizing Inputs

                                                         Dependent Variable: Chose Ticket Allocation
                                                         (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)        (5)
 Household earnings ('00)                              0.2471*** 0.1527*** 0.2297*** 0.1937***
                                                      (0.0557) (0.0545) (0.0454) (0.0475)
 Log household earnings                                                                                 7.0107***
                                                                                                       (1.6224)
 Absolute difference in inputs                         -0.3645***-0.3095***
                                                      (0.0613) (0.0690)
 Inputs not equally split (0/1)                                                 -2.9763***-2.9031***-3.0869***
                                                                               (0.2921) (0.2967) (0.2988)
 Gap between children's earnings ('00)                 0.0347       0.0773* 0.0108          0.0297      -0.0313
                                                      (0.0353)     (0.0426) (0.0292)       (0.0300)    (0.0412)
 Tickets to Child L                                    -0.0831      -0.1788** -0.1398** -0.1812***-0.1503**
                                                      (0.0643)     (0.0807) (0.0684) (0.0600) (0.0727)
 WTP for 1 unit lower input inequality ('00)             1.48        2.03
 WTP for equal inputs ('00)                                                      12.96       16.57
 WTP for equal inputs (percent)                                                                          0.44
 Control Function?                                      NO           YES         NO          YES         YES
 Observations                                          15,895       15,895      15,895      15,895      15,895

Notes: This table presents estimates of the predictors of parents' choice of ticket allocations. Each observation
is a parent × scenario × ticket allocation. Willingness to pay is calculated by dividing the "Absolute
difference in inputs" (Columns 1 and 2) and "Inputs not equally split" (Columns 3, 4 and 5) coefficients by
the "Household earnings" (Columns 1, 2, 3 and 4) and "Log Household earnings" (Column 5) coefficients.
Columns 2, 4, and 5 are estimated using a control function approach where control functions are used for
"Household earnings" and "Gap between children's earnings" and the instruments are dummies for the
scenario × ticket allocation. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the household level. * denotes
significance at 0.10; ** at 0.05; and *** at 0.01.




                                                       31
pick choices that have smaller input gaps between children. To interpret the magnitude,
note that the coefficient estimates are only identified up to a scale factor.28 It is thus useful
                                                                                                    
to scale all coefficients relative to the (sample-average) T otalP ay coefficient, ;                
                                                                                                        then gives
the amount of total household earnings a parent would be willing to forgo to decrease the
                                                                                               
gap in inputs between her children by 1 lottery ticket. Our estimate of                        
                                                                                                  is quite large,
implying that, on average, parents are willing to give up 148 MWK or roughly 0.20 USD in
expected household earnings for each 1 ticket decrease in input inequality.
       Including control functions to address endogeneity does not change the conclusion that
parents have a high willingness to pay (WTP) for input equality. Column 2 of Table 2 shows
that parents are willing to give up 203 MWK or roughly 0.28 USD in expected household
earnings for each 1 ticket decrease in input inequality, somewhat larger than our baseline
willingness to pay estimate. The similarity suggests that the primary variation identifying
the mixed logit model is the experimental variation.
       To fit the trends visible in the raw data more closely, in column 3 we estimate a variant
of equation (2) where we replace the continuous InputInequality term with a binary term
for whether the allocation equally split inputs. We find that parents' mean WTP to avoid
unequal inputs is 1, 296 MWK or roughly 1.81 USD, a substantial amount equal to roughly
92% of the daily adult wage in our setting and 15% of per-child annual education spending.
As before, our coefficients of interest remain qualitatively similar after we include the control
functions (column 4, Table 2): Parents' mean WTP to avoid unequal inputs is 1, 657 MWK
or roughly 2.32 USD.
       For ease of interpretation, in column 5 we estimate another version of equation (3)
where we model T otalP ayijk as the log of the total expected combined earnings across both
children under allocation k . We find that parents' mean willingness to pay (WTP) to avoid
unequal inputs is 44% of total expected combined earnings. This willingness-to-pay estimate
is remarkably similar to the forgone earnings estimate from our reduced-form analysis, where
we find on average parents forwent 40% of their potential earnings across scenarios.
       In Figure A.4 we show the distribution of the parent-level coefficients for willingness to
pay to equalize inputs: 80% of parents have a positive WTP to equally split inputs, and 65%
 28
      The default scaling of the logit coefficient is relative to the the variance of the error term.


                                                        32
have a positive WTP to decrease the absolute gap in inputs. Reassuringly, we also show
that the parent-level preference to equalize inputs correlates with survey measures capturing
inequality in non-experimental inputs between children. Parents with higher willingness to
pay to equalize inputs, as measured by our experiment, have smaller inequalities between
their children in educational expenditures (Appendix Table A.2 Panel A), time spent by the
mother on each child (Appendix Table A.2 Panel B), and time spent by the father on each
child (Appendix Table A.2 Panel C).

4.3     Robustness Checks
      In this section, we present evidence against possible confounds and rule out plausible
alternative explanations. First, we discuss why demand effects are unlikely to explain our
findings. Second, we rule out alternative explanations that may explain why parents equalize
inputs. Finally, we present evidence against other explanations for why parents did not
equalize outcomes.

Demand Effects. Our experimental design, in which surveyors observe all of parents'
decisions, has the potential for demand effects. The use of real stakes for all choices, the
standard approach to address demand effects, helps assuage this concern. Indeed, de Quidt
et al. (2018) provide evidence that demand effects are modest with incentivized choices.
The stakes in our experiment were also substantial: the average gap between the returns-
maximizing and returns-minimizing total payments was roughly 700 MWK (0.98 USD) or
50% of the daily wage for adults in the area. In addition, our experimental results are
consistent with data from a different experiment, conducted in the same area in Malawi,
where the potential for demand effects was lower (Dizon-Ross, 2019). While the focus of
Dizon-Ross (2019) is information frictions and the study was not designed to fully distinguish
between the preferences we study here, the data suggest that parents prefer to split inputs
under a setup with less scope for surveyor demand effects. In the Dizon-Ross (2019) setting,
parents also allocated lottery tickets across their children, with the prize again an educational
investment. However, unlike in our experiment, the surveyors did not instruct parents how
to returns-maximize, equalize inputs, or equalize outcomes; and yet parents still equalized
inputs as much as they could. That experiment also used an even higher-valued prize, and


                                               33
had other features (such as using an odd number of tickets) that should mitigate demand
effects further. The consistency of our results with Dizon-Ross (2019) thus suggests that
demand effects do not explain our results. See Appendix C for further discussion.

Alternative Explanations for Equalization of Inputs. We next consider whether
uncertainty in beliefs, indifference, lack of understanding, or an attempt to balance returns
maximization with inequality aversion over outcomes could drive the equal input allocations
we observe in the data. We conclude that none do.
    Did parents choose to split their allocations due to beliefs uncertainty? Neoclassical risk
aversion through concave utility should not cause splitting in our experiment. However, there
could still be behavioral channels through which risk aversion might cause parents to choose
split allocations. To address this, we perform a heterogeneity analysis based on baseline
measures of uncertainty in parents' beliefs. We fail to find evidence that more uncertain
parents equalize more; see Appendix Figure A.6.
    We can also provide more direct evidence: After the experiment we asked parents
whether they would have allocated differently if they were certain about the scores their
children would receive with and without tutoring. Only two out of 289 parents replied in
the affirmative. Thus, uncertainty does not seem to be causing split allocations here.
    Does indifference explain why parents split their tickets evenly? If parents are completely
indifferent about which of their children receives tutoring, they could split their tickets evenly
even if they are pure returns-maximizers. However, our results show that 19% of parents
equate in all scenarios, which should not reflect indifference: if a given parent is indifferent
between her children in the base case, then when we offer 10x higher returns per point to
Child H (scenario 2) or Child L (scenario 3), the parent should no longer be indifferent,
but many parents continue to equalize. Moreover, indifference is a knife's edge and hence
empirically improbable case.
    Did parents split their tickets because they did not understand the setup? Section 3.3
already showed that parents do understand the setup. Heterogeneity analysis based on
parental education provides additional support for this conclusion. Since one would expect
more-educated parents to better understand the design, if evenly splitting tickets represented
lack of understanding, we would expect it to be more prevalent among the less-educated.

                                               34
In contrast, relative to parents with below-median education, we find that parents with
above-median education are equally likely to maximize returns, and 11% more likely to split
their tickets evenly (Appendix Table A.3). The structural analysis yields similar conclusions:
more-educated parents are willing to pay MWK 400 more to equalize inputs (Appendix Table
A.2, Panel D). Although preferences themselves may vary by parental education, these results
suggest that misunderstanding of the setup is not the reason that parents split their tickets
in our experiment.
       Did parents split their tickets to balance inequality aversion over outcomes with returns-
maximization? We rule out this possibility by showing that parents still choose a substantial
share of split allocations in scenarios where the returns-maximizing and outcomes-inequality-
minimizing allocations are the same. In the Higher Returns to Child L & Lump Sum to Child
H scenario, both returns maximization and inequality aversion over outcomes dictate that
almost all parents should allocate all tickets to Child L. The fact that we still see 33%
of parents choosing equal inputs in that scenario provides further evidence that equalizing
inputs reflects an aversion to input inequality, not a desire to balance returns-maximization
against inequality aversion in inputs.29
       Figure 10 presents additional evidence from other scenarios, limiting to people with
RL < RH to have only one ticket allocation prediction per strategy per scenario. The
left bar pools all parent × scenario observations where inequality aversion in outcomes and
returns maximization have different predictions (and thus splitting tickets could represent a
balance between the two forces) while the right bar shows all parent × scenario observations
where inequality aversion in outcomes and returns maximization have the same prediction
(and thus splitting tickets would not represent a balance between the two). Parents equalize
in nearly as many scenarios in the right subfigures as the left subfigures, suggesting that the
vast majority of "splitting" represents an aversion to inequality in inputs. We find similar
results when we include the full sample of households but limit the scenarios to those in
which the predictions are uniform across nearly all households (Scenarios 2, 3 and 5) (Figure
A.7).
  29
    This does not address the potential that parents are instead balancing child-specific preferences with the
other desires, but the spike at equal allocation makes that explanation unlikely, as does the fact that we get
similar results when excluding parents who appear to have a child-specific preference for Child H.


                                                     35
Figure 10: Many Parents Equalized Inputs Even When Returns Maximization and Inequality
Aversion of Outcomes Had the Same Prediction




                                       50             40
                            % of Parents that Equalized
                                             30
                                                                  32%                       31%
                           10      20  0




                                                           Opposite predictions        Same predictions
                                                             (Scenarios 1-3)            (Scenarios 4-5)


Notes: This figure shows the percentage of parents who equalized tickets across their children, with the left
bar depicting the scenarios where inequality aversion over outcomes and returns maximization have opposite
predictions (Scenarios 1, 2 and 3) and the right bar depicting the scenarios where IAO and RM have the
same prediction (Scenarios 4 and 5). The figure restricts the sample to the 66% of households who believed
tutoring yields higher test score gains for Child H (RL < RH ) since the predictions for inequality aversion
over outcomes and returns maximization are uniform across that sample. The bracket on the right bar
depicts the 95% confidence interval for a test that the difference between the bars is 0; the heights of the
two bars are not statistically different from each other.


Absence of Outcomes Equalization. Finally, we discuss several alternative explana-
tions (aside from parents not being inequality averse over outcomes) for why parents did
not equalize outcomes within our experiment. Our results are driven neither by parents
reallocating earnings after the experiment, by parents equalizing outcomes across scenarios,
nor by the fact that parents cannnot perfectly equalize within scenarios.
     Did parents not equalize outcomes because they could reallocate children's earnings after
the experiment? Our experiment uses cash rewards, which parents could potentially equalize
ex post. However, if parents were planning to equalize these rewards ex post, the natural
response would be to maximize returns ex ante, thus maximizing the total rewards available
for ex post reallocation, which is not what we see.
     To further address this possibility, we conducted a follow-up survey between August
and October 2019 in which we separately interviewed parents and children from our original
sample. We located and surveyed 259 (out of 289) parents and 392 (out of 578) children
(Table A.4). We asked both children and parents about whether the parents reallocated
children's earnings after the experiment. 77% of children with positive earnings indicated

                                                                                  36
that they kept their full earnings; the reports from parents were similar. Importantly, only
2% of children said that their parents gave their earnings to their sibling, and only 5% of
parents said that they took earnings from one of their children because they wanted to ex
post equalize outcomes. Further evidence against ex post reallocation comes from the fact
that we fail to find significant evidence that parents took earnings from their higher-earning
children more often than their lower-earning children. Parents report that they allowed
similar shares of high and low earnings to keep their earnings (74% of high earners and 79%
of low earners), and the difference is not statistically significant (p-value = 0.19). Overall,
these data show that the potential for reallocation is an unlikely explanation for why parents
did not equalize expected outcomes in the experiment.30
       Did parents equalize outcomes across scenarios rather than within scenarios? To test
this potential explanation for why we see no outcomes equalization within scenario, after
we elicited all ticket allocations, we asked parents if they had equalized outcomes across
scenarios. Reassuringly, only 19% of parents said they equalized outcomes across scenarios,
and our results look very similar when we exclude these respondents.
       Did parents not equalize outcomes because they could not perfectly do so? If parents
only care about equalizing outcomes when they can perfectly do so (i.e., if their utility
term governing inequality aversion over outcomes is -1{ER(x1 ) = ER(x2 )}), it could
bias us away from finding evidence of inequality aversion in outcomes because, in many of
our scenarios, it was not possible for parents to perfectly equalize expected outcomes. To
test this idea, we present summary statistics from Scenario 1 (the scenario which had the
majority of cases in which parents could perfectly equalize outcomes), separately by whether
the parent had the option to perfectly equalize experimental earnings. Although the option
to perfectly equalize depends on potentially endogenous variation in parents' beliefs about
their children's scores, we view the analysis as suggestive. Appendix Table A.5 shows that
the percentage of choices in which parents minimize outcomes inequality is not significantly
different across parent types and, if anything, is smaller among parents who had the option
to perfectly equalize. Thus, not being able to perfectly equalize appears not to explain our
  30
    Similarly, in the follow-up survey we also asked parents if after the experiment they treated either of
their children differently than usual, either by giving them more or less of something than usual. Only 9
(8%) out of the 110 parents we posed this question to replied in the affirmative.


                                                    37
findings.


5     Conclusion
    Our experiment provides the first evidence that parents have a quantitatively important
preference for equalizing the inputs they invest in their children. In order to identify parents'
preferences, we experimentally shock the short-run returns to educational investments to
identify the degree to which parents care about (a) maximizing total returns, (b) minimizing
cross-sibling inequality in outcomes, and (c) minimizing cross-sibling inequality in inputs.
We find that parents care about both maximizing returns and minimizing inequality in
inputs, but find no evidence for aversion to inequality in child-level outcomes or earnings.
Parents' aversion to inequality in inputs is quantitatively important, causing parents to forgo
roughly 40% of their potential experimental earnings.
    Because the effects of policies depend on individuals' behavioral responses, our estimates
have important implications for policy design. In particular, when policies target children,
parents' preferences for investment can create important spillovers to non-targeted children
within the household. Our results imply, for example, that parents may respond to policies
that deliver inputs to one child in the household by providing more inputs to non-targeted
children to try to mitigate the input inequality. The impacts are likely to depend on whether
parents know what level of inputs the policy is providing, and thus giving information to par-
ents about the inputs provided may encourage parental spending on non-targeted children.
These results have relevance to numerous policies that target a subset of children within the
household, such as programs based on academic achievement, gender, or age.
    Our findings open up several directions for future work. One direction is to investi-
gate the implications for policy design by using the preference parameters estimated here
to develop and evaluate "optimized" policies that account for parents' behavioral responses.
Another important area is to examine the extent to which the preferences we identify here
over investments with short-run returns extend to investments with larger, longer-term re-
turns, such as long-run schooling decisions. One specific issue to investigate is whether
parents who are averse to inequality in expected inputs also prefer to equalize actual inputs
when inputs are divisible. Another issue to explore is how the cost of choosing unequal


                                               38
inputs scales with the stakes of the decision. If the cost is fixed, then inequality aversion
would be more important for small-stakes than large-stakes decisions. In contrast, if the
cost scales in proportion with the returns, then inequality aversion would be important for
large-stakes decisions as well. In that case, our structural estimates imply that parents are
willing to give up 44% of total investment returns to equalize, a huge cost for large-stakes
decisions. A final area for future work is to determine the frame or bracket within which
parents normally equalize. Do they equalize within short or long time horizons, or within
specific investment domains (e.g., health vs. education) or across all investments? In our
experiment, parents narrowly bracket, and Exley and Kessler (2019) suggest that narrow
bracketing of equity concerns is a widespread phenomenon. The more narrowly parents
bracket outside of experimental settings, the higher the efficiency cost of equalizing inputs
is likely to be.


References
Agrawal, P. (2002). Incentives, Risk, and Agency Costs in the Choice of Contractual Ar-
  rangements in Agriculture. Review of Development Economics 6 (3), 460­477.

Almond, D. and B. Mazumder (2013). Fetal Origins and Parental Responses. Annual Review
  of Economics 5 (1), 37­56.

Andreoni, J., D. Aydin, B. Barton, B. D. Bernheim, and J. Naecker (2018). When Fair
 Isn't Fair: Understanding Choice Reversals Involving Social Preferences. NBER Working
 Paper 25257 .

Andreoni, J. and B. D. Bernheim (2009). Social Image and the 50-50 Norm: A Theoretical
 and Experimental Analysis of Audience Effects. Econometrica 77 (5), 1607­1636.

Banerji, R., J. Berry, and M. Shotland (2017). The impact of maternal literacy and partic-
  ipation programs: Evidence from a randomized evaluation in india. American Economic
  Journal: Applied Economics 9 (4), 303­337.

Behrman, J. R., R. A. Pollak, and P. Taubman (1982). Parental Preferences and Provision
  for Progeny. Journal of Political Economy 90 (1), 52­73.

Behrman, J. R., R. A. Pollak, and P. Taubman (1986). Do parents favor boys? International
  Economic Review 27 (1), 33­54.

Bernheim, B. D. and S. Severinov (2003). Bequests as Signals: An Explanation for the Equal
  Division Puzzle. Journal of Political Economy 111 (4), 733­764.



                                             39
Bolton, G. E. and A. Ockenfels (2000). ERC: A Theory of Equity, Reciprocity, and Vompe-
  tition. American Economic Review 90 (1), 166­193.

Brock, J. M., A. Lange, and E. Y. Ozbay (2013). Dictating the risk: Experimental evidence
  on giving in risky environments. American Economic Review 103 (1), 413­437.

Cappelen, A. W., K. O. Moene, E. Ø. Sørensen, and B. Tungodden (2013). Just Luck : An
  Experimental Study of Risk Taking and Fairness. American Economic Review 124 (4),
  1398­1413.

Charness, G. and M. Rabin (2002). Understanding Social Preferences with Simple Tests.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (3), 817­869.

Cherry, T. L., P. Frykblom, and J. F. Shogren (2002). Hardnose the Dictator. The American
 Economic Review 92 (4), 1218­1221.

Cunha, F. and J. Heckman (2007). The Technology of Skill Formation. American Economic
 Review Papers and Proceedings 97 (2), 31­47.

Cunha, F., J. J. Heckman, L. Lochner, and D. V. Masterov (2006). Interpreting the Evidence
 on Life Cycle Skill Formation. Handbook of the Economics of Education 1 (6), 697­812.

Dasgupta, S. and Z. Tao (1998). Contractual Incompleteness and the Optimality of Equity
 Joint Ventures. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 37 (4), 391­413.

de Quidt, J., J. Haushofer, and C. Roth (2018). Measuring and bounding experimenter
  demand. American Economic Review 108 (11), 3266­3302.

Dizon-Ross, R. (2019). Parents' beliefs about their children's academic ability: Implications
  for educational investments. American Economic Review 109 (8), 2728­2765.

Exley, C. L. and J. B. Kessler (2019). Equity concerns are narrowly framed. NBER Working
  Paper 25326 .

Fahr, R. and B. Irlenbusch (2000). Fairness as a constraint on trust in reciprocity: Earned
  property rights in a reciprocal exchange experiment. Economics Letters 66 (3), 275­282.

Farmer, A. and J. Tiefenthaler (1995). Fairness concepts and the intrahousehold allocation
  of resources. Journal of Development Economics 47 (2), 179­189.

Fehr, E. and K. M. Schmidt (1999). A theory of fairness, competition, and cooperation.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (3), 817­868.

Forsythe, R., J. L. Horowitz, N. E. Savin, and M. Sefton (1994). Fairness in simple bargaining
  experiments.

Hertwig, R., J. N. Davis, and F. J. Sulloway (2002). Parental investment: how an equity
  motive can produce inequality. Psychological bulletin 128 (5), 728.



                                             40
Jakiela, P. (2015). How Fair Shares Compare: Experimental Evidence from Two Cultures.
  Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 118, 40­54.

Kahneman, D., A. Tversky, B. Y. D. Kahneman, and A. Tversky (2016). Prospect Theory:
 An Analysis of Decision under Risk Linked. Econometrica 47 (2), 263­292.

Konow, J. (2003). Which is the fairest one of all? a positive analysis of justice theories.
 Journal of Economic Literature 41 (4), 1188­1239.

Krawczyk, M. and F. Le Lec (2010). `Give me a chance!' an experiment in social decision
  under risk. Experimental Economics 13, 500­511.

Machina, M. J. (1989). Dynamic Consistency and Non-Expected Utility Models of Choice
 Under Uncertainty. Journal of Economic Literature 27 (4), 1622­1668.

Menchik, P. L. (1980). Primogeniture, Equal Sharing, and the U.S. Distribution of Wealth.
 The Quarterly Journal of Economics 94 (2), 299­316.

Petrin, A. and K. Train (2010). Control function approach to endogeneity in consumer choice
  models. Journal of Marketing Research 47, 2­13.

Pitt, M. M., M. R. Rosenzweig, and M. N. Hassan (1990). Productivity, health, and in-
  equality in the intrahousehold distribution of food in low-income countries. The American
  Economic Review 80 (5), 1139­1156.

Price, J. (2008). Parent-child quality time does birth order matter?      Journal of human
  resources 43 (1), 240­265.

Trivers, R. L. (1974). Parent-offspring conflict. Integrative and Comparative Biology 14 (1),
  249­264.

Wilhelm, B. M. (1996). Bequest Behavior and the Effect of Heirs' Earnings: Testing the
 Altruistic Model of Bequests. American Economic Review 86 (4), 874­892.

World Bank (2020). World Bank Open Data. https://data.worldbank.org/. Accessed Jan-
 uary 10, 2020.




                                             41
A      Appendix Tables and Figures

Appendix Figure A.1: The Share of Baseline Educational Expenditures on the Perceived
Lower-Performing Child Has a Spike at 50%


                             20
                             15                                             N=287
                   Density
                             10
                             5
                             0




                                  0   .1    .2   .3    .4   .5   .6   .7   .8     .9   1
                                            Percent of Educational Expenditures
                                           on Perceived Lower-Performing Child

Notes: This figure shows the distribution of the percent of educational expenditures on the perceived
lower-performing child, as a share of the total educational expenditures on both sampled children in the
study sample.




                                                       42
                   Appendix Figure A.2: Sequence of Events

                  Household survey with the primary caregiver

Elicit beliefs: Ask parents for beliefs about each child's performance on the math
                       test with and without 1 hour tutoring

Explain design: Practice scenarios with explanations of how to maximize returns,
             equalize outcomes, or equalize inputs; Placebo lottery

         Parents allocate tickets: Parents allocate tickets across kids in
                         5 (real) experimental scenarios

       Lottery for tutoring: Scenario randomly selected; tickets assigned
         based on parents' choices; one ticket selected per household

      Survey: Short parent survey to gauge understanding and confounds

                  Tutoring: "Winning child" in each household
                            gets an hour of tutoring


                     Test: Both children take the math test


      Payment: Reward money handed to children in individual envelopes




                                        43
Appendix Figure A.3: Inconsistent With Inequality Aversion in Outcomes, When One Child
Received a Lump Sum, Parents Did Not Reallocate to His/Her Sibling.
                                             Individual Parent-level Changes




                               60
                        Percent of Parents
                       20      0   40




                                 Away from Lower-          No Change   Towards Lower-
                                  Performing Child                     Performing Child


                      (a) Parent-level Changes From 1. Base Case to 4.
                      Lump Sum to Child L
                               60
                        Percent of Parents
                       20      0   40




                                 Away from Lower-          No Change   Towards Lower-
                                  Performing Child                     Performing Child


                      (b) Parent-level Changes From 5. Higher Returns
                      to Child L & Lump Sum to Child H to 4. Higher
                      Returns to Child L




                                                           44
      Appendix Figure A.4: Distribution of Parents' Preferences for Equalizing Inputs




(a) Distribution of parents' preferences to decrease (b) Distribution of parents' preferences to equally
absolute gap in inputs                               split inputs
Note: Panel (a) presents the distribution of the coefficient on "Absolute difference in inputs" from Column
1 of Table 2. Panel (a) presents the distribution of the coefficient on "Inputs not equally split" from Column
3 of Table 2. We use an Epanechnikov kernel function, with bandwidths of 0.36 and 0.92 for Panels (a) and
(b), respectively.




                                                     45
                                                              Appendix Figure A.5: Evidence for Child-Specific Preferences
            Parents Who Gave More Tickets to Child H in Scenario 1 Continue to Allocate More to Child H in Scenarios 2-5




                                                                20 40 60 80




                                                                                                                 20 40 60 80




                                                                                                                                                                 20 40 60 80
            0 20 40 60 80
               Percentage




                                                                Percentage




                                                                                                                 Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage
                                                                    0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                 Tickets to Child L                                Tickets to Child L                               Tickets to Child L                              Tickets to Child L
                              Prefer High:   Did Not Prefer                     Prefer High:   Did Not Prefer                    Prefer High:   Did Not Prefer                   Prefer High:   Did Not Prefer
                              S2 Mean        High: S2 Mean                      S3 Mean        High: S3 Mean                     S4 Mean        High: S4 Mean                    S5 Mean        High: S5 Mean


          (a) Scenario 2 (Higher Returns                       (b) Scenario 3 (Higher Returns                   (c) Scenario 4 (Lump Sum to (d) Scenario 5 (Higher Returns
          to Child H)                                          to Child L)                                      Child L)                    to Child L & Lump Sum to Child
                                                                                                                                            H)

            Parents Who Gave More Tickets to Child L in Scenario 1 Continue to Allocate More to Child H in Scenarios 2-5
46




            20 40 60 80




                                                                                                                 20 40 60 80




                                                                                                                                                                 20 40 60 80
                                                                20 40 60 80
            Percentage




                                                                Percentage




                                                                                                                 Percentage




                                                                                                                                                                 Percentage
                 0




                                                                    0




                                                                                                                     0




                                                                                                                                                                     0
                            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                            0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                          0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                                 Tickets to Child L                                Tickets to Child L                               Tickets to Child L                              Tickets to Child L
                              Prefer Low:    Did Not Prefer                     Prefer Low:    Did Not Prefer                    Prefer Low:    Did Not Prefer                   Prefer Low:    Did Not Prefer
                              S2 Mean        Low: S2 Mean                       S3 Mean        Low: S3 Mean                      S4 Mean        Low: S4 Mean                     S5 Mean        Low: S5 Mean


          (e) Scenario 2 (Higher Returns                       (f) Scenario 3 (Higher Returns                   (g) Scenario 4 (Lump Sum to (h) Scenario 5 (Higher Returns
          to Child H)                                          to Child L)                                      Child L)                    to Child L & Lump Sum to Child
                                                                                                                                            H)
     Notes: This figure presents allocation of lottery tickets across children for Scenarios 2-5. Panels (a) through (d) present allocations separately for
     parents who gave strictly more tickets to Child H in Scenario 1 (2,387 parents, labeled as "Prefer High" in the figures) and those who did not (792
     parents, labeled as "Did Not Prefer High" in the figures). Panels (e) through (h) present allocations separately for parents who gave strictly more
     tickets to Child L in Scenario 1 (2,772 parents, labeled as "Prefer Low" in the figures) and those who did not (407 parents, labeled as "Did Not Prefer
     Low" in the figures).
                         Appendix Figure A.6: More Uncertain Parents Did Not Equalize Inputs More
                           Heterogeneity in allocations by parents' baseline measure of uncertainty
                                          N=3,355                                          N=8,250                                                N=11,605
   0 10 20 30 40 50 60




                                                    0 10 20 30 40 50 60




                                                                                                     -40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40
        Percentage




                                                         Percentage




                                                                                                             Percentage
                         0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                              Tickets to Child L                               Tickets to Child L                                      Tickets to Child L

  (a) Parents who are uncertain (b) Parents who are certain about (c) Difference in means (uncertain
  about their beliefs           their beliefs                     - certain)

Heterogeneity in allocations by whether parents changed beliefs between baseline survey and
                                        experiment
                                         N=10,175                                          N=5,720                                                N=15,895
   0 10 20 30 40 50 60




                                                    0 10 20 30 40 50 60




                                                                                                     -40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40
        Percentage




                                                         Percentage




                                                                                                             Percentage
                         0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                              Tickets to Child L                               Tickets to Child L                                      Tickets to Child L

  (d) Parents who changed their be- (e) Parents who did not change (f) Difference in means (changed
  liefs                             their beliefs                  - did not change)

          Heterogeneity in allocations by difference between parents' beliefs and actual scores
                                          N=8,085                                          N=7,810                                                N=15,895
   0 10 20 30 40 50 60




                                                    0 10 20 30 40 50 60




                                                                                                     -40-30-20-10 0 10 20 30 40
        Percentage




                                                         Percentage




                                                                                                             Percentage




                         0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                           0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10                                  0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
                              Tickets to Child L                               Tickets to Child L                                      Tickets to Child L

  (g) Difference between beliefs and (h) Difference between beliefs and (i) Difference in means (Differ-
  actual scores above median         actual scores below median         ence in means (above-median -
                                                                        below-median)

Notes: This figure presents allocation of lottery tickets across children for Scenarios 2-5, and 95% confidence
intervals for each scenario, separately by beliefs uncertainty. We use three measures of uncertainty. Panels
(a)-(c) use parents' stated uncertainty about their beliefs during the baseline survey. However, since we
allowed parents to adjust their beliefs at the experimental visit but only measured beliefs uncertainty in the
baseline survey baseline, this measure may not perfectly capture uncertainty at the time of the experimental
allocations. We thus use two additional proxies for uncertainty: Whether parents changed their beliefs
between the baseline survey and experimental visit, and whether the absolute value of the gap between the
parents' beliefs and their children's true scores was above-median.



                                                                                  47
Appendix Figure A.7: Many Parents Equalize Inputs Even When Returns Maximization and
Inequality Aversion of Outcomes Have the Same Prediction




                                       50             40
                            % of Parents that Equalized
                                             30
                                                                  36%                       33%
                           10      20  0




                                                           Opposite predictions        Same predictions
                                                           (Scenarios 2 and 3)           (Scenario 5)


Notes: These figures presents the percentage of parents who equalized tickets across their two children. It
only displays the scenarios for which, for at least 94% of the sample, there is only one ticket allocation
prediction per strategy. The left bar show all scenarios where inequality aversion over outcomes (IAO) and
returns maximization (RM) have opposite predictions (Scenarios 2 and 3). The right bar show the scenario
where inequality aversion over outcomes (IAO) and returns maximization (RM) have the same prediction
(Scenario 5). The bracket on the right bar shows that the two bars are not statistically different from each
other.




                                                                                  48
         Appendix Table A.1: Parents' Stated Reasons Predict Their Actual Choices

                                             (1)                 (2)                      (3)
                                       Equalize Inputs     Maximize Returns       Equalize Outcomes
    Prefer Equalizing Inputs                0.79                 -0.14                   -0.17
                                            (0.05)                (0.04)                  (0.04)
    Prefer Maximizing Returns              -0.13                 0.36                    -0.16
                                            (0.05)               (0.06)                   (0.04)
    Prefer Equalizing Outcomes               0.08                  -0.03                   0.00
                                            (0.09)                (0.06)                  (0.06)
    Prefer Child L                           0.02                  -0.02                   0.03
                                            (0.05)                (0.05)                  (0.04)
    Prefer Child H                           0.02                  -0.02                   -0.04
                                            (0.05)                (0.05)                  (0.04)
    Scenario FE                              Yes                   Yes                     Yes
    Household FE                             Yes                   Yes                     Yes
    Observations                            1445                  1445                    1445
    R2                                      0.886                 0.468                   0.298
Notes: The dependent variables represent dummies for the actual choices parents made in a given scenario.
The independent variables represent the parents' stated reasons for making those choices. Standard errors
in parentheses, clustered at the household level. * denotes significance at 0.10; ** at 0.05; and *** at 0.01.




                                                     49
Appendix Table A.2: Estimated Preference for Equal Inputs Correlates with More Equal
Allocations of Spending and Time and Higher Parental Education

                                                                (1)                   (2)
                                                          Coefficient on     Coefficient on Inputs
                                                      Absolute Gap in Inputs  Not Equally Split
 A. Household Expenditure
 Above-Median Abs. Gap in Expenditures                            0.29**                       0.61
                                                                 (0.14)                       (0.37)

 Constant                                                         -0.55***                     -3.27***
                                                                 (0.10)                       (0.28)
 Observations                                                      288                          288
 R2                                                              0.013                        0.009
 B. Mother's Time Use
 Mother's Time Not Equally Split                                  0.32**                       0.90**
                                                                 (0.16)                       (0.40)

 Constant                                                         -0.52***                     -3.35***
                                                                 (0.10)                       (0.27)
 Observations                                                      251                          251
 R2                                                              0.015                        0.019
 C. Father's Time Use
 Father's Time Not Equally Split                                  0.39**                       0.99**
                                                                 (0.19)                       (0.49)

 Constant                                                         -0.59***                     -3.39***
                                                                 (0.12)                       (0.33)
 Observations                                                      175                          175
 R2                                                              0.022                        0.022
 D. Parental Education
 Grade 8 Completed                                                -0.31**                      -0.92**
                                                                 (0.16)                       (0.40)

 Constant                                                         -0.30***                     -2.66***
                                                                 (0.09)                       (0.23)
 Observations                                                      289                          289
 R2                                                              0.014                        0.019
Notes: Panel A presents heterogeneity by the difference in children's share of household expenditure, which is
measured by a binary variable that takes value 1 if the absolute gap in expenditure between children is above
the median. Panel B presents heterogeneity by the difference in children's share of mother's time, which
is measured by a binary variable that takes value 1 if mother's time is not equally split. Panel C presents
Panel A presents heterogeneity by the difference in children's share of father's time, which is measured by
a binary variable that takes value 1 if father's time is not equally split. Panel D presents heterogeneity
by parents' education, captured by a binary variable that takes the value 1 if the primary caregiver has at
least completed Grade 8. Standard errors are in parentheses, clustered at the household level. * denotes
significance at 0.10; ** at 0.05; and *** at 0.01.    50
     Appendix Table A.3: More Educated Parents Are More Likely to Equalize Inputs

                                (1)                 (2)                  (3)                      (4)
                          Child L Tickets     Equalize Inputs      Maximize Returns       Equalize Outcomes
 Caregiver > Class 8             0.42               0.11                   -0.02                   -0.01
                                (0.31)              (0.05)                (0.04)                  (0.03)
 Constant                      4.57                0.33                  0.28                    0.13
                               (0.19)              (0.03)                (0.02)                  (0.01)
 Observations                   1445                1445                   867                     867
 R2                             0.003               0.012                 0.000                   0.000

Notes: Regression is at the parent × scenario level. Table shows heterogeneity in parents' choices by parental
education. "Caregiver > Class 8" is a binary variable that takes the value 1 if the primary caregiver has at
least completed Grade 8; 0 otherwise. The dependent variables represent the parents' choices (in particular,
for columns (1)-(4), the dependent variables represent the number of tickets given to Child L, a dummy
for whether the parent equalized inputs, a dummy for whether the parent chose the returns-maximizing
strategy for experimental earnings, and a dummy for whether the parent chose the outcomes-equalizing
strategy for experimental earnings). Standard errors in parentheses, clustered at the household level. *
denotes significance at 0.10; ** at 0.05; and *** at 0.01.




                                                     51
                                Appendix Table A.4: Most Children Kept Their Earnings After the Experiment

          Total Households                                                                                 289
          Total Parents Surveyed                                                                           259
          Total Children Surveyed                                                                          392
          A. Parent Survey                                                Child L        Child H      High Earner     Low Earner      Equal Earner
          Children with non-zero earnings                                   135            163            210             84                4
                Children who kept earnings                               111 (82%)      113 (69%)      154 (74%)       66 (79%)         4 (100%)
                Children who did not get to keep earnings                24 (18%)       50 (31%)       56 (26%)        18 (21%)          0 (0%)
                Reasons children did not keep earnings
                      Parents didn't trust child with money                 8 (6%)      16 (10%)       20 (9%)           4 (4%)
52




                      Parents wanted to equalize outcomes                   5 (4%)       4 (3%)         5 (2%)           4 (5%)
                      Other reasons                                        11 (8%)      30 (18%)       31 (15%)         10 (12%)
          B. Child Survey                                                  Child L       Child H      High Earner     Low Earner      Equal Earner
          Children surveyed                                                  190           202            193             196               3
                Children with non-zero earnings                              125           150            193              79               3
                      Children who kept earnings                          94 (75%)      116 (77%)      143 (74%)       64 (81%)         3 (100%)
                      Children who did not get to keep earnings           31 (25%)      34 (23%)       50 (26%)        15 (19%)          0 (0%)
                      Reasons children did not keep earnings
                            Parents took earnings                          6 (5%)        8 (5%)        10 (5%)           4 (5%)
                            Parents gave it to sibling                     2 (2%)        2 (2%)         4 (2%)           0 (0%)
                            Children with other reasons                   23 (18%)      24 (16%)       36 (19%)         11 (14%)

     Notes: This table presents parents' and children's responses from the follow-up survey where they were asked questions about reallocation of children's
     earnings after the experiment.
Appendix Table A.5: No Evidence of Aversion to Inequality in Outcomes Even Among
Parents Who Can Perfectly Equalize Outcomes
    Scenario 1 (Base Case) choices by whether parents could perfectly equalize outcomes

                                                 Whether parents' IAO choice
                                                 perfectly equalized outcomes


                                        Yes               No            P-value (Yes=No)


                                        (1)               (2)                   (3)
        IAI (% of parents)             0.47               0.39                  0.20
                                      ( 0.50)            ( 0.49)
        RM (% of parents)               0.25              0.21                  0.46
                                      ( 0.43)            ( 0.41)
        IAO (% of parents)              0.08              0.11                  0.29
                                      ( 0.27)            ( 0.32)
        Observations                    106                183

Notes: This table presents the proportion of parents who equalized inputs, maximized returns, and equalized
outcomes for Scenario 1, summarized separately by whether the parent had the option to perfectly equalize
outcomes. The P-value reported in column 3 tests for a difference in means between columns 1 and 2. There
were two parents for which the returns-maximizing and outcomes-equalizing allocations were the same --
these parents were categorized in the "equalized outcomes" category.




                                                    53
B      Section 2 Proofs
     In Section 2, we posit that, if parents do not care about inequality aversion (i.e., if
 = 0 and  = 0), then parents should only choose all-or-nothing allocations of inputs.
In this section, we first show this idea more rigorously when parents have expected-utility
preferences. We then explore the robustness of the prediction even when parents have other
types of preferences such as prospect theory preferences.

Expected Utility
    To see that parents with expected-utility preferences and no inequality aversion ( =
0,  = 0) would choose all-or-nothing allocations, we first rewrite equation (1) in the case
where  = 0,  = 0, and the first term is a nonlinear expected-utility term:

                    U (x1 , x2 ) =Eu (R1 (x1 ) + R2 (x2 )) +  (z1 , z2 ) (x1 - x2 )                  (4)

Now define ti as the fraction of tickets allocated by the parent to child i and rewrite equation
(4) as a function of the new choice variable ti :

       U (t1 , t2 ) = [t1 Eu (R1 (1) + R2 (0)) + t2 Eu (R1 (0) + R2 (1))] +  (z1 , z2 ) (t1 - t2 )   (5)

The first returns-maximizing term represents a weighted sum of the parent's expected utility
if child 1 received the binary investment and her expected utility if child 2 received the
binary investment, weighted by the probability that each event occurs, t1 and t2 . Utility
is thus linear in t1 and t2 , and hence parents will in general choose "all-or-nothing" corner
solutions, setting either t1 or t2 to 0. The only case in which parents with utility function
(5) would not choose corner solutions is if they are exactly indifferent between which child
receives the tutoring (i.e., Eu (R1 (1) + R2 (0)) +  (z1 , z2 ) = Eu (R1 (0) + R2 (1)) -  (z1 , z2 ))
which is a knife's edge case that is unlikely to hold in practice.

Non-Expected-Utility Preferences (e.g., Prospect Theory)
     Define  (p) as the "probability weighting" function or the actual probability weight a
parent places on an event whose true probabililty of occurrence is p. A sufficient condition for
the prediction that parents who are not averse to inequality will not choose split allocations
to hold is that  (p) +  (1 - p)   (0) +  (1). Intuitively, this condition means that parents
understand that choosing split allocations does not increase their chance of winning the
lottery.
     Most non-expected-utility preferences that the literature has posited will satisfy this
condition. For example, if people prefer certainty (as prospect theory suggests), which

                                                   54
means that  (1) is particularly large, then the prediction should go through. If people
have probability weighting functions that are concave at the bottom and convex at the
top (as again suggested by prospect theory) then that is also fine for the prediction as
long as the function is rotationally symmetric. In our specific setting, we show that the
 (p) +  (1 - p)   (0) +  (1) condition likely holds by conducting a "placebo lottery"
allocation, which suggests that parents likely understand that choosing split allocations does
not increase their chances of winning the lottery.




                                             55
C      Using Data From A Different Experiment To Ad-
       dress Potential Confounds
      Here, we bring in data from a different experiment conducted in the same area in Malawi
in 2012 (Dizon-Ross, 2019). The data come from the control group of the experiment, so we
can think of the data as representing "baseline" allocations. These data describe the results
of a lottery similar to the one conducted here: parents allocated lottery tickets between two
of their children, and the child whose ticket was chosen won a prize. However, there are
several differences between the Dizon-Ross (2019) lottery and ours.
      First, the prize was something parents could not ex post equalize. Instead, it was a
scholarship to secondary school. Most parents in this setting could not afford secondary
school on their own. The earnings return to secondary school would also not be realized for
many years, until the children were out of the house and adults in the labor market (at the
time, the children were in 2nd through 7th grade). Thus, this is a setting where parents could
not ex post equalize any more easily than they could in non-experimental settings.
      Second, the Dizon-Ross (2019) experiment had several features that decreased the poten-
tial for demand effects. Unlike in our experiment, the enumerator script for the Dizon-Ross
(2019) experiment did not instruct parents how to returns-maximize, equalize inputs, or
equalize outcomes. In addition, the total number of tickets was an odd number (9).31 Thus,
it is unlikely that parents felt pressured by enumerators to choose equal allocations, since
they were not capable of doing so. However, we can still use the data from that experiment
to test for inequality aversion in inputs. In particular, a parent inequality averse in inputs
should choose the most equal allocation--4 to one child and 5 to the other. In contrast, a
parent who does not care about equality should still assign all tickets in all-or-nothing fash-
ion. As a result, if we see excess mass at the 4/5 choice, that provides evidence of inequality
aversion in inputs, as returns-maximization would be all-or-nothing and inequality aversion
over outcomes would be smooth through the 4/5 point. Finally, the value of the Dizon-Ross
(2019) prize was also larger than ours.
      Figure C.1(a) shows the absolute value of the gap in tickets between children from the
Dizon-Ross (2019) experiment. Seventy-five percent of parents chose as equal an allocation as
possible, whereas only 12% chose an all-or-nothing allocation. Panel (b) shows the number
of tickets that were given to the child perceived as lower-performing. Among those who
chose the most equal allocation, 4 times as many chose to allocate 1 more ticket to their
higher-performing child than lower-performing child, suggesting that, again, in that setting,
  31
    That study used an odd number because, when piloting for the experiment, we found that parents
primarily chose equal allocations when given an even number of tickets. For that project, allowing equal
allocation was not desirable.


                                                  56
parents were not truly indifferent or did not misunderstand the returns.32 Rather, they were
simply averse to splitting inputs unequally.

Appendix Figure C.1: Many Parents Also Equalize Inputs As Much As Possible In Another
Setting

                                                                                                                                       61.52%
                     74.55%
                .8




                                                                                                  .6
                .6




                                                                                                  .4
   Percentage




                                                                                     Percentage
                .4




                                                                                                  .2
                                                                                                                                                14.02%
                .2




                                                                                                       9.17%                   9.24%
                                  10.57%                                  11.79%

                                                                                                                       2.50%
                                                  2.74%           0.34%                                                                                  1.14%                1.74%
                                                                                                               0.45%                                             0.23%   0%
                0




                                                                                                  0
                       1             3              5               7       9                           0       1        2      3        4        5       6       7      8     9
                               Absolute Gap in Tickets Between Children                                             Tickets to (Perceived) Lower-Performing Child




                           (a) Absolute Gap in Tickets                                  (b) Tickets Allocated to Lower-Performing Child


Notes: Data from the control group from the Dizon-Ross (2019) experiment. Panel A shows the distribution of
the absolute gap between the number of tickets allocated to a parents' two children in a setting where parents
were asked to allocate 9 tickets between their two children. Panel B shows the number of tickets allocated
to the child the parent perceived was lower-performing child. Here, one out of every 100 households was
randomly selected and the child whose name was on the selected ticket received a scholarship for four years
of government school fees. In the cases where parents believed both children performed equally, we randomly
select which child is designated as the "lower-perfoming child."




  32
     In that setting, the vast majority of parents believed the earnings return to the lottery prize would be
higher for higher-performing children.


                                                                                57
D     Additional Detail on Experimental Scenarios
    In the experiment, the scenarios were presented to respondents in the following or-
der:
   1. Base Case
   2. Lump Sum to Child L
   3. Higher Returns to Child H
   4. Higher-Returns to Child L & Lump Sum to Child H
   5. Higher Returns to Child L
This order was optimized during piloting to facilitate respondent understanding of the pay-
ment functions. For example, this order of payment functions changes the lump sum param-
eter B and the slope parameter C separately before changing them together.
     The remainder of this appendix presents the script and visual aids that surveyors used
to explain Scenario 1 (the Base Case) to respondents.




                                            58
NOTE TO READER: "Child A" is referred to in the text as "Child L" or the "lower-performing
child." "Child B" is referred to in the text as "Child H" or the "higher-performing child."
                                              Scenario 1 Script
OVERVIEW
Here's your first scenario. With this scenario, both children get 10 MWK for every point scored over 40
on the test.


                                                   Scenario 1
                            Beliefs w                                   Payoff w
          Beliefs w/o T         T         Scenario    Payoff w/o T         T          # Tickets o/f 10
 Child                                    10*(TS-
  A             50              60          40)            100             200
 Child                                    10*(TS-
  B             70              90          40)            300             500




So, if Child A gets 50 points and Child B gets 70 points, with this scenario, Child A would get a reward
worth (50-40) points X 10 MWK per point = 100 MWK, and Child B would get a reward worth (70-40)
points X 10 MWK per point = 300 MWK. So, the expected reward for each child depends on the score
they receive, but with this scenario, both children get 10 MWK for each point above 40 scored.


Without tutoring, you expected Child A to score 50 on the test; if they do in fact score 50, then Child A
would get a prize worth 10*(50-40) = 100 MWK. With tutoring, you expected Child A to get a score of
60. If he/she did score 60, he/she will receive a prize worth 10*(60-40) = 200 MWK. So, then the more
tickets you give to Child A, the higher chance you move them from a prize worth 100 MWK to a prize
worth 200 MWK.


Similarly, without tutoring, you expected Child B to score 70 on the test, which means that Child B would
get a prize worth 10*(70-40) = 300 MWK. With tutoring, you expected Child B to get a score of 90. With
this reward scenario, he/she will receive 10 * (90-40) = 500 MWK. So, then the more tickets you give to
Child B, the higher chance you move them from a prize worth 300 MWK to a prize worth 500 MWK.


Because your ticket allocation can make a big difference on which child gets tutoring, and because only
one scenario is randomly selected by the computer, you should think of each scenario as a standalone
scenario and evaluate it in isolation, pretending that that scenario is the scenario selected by the computer
and thinking what you want to happen in that case.
BAR CHART
This bar chart is another way to see the information in the table. It shows how expected reward for Child
A and Child B and total rewards depend on how you allocated tickets.
[RA INSTRUCTIONS] Draw a graph with y axis labeled rewards and x axis with space for 11 bars.
Below the x-axis, create a row labeled "Tickets to Child A" and write the numbers 0-10 from left to right.
Under this, create a row labeled "Tickets to Child B" and write the numbers 10-0 from left to right]
With this scenario, if you allocate 0 tickets to Child A and 10 tickets to Child B, Child A's expected
reward is 100 and Child B's expected reward is 500. The total reward for this allocation is 600. [RA
INSTRUCTIONS: Draw a bar for Child A from y=0 to y=100 and shade this in lightly. Label this region
100. Draw a bar for Child B that starts from y=100 to y=600 and do not shade in. Label this region 500.
Label top of bar 600.]
If you allocate 10 tickets to Child A and 0 tickets to Child B, Child A's expected reward is 200 and Child
B's expected reward is 300.The total reward for this allocation is 500. [RA INSTRUCTIONS: Draw a
bar for Child A from y=0 to y=200 and shade this in lightly. Label this region 200. Draw a bar for Child
B that starts from y=200 to y=500 and do not shade in. Label this region 300. Label top of bar 500.]


ALLOCATIONS TABLE
For instance, if Child A is allocated 0 tickets and Child B is allocated 10 tickets, expected reward for
Child A is 100, while expected reward for Child B is 500. [RA INSTRUCTIONS: point to first row of
visual aid table in which Child A is allocated 0 tickets]
If Child A is allocated 10 tickets and Child B is allocated 0 tickets, expected reward for Child A is 200,
while expected reward for Child B is 300. [RA INSTRUCTIONS: point to last row of visual aid table in
which Child A is allocated 10 tickets]
If you would like to maximize Child A's reward, you should allocate all tickets to Child A [RA
INSTRUCTIONS: draw an arrow to last row of table in which Child A gets 10 tickets and label "highest
reward for Child A"]
If you would like to maximize Child B's reward, you should allocate all tickets to Child B [RA
INSTRUCTIONS: draw arrow to first row in table in which Child B gets 10 tickets and label "highest
reward for Child B"]
[RA CHECK] If one child has a higher score gain from tutoring than the other: If you would like to
maximize the total reward amount received by Child A and Child B combined, you would give the
tutoring to [Child with higher returns to tutoring] because s/he is the one whose expected reward would
increase more with tutoring. To do that, you would allocate all the tickets to [Child with higher returns to
tutoring] [RA INSTRUCTIONS: draw an arrow to the row in which [Child with higher returns to
tutoring] gets 10 tickets and label "highest total reward".].
[RA CHECK] If one child does not have a higher score gain from tutoring than the other: If you want to
maximize the total reward amount received by Child A and Child B combined, it wouldn't matter how
you allocate the tickets because they all have the same total expected reward -- the only thing that differs
across allocations is the split between Child A and Child B, not the total.
If you would like to give both children an equal opportunity to get tutoring, you should allocate tickets
equally; 5 tickets to Child A and 5 tickets to Child B. [RA INSTRUCTIONS: draw arrow to row in which
Child A and Child B each get 5 tickets and label "equal tickets"].
[RA CHECK] If Child A's maximum expected reward is greater than or equal to Child B's minimum
expected reward: If you would like to give both children as close to the same expected reward as
possible, you should allocate more tickets to Child A than to Child B. [RA INSTRUCTIONS: draw an
arrow to right half of table in which Child A gets more tickets than Child B and label "most equal
rewards"]
[RA CHECK] If Child A's maximum expected reward is less than Child B's minimum expected reward: If
you would like to give both children as close to the same expected reward as possible, you should allocate
10 tickets to Child A and 0 tickets to Child B. [RA INSTRUCTIONS: Draw an arrow to last row in which
Child A gets 10 tickets and label "most equal rewards"]
Do you have any questions?


TICKET ALLOCATION
So, here are 10 tickets. We'll ask you to divide these 10 lottery tickets between your children. One out of
the 10 lottery tickets will be randomly selected by you, and the child whose ticket it is will receive one
hour of tutoring. If that chosen lottery ticket belongs to "Child A", he/she will receive tutoring, otherwise,
" Child B" will receive tutoring. Thus, the child with a larger allocation of lottery tickets has a higher
chance of receiving tutoring.
Please allocate these 10 lottery tickets across your two children.
                                     Scenario 1: Visual Aid 1




                                              SCENARIO 1
     700
            600      590       580      570
     600                                         560        550     540     530      520       510      500
     500
62




     400
            500      480       460      440      420        400     380     360      340       320      300
     300

     200

     100                                                                    170      180       190      200
                                        130      140        150     160
            100      110       120
      0
           0 to A / 1 to A / 2 to A / 3 to A / 4 to A / 5 to A / 6 to A / 7 to A / 8 to A / 9 to A / 10 to A /
           10 to B 9 to B     8 to B   7 to B   6 to B   5 to B   4 to B   3 to B   2 to B   1 to B   0 to B

                                                A rewards     B rewards
                                   Scenario 1: Visual Aid 2




      Tickets
      to Child   0      1     2      3       4       5         6     7     8     9    10
         A
     Child A's
     Expected    100   110   120    130     140     150       160   170   180   190   200
      Reward

     Child B's
63




     Expected    500   480   460    440     420     400       380   360   340   320   300
      Reward
      Tickets
      to Child   10     9     8      7       6       5         4     3     2     1     0
         B
