                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       DECENTRALIZED TARGETING OF AGRICULTURAL CREDIT PROGRAMS:
                PRIVATE VERSUS POLITICAL INTERMEDIARIES

                                         Pushkar Maitra
                                          Sandip Mitra
                                        Dilip Mookherjee
                                         Sujata Visaria

                                      Working Paper 26730
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26730


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




Funding was provided by the Australian Agency for International Development, the International
Growth Centre, United States Agency for International Development, the Hong Kong Research
Grants Council (GRF 16503014) and the HKUST Institute for Emerging Market Studies
(IEMS15BM05). We thank the director and staff of Shree Sanchari for collaborating on the
project. Jingyan Gao, Arpita Khanna, Clarence Lee, Daijing Lv, Foez Mojumder, Moumita
Poddar and Nina Yeung provided exceptional research assistance, and Elizabeth Kwok provided
excellent administrative support. We thank audiences at numerous seminars and conferences for
their comments and suggestions, which have significantly improved the paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pushkar Maitra, Sandip Mitra, Dilip Mookherjee, and Sujata Visaria. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Decentralized Targeting of Agricultural Credit Programs: Private versus Political Intermediaries
Pushkar Maitra, Sandip Mitra, Dilip Mookherjee, and Sujata Visaria
NBER Working Paper No. 26730
February 2020
JEL No. H42,I38,O13,O16,O17

                                           ABSTRACT

We compare two different methods of appointing a local commission agent as an intermediary for
a credit program. In the Trader-Agent Intermediated Lending Scheme (TRAIL), the agent was a
randomly selected established private trader, while in the Gram Panchayat-Agent Intermediated-
Lending Scheme (GRAIL), he was randomly chosen from nominations by the elected village
council. More TRAIL loans were taken up, but repayment rates were similar, and TRAIL loans
had larger average impacts on borrowers' farm incomes. The majority of this difference in
impacts is due to differences in treatment effects conditional on farmer productivity, rather than
differences in borrower selection patterns. The findings can be explained by a model where
TRAIL agents increased their middleman profits by helping more able treated borrowers reduce
their unit costs and increase output. In contrast, for political reasons GRAIL agents monitored the
less able treated borrowers and reduced their default risk.

Pushkar Maitra                                    Dilip Mookherjee
Monash University                                 Department of Economics
Department of Economics                           Boston University
Clayton Campus, VIC 3800                          270 Bay State Road
Australia                                         Boston, MA 02215
Pushkar.Maitra@monash.edu                         and NBER
                                                  dilipm@bu.edu
Sandip Mitra
Indian Statistical Institute                      Sujata Visaria
Sampling and Official Statistics Unit             Department of Economics
203 BT Road                                       Lee Shau Kee Business Building
Kolkata 700108                                    and Technology
India                                             Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong
sandipisi@gmail.com                               Hong Kong
                                                  svisaria@ust.hk




A data appendix is available at
http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26730
A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
http://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/5366
1       Introduction
Public programs in developing countries are increasingly being implemented at the local
level. Communities are monitoring service providers, and local governments are deliver-
ing development and welfare programs. Despite the promise that decentralization can
improve targeting and implementation through better information and accountability,
a growing literature argues that these programs have a mixed record.1 Community-led
programs are often captured by the local elite (see, for example World Development
Report 2004; Mansuri and Rao 2013; Vera-Cossio 2018; Deserranno et al. 2018), and
there is evidence that local governments target their vote bank, rather than those who
stand to benefit the most (Stokes 2005; Robinson and Verdier 2013; Bardhan et al. 2015;
Bardhan and Mookherjee 2016; Devarajan and Khemani 2016; Dey and Sen 2016).
    In this paper we present evidence on a new alternative designed in the context of an
agricultural credit program in West Bengal, India. The program offered subsidized indi-
vidual liability loans to smallholder farmers. Our approach, called Agent Intermediated
Lending (AIL), delegates the selection of beneficiaries to an intermediary chosen from
within the community. It sought to leverage the intermediary's specialized information
and connections with local residents, while avoiding the pitfalls associated with elite
capture.
    During 2010­2013 we collaborated with a microfinance institution that implemented
the AIL scheme in 48 randomly chosen villages in two potato-growing districts of West
Bengal, India. We experimented with two different versions of the AIL scheme.2 In
the 24 villages randomly assigned to the Trader-Agent Intermediated Lending (TRAIL)
treatment, the agent was randomly chosen from a list of local private traders with a
track record of lending to, and selling and buying from farmers in the village. In the
remaining 24 villages assigned to the Gram Panchayat Agent Intermediated Lending
(GRAIL) treatment, the agent was randomly selected from a list of local individuals
provided by the elected village council in GRAIL. The agents then recommended village
households for individual liability loans designed to finance the cultivation of the local
    1
     In her survey of community-driven development (CDD) programs around the world, Casey (2018)
argues that although CDDs have successfully provided public goods in countries with weak states (for
example, Sierra Leone, Indonesia, Afghanistan and Sudan), they have generally failed to transform local
decision-making or increase empowerment.
   2
     In a different set of 24 randomly chosen villages in the same districts, we implemented a group-based
lending (GBL) approach, where borrowers self-selected into joint liability groups. Our previous research
(Maitra et al. 2017) compares TRAIL with GBL. In the current paper we focus on a comparison of the
TRAIL and GRAIL schemes.



                                                    1
cash crop, potatoes. They earned as commission 75 percent of the interest payments
made by each borrower they recommended.3
    The goal of this paper is to evaluate these alternative methods of devolution of ben-
eficiary selection. Specifically, we ask if the programs had positive impacts on farmer
cultivation decisions, output and incomes. We examine whether the impacts differ across
the two approaches, and why. In particular, the agent's identity, networks and motiva-
tions could have affected the success of the intervention. Given their experience lending
and trading farm inputs and output within the community, the TRAIL agents may be
better informed about borrowers' farm productivity and reliability. They could also
expect to earn middleman profits from trading the farmers' output, and so may have
chosen to direct credit and business advice to their most productive farmer-clients.4
GRAIL agents, on the other hand, would have likely acted in line with the priorities
of their political party, for example, selecting poor beneficiaries to further their party's
pro-poor agenda. They may also have been motivated differently vis-a-vis their ben-
eficiaries' projects: they were unlikely to benefit directly if their borrowers had large
harvests, and instead could have faced the blame if the borrowers' projects failed and
they fell into economic distress. The agents would also likely impose informal sanctions
on defaulting borrowers. A TRAIL agent might withhold future business transactions,
and the GRAIL agent might apply social or political pressure.
    Our experimental design allows us to separate the effect of receiving an AIL loan from
the confound caused by endogenous borrower selection. In each village, the agent was
asked to recommend 30 village residents as potential borrowers, but only 10 randomly
chosen from this list were offered the AIL loan. Among the recommended, a comparison
of those who were offered the loan with those who were not, provides an estimate of the
treatment effect of the loan, conditional on selection. Among those who were not offered
the loans, the underlying differences between those who were and were not recommended
allow us to separately estimate the selection effect.
    Our estimates show that TRAIL loans were more likely to be taken up than GRAIL
loans. Among the loans taken up, repayment rates were a similarly high 93 percent in
both schemes. In both schemes, beneficiaries borrowed more, cultivated more area and
had larger potato harvests. However, potato profits and farm incomes only increased for
   3
     See Fuentes (1996), Varghese (2005) and Mansuri (2007) for theoretical arguments about credit
delivery using local agents and bank-money-lender linkages in developing countries.
   4
     The potato value chain in this region is characterized by large middlemen margins: Mitra et al.
(2018) estimate that in 2008 farmgate prices were 45% of wholesale prices, with middlemen earning at
least 50-70% of this gap.


                                                 2
beneficiaries in the TRAIL scheme (by 40 percent and 21 percent, respectively).5 This
is because TRAIL farmers' expansion of cultivation was accompanied by a reduction in
unit production costs, whereas GRAIL farmers continued to produce at previous (high)
costs per acre.
    We develop a simple model with a decreasing returns Cobb-Douglas production func-
tion where farmers vary in a single productivity attribute, and at baseline, the allocation
of informal credit is efficient. We use this model to estimate farmer productivity, and
find that the TRAIL agent selected more productive farmers than the GRAIL agent did.
And yet, this selection difference accounts for less than 10 percent of the TRAIL­GRAIL
difference in the average treatment effects on farm income. We show that alternative
explanations such as superior selection on other farmer attributes (such as wealth or
unit costs), and credit rationing cannot explain why the TRAIL scheme outperforms
the GRAIL. Instead, our analysis indicates that most of the difference can be attributed
to the TRAIL scheme generating larger treatment effects on farm income, conditional on
farmer productivity. Specifically, our findings suggest that a beneficiary in the TRAIL
scheme produced more output at significantly lower per-unit cost and earned larger
profit, than a GRAIL beneficiary of the same productivity. Since the loan product and
hence borrower incentives were identical in the two schemes, this suggests that the key
difference was the borrower's relationship with their agent.
    Accordingly, we extend our simple model of selection on a single productivity di-
mension to incorporate interactions between agents and borrowers. Since TRAIL agents
are also middlemen in the potato trade, they are motivated to increase their profits
by helping their clients produce and sell more(Mitra et al. 2018). In our model, they
advise farmers on ways to lower unit costs of production, inducing them to cultivate
more potatoes, and earn larger profits per kilogram. This advice is most effective for the
most able farmers. On the other hand, the GRAIL agent is motivated by the objectives
of the political party controlling the village council. His primary goal is to minimize
loan defaults, and accordingly he may intensively monitor poor, less able borrowers and
induce them undertake actions and expenditures that ensure crop success, but also lower
expected profits. As a result GRAIL borrowers would incur higher costs than TRAIL
borrower. We show that our model's predictions match empirical patterns in default
rates and conditional treatment effects on borrowers' farm output and incomes, as well
as the frequency of their interactions with the agent and local traders.
   5
    These percentage effects are mirrored in the absolute effects on borrower profits and farm incomes,
since control farmers in both schemes had similar profits and incomes.


                                                  3
    Our paper contributes to the recent literature that examines the role that commu-
nity agents play in development interventions. Several recent papers find that central
individuals in the network can help to effectively target beneficiaries, diffuse informa-
tion and increase program take-up (Bandiera and Rasul 2006; Alatas et al. 2012, 2016;
Fisman et al. 2017; Hussam et al. 2018; Berg et al. 2018; Beaman and Magruder 2012;
Debnath and Jain 2018; Beaman et al. 2018; Banerjee et al. 2013; Chandrasekhar et al.
2018). We bring to this literature the observation that villages tend to have a num-
ber of different networks: economic, political and social. The nodal agents of different
networks may have different information sets and different incentives to deliver devel-
opment programs. This raises the question of which network to tap into. Further, the
intervention itself may affect network relationships, and thereby also affect borrowers'
profits. Our results indicate the importance of looking beyond the architecture of local
networks, and incorporating the effects of policy treatments on relationships within the
network. Our work also sheds light on the specific role that intermediaries play.6 We
provide evidence on interactions between the beneficiary and program intermediary, and
quantify the importance of such interactions vis-a-vis beneficiary selection.
    Our experiment provides a rare instance of a microcredit experiment that successfully
raised borrower production and incomes, while maintaining high repayment rates and
take-up. In a previous paper (Maitra et al. 2017), we found that the TRAIL scheme
also outperformed a traditional group-based micro-lending (GBL) scheme. We found
that differences in borrower selection accounted for at least 30-40% of the difference in
the average treatment effects across the two schemes. Instead, this paper finds that
selection differences explain very little of the difference in the outcomes of the TRAIL
and GRAIL schemes; accordingly we focus on the role of interactions between the agent
and farmers.7 Interestingly, the large profits that the traders earn as middlemen appear
to be the precise reason why their incentives are aligned with increasing farmers' output.
    The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we describe the two loan intervention
schemes that we will analyse in this paper. Section 3 describes our data and Section 4
   6
      For example, Beaman and Magruder (2012) argue that members of social networks can be incen-
tivized to help select and refer high ability workers to jobs. On the other hand, Heath (2018) finds
evidence that firms mitigate shirking by workers referred by employees that interact with them socially,
relying on these interactions to help weaken the effect of limited liability constraints.
    7
      In another related paper (Maitra et al. 2019), we compare the distributive effects of TRAIL, GRAIL
and GBL, by assessing their impacts on an Atkinson (1970) welfare function. We find that the TRAIL
scheme had significantly positive average treatment effects on welfare that were consistently larger than
the average treatment effects of the GRAIL and GBL schemes, irrespective of the degree of inequality
aversion.



                                                   4
presents the estimates of the average treatment effects of the two schemes on borrower
outcomes. In Section 5 we present statistics on the financial performance of the schemes.
To explain our empirical findings, in Section 6 we examine how and why selection pat-
terns varied across the two schemes. We then decompose the difference in average
treatment effects into the part that can be explained by these selection differences, and
the part that is due to differences in the treatment effects, conditional on borrower pro-
ductivity. Since we find that this latter part is substantial, in Section 7 we develop a
model of agent incentives and agent-farmer interactions and test its predictions. Section
8 concludes.


2       Empirical Context and Intervention Design
Our interventions were conducted across 48 randomly-chosen villages in the Hugli and
West Medinipur districts of the Indian state of West Bengal.8 The loans offered through
the AIL schemes were designed to facilitate the cultivation of potatoes, a high return
high-cost crop in this region (see Maitra et al. 2017, Table 2).
    The 48 villages in our sample were randomly and evenly assigned to the two treat-
ment arms. Our sample villages were at least 8 kilometres apart from one another; this
helped to avoid information and other spillovers across the treatment arms. Each village
belonged to the jurisdiction of a different village council or gram panchayat (GP). Panel
A of Table 1 shows that across the villages in the two treatment arms there are no signif-
icant differences in village size, or number or landsize distribution of potato cultivators.
Our partner MFI had not operated in any of these villages before. In general, when our
intervention began in 2010, there was very little microfinance available in this area.
    The institutional arrangements in this region are such that potato traders regularly
visit farmers in their fields, and often engage in repeated sales and credit transactions
with farmers. In each TRAIL village, our project team drew up a list of local traders
who had at least 50 clients or had been operating for longer than 3 years. One trader
was randomly drawn from this list and offered the position of agent.9
    In India, gram panchayats are village councils of between 8 and 15 members, formed
through direct elections once every five years. In the West Bengal village councils,
    8
     This is a subset of the random sample of villages where Mitra et al. (2018) conducted a potato price
information intervention experiment in 2007­08.
   9
     If this person had refused to participate, we would have offered the position to a second randomly
chosen trader from the list. In practice the first trader approached always accepted the contract.



                                                   5
candidates tend to be affiliated with state-level political parties.10 Many government
schemes are implemented locally by village councils, and local party affiliates are often
involved in both identifying beneficiaries and delivering benefits.11
     In the villages assigned to the GRAIL treatment, we asked the village council to
suggest as potential GRAIL agents individuals who had lived in the village for at least
3 years, were personally familiar with village farmers, and had a good local reputation.
Given the background we described above, we expected the GP to recommend political
affiliates experienced at delivering government benefits. One randomly drawn person
from this list was offered the contract.12
     In each intervention arm, the agent was asked to recommend 30 potential borrowers,
from the land-poor households in the village.13 Ten of these 30 recommended individuals
were randomly chosen in a lottery that we conducted in the office of the local govern-
ment.14 The MFI then approached the selected individuals in their homes and offered
them the loans.
     Our partner MFI was limited to disbursing hte program loans and collecting repay-
ment. It did not select borrowers or monitor them subsequently. The loans were funded
through an external grant held by the principal investigators of this project.
     The first loan cycle began with disbursals in October­November 2010, to coincide
with the planting season for potatoes. Borrowers were individually liable for the repay-
ment of their loans. The scheme featured "progressive lending" to generate dynamic
repayment incentives. In cycle 1 the loan size was capped at Rs. 2000 (equivalent to
US $30), repayable as a single lumpsum at the end of four months, at 6 percent interest.
The loan size in each subsequent cycle was 133% of the principal amount repaid. Bor-
rowers who repaid less than 50% of principal in any cycle, were terminated. We did not
  10
      West Bengal has a long history of cadre-based mass mobilization of voters through political rallies
and campaigns. From 1977 to 2011, the Communist Party of India (Marxist) led a left-wing coalition
government in West Bengal state, and held the majority of the village council seats. This long dominance
ended when the Trinamool Congress captured the majority of state assembly seats in the 2011 state
elections. After the 2013 village council elections most village councils also had a Trinamool Congress
majority.
   11
      There is considerable evidence that local governments in West Bengal direct benefits towards swing
voters (Bardhan et al. 2015; Dey and Sen 2016).
   12
      Only 1 of the 24 individuals selected in this way refused the position, citing a religious taboo on
participating in a credit scheme. He was replaced by a second randomly drawn person from the list.
   13
      Specifically, we required that recommended households owned no more than 1.5 acres of cultivable
land.
   14
      The list of recommended borrowers was kept confidential so as to avoid any spillovers on informal
credit access or other relationships for households that had been recommended but were not eventually
chosen to receive the loan.



                                                   6
want to create any pressure for borrowers to sell their harvest prematurely to meet their
repayment obligation; therefore borrowers could also repay in potato "bonds"; we then
calculated the rupee value of the repayment at the prevailing price of potato bonds.15
Although the stated purpose of the loans was agricultural, we did not monitor or restrict
how households spent the funds.16
    Agents had both monetary and non-monetary incentives to participate in the scheme.
At the end of each loan cycle, they received from the MFI a commission equal to 75% of
the interest paid by all borrowers whom they had recommended. This high commission
rate was meant to incentivize the agent to select productive borrowers who would repay
the loan and benefit from it, and to discourage collusion between the agent and potential
applicants.17 In addition, the agent put down a deposit of Rs. 50 per borrower, which
was refunded if his borrower survived in the program for two years. If more than one-
half of the borrowers recommended by an agent defaulted on their loans, the agent was
terminated and earned no further commissions. All agents who survived in the program
for 2 years also received a paid holiday to a seaside resort. In conversations during our
field visits, some TRAIL agents remarked that they expected the scheme to increase
their prominence in the village, or to boost their business. GRAIL agents may also have
viewed the scheme as an extension of government anti-poverty programs, or expected
the public to view their political party more favorably because of association with the
scheme.


3      Data and Selected Descriptive Statistics
We conducted surveys with a sample of 50 households per village. These households
were selected as follows. In each village, all 10 households assigned to receive the loan
(Treatment households) were included in the sample. Of the 20 households that the
agent recommended but did not receive the loan, we included a random subset of 10
households; they are referred to as Control 1 households. We also included 30 households
randomly chosen from the pool of the non-recommended, hereafter referred to as Control
2 households.
   The first round of surveys was conducted in December 2010, two months after the
  15
     Farmers can store their harvest in cold storages for a maximum of 11 months. Potato "bonds" are
receipts from the cold store facility that are often traded between farmers and traders.
  16
     Survey respondents reported to us their actual use of loan funds in our detailed four-monthly
household surveys.
  17
     Maitra et al. (2017) presents a model of borrower selection that illustrates this mechanism.


                                                 7
Cycle 1 loans were disbursed. Surveys were repeated every four months. In each sample
household, we ensured that the same person responded to the survey in each round.
There was no attrition in the sample over the eight survey rounds. In Panel B of
Table 1, we present summary statistics of selected household-level characteristics for this
sample. These household characteristics do not jointly explain assignment to treatment
(p = 0.996).
    Table 2 compares the characteristics of the TRAIL and GRAIL agents. Over 95%
of the TRAIL agents were business persons and reported owning a shop or business.
GRAIL agents were either farmers, or had a salaried government job. TRAIL agents
were wealthier and had higher incomes, but were less likely to have studied beyond
primary school. On the other hand GRAIL agents were more involved in civil society
and politics; 30% were members of a village organization, 17% were political party
workers, and 13% had been members of the local government. None of the TRAIL
agents were directly involved in politics in this way.
    Table 3 presents information about the relationships between agents and village
residents. Both types of agents were well-known in the village. More than 90% of the
non-recommended Control 2 households said they knew the agent, and 98% of these 90
percent said they saw him at least once a week. However Control 2 households were less
likely to have close social ties with the agent, as depicted by belonging to the same caste
or religious category, or visiting the agent's house on special occasions.
    The main distinction between TRAIL and GRAIL agents is in their economic links
with sample households. Nearly a fifth of Control 2 households and a quarter of Control
1 households in TRAIL villages reported that the agent was an important source of
credit or inputs, or an important buyer of their crop output. The GRAIL agent was
significantly less likely to fill these roles.18 In survey round 1 in December 2010, we also
asked households whether they had transacted with the agent in the product, credit
or labour markets at any point in the previous three years. A third or more of TRAIL
households had bought from the agent, and a tenth to a quarter had borrowed or worked
for the agent. Households in GRAIL villages were less likely to have engaged with their
agent in this way. This suggests that the TRAIL agents were better informed about the
cultivation and borrowing activities of village residents.
    Table A1 in the Appendix summarizes the characteristics of the loans that sample
households held at the time that our intervention began. Two-thirds of the households
  18
    We note however that about 10% of sample households in both treatment arms reported that they
had worked for the agent.


                                               8
reported that they had an outstanding loan, the bulk of which were for production
purposes. Of the agricultural borrowing, nearly two-thirds was from traders or mon-
eylenders, for a mean duration of 4 months and an average annual interest rate of
25%. Credit cooperatives accounted for nearly one quarter of the loans, but loans from
commercial banks and from microfinance institutions were rare. Cooperatives and com-
mercial banks charged much lower interest rates, but generally required collateral, and
so were inaccessible to poor households.


4     Average Treatment Effects of the Schemes
We start by examining the impacts of the TRAIL and GRAIL schemes on borrower
outcomes. Since only a random subset of the recommended household were offered the
loans, the average difference in the outcomes of the Treatment and Control 1 households
is an estimate of the treatment effect of the loan, conditional on the household being
selected into the scheme. The average difference in the outcomes of the Control 1 and
Control 2 households is an estimate of the selection effect. Our regression specification
takes the form:

    yivt = 0 + 1 TRAILv + 2 (TRAILv × Control 1iv ) + 3 (TRAILv × Treatmentiv )
        + 4 (GRAILv × Control 1iv ) + 5 (GRAILv × Treatmentiv )                                     (1)
        +  Xiv + I (Yeart ) + ivt

Here yivt denotes the outcome variable of interest for household i in village v at time
t. The omitted category is the Control 2 households in GRAIL villages. The average
treatment effects of the TRAIL and GRAIL schemes are estimated by             ^3 -  ^2 and
^5 - 
      ^4 respectively.19 The coefficient ^2 is the difference in outcomes of Control 1 and
Control 2 borrowers in TRAIL villages, and so represents the TRAIL selection effect;
analogously,  ^5 measures the GRAIL selection effect. The set Xiv contains measures of
the household's landholding, religion and caste, and the age, education and occupation
of the oldest male in the household.20 I (Yeart ) denotes two year dummies to control for
  19
     All treatment effects are intent-to-treat estimates because they compare the outcomes of households
assigned to the Treatment and Control 1 groups, regardless of whether the Treatment households
actually took the loan.
  20
      In our study the administrative definition of a village corresponds to a collection of hamlets or
paras. Households within the same hamlet tend to be more homogenous, are more likely to interact with
each other, and arguably experience correlated shocks to cultivation and market prices. The results are


                                                   9
secular changes over time.21 Standard errors are clustered at the hamlet level.


4.1     Treatment Effects on Agricultural Borrowing
Columns 1 and 2 of Table 4 present the average treatment effects on agricultural borrow-
ing. The TRAIL scheme increased total agricultural borrowing for selected households
by Rs. 2868 (or 137%) over the three-year study period, which is statistically sig-
nificant at the 1% level. The GRAIL scheme caused a similar, significant, increase of
Rs. 2754 (or 143%). The point estimates on non-program agricultural borrowing are
small and statistically insignificant, suggesting that the TRAIL and GRAIL loans did
not crowd out agricultural loans from other sources. Thus Treatment households took
the additional subsidized credit, but did not substitute away from their more expensive
pre-existing informal loans, possibly because they wanted to sustain their traditional
informal credit relationships.


4.2     Treatment Effects on Farm Incomes
Columns 3, 4 and 5 of Table 4 present the estimates of average treatment effects on
aggregate farm and non-farm income. In column 3, farm value-added is computed as
the sum of the value-added for the four major crops grown in this region: potatoes,
paddy, sesame and vegetables.22 The TRAIL loans caused a statistically significant
21% increase in average farm value-added, whereas GRAIL loans had a non-significant
impact, estimated at 1.3%. In column 4, non-agricultural income is calculated as the
sum of rental, sales, labour and business income. The average treatment effect estimates
for non-agricultural income are imprecise, possibly because these incomes are measured
with greater error. Nevertheless, column 4 indicates that neither loan scheme increased
non-agricultural incomes significantly. Column 5 shows that aggregate income increased
by 11.3% in the TRAIL scheme, and decreased by 10% in the GRAIL scheme; this
difference is statistically significant at the 10% level.
robust to clustering at the village-level instead. See Panel B of Table A3.
  21
     In Panel A of Table A3 we present the results from running equation (1) without the set of controls
Xiv . The key effects are qualitatively similar, although less precise.
  22
     The separate results for paddy, sesame and vegetables are available on request.




                                                  10
4.3     Treatment Effects on Potato Cultivation
Recall that the AIL loans were designed specifically to enable the cultivation of pota-
toes, the highest-value cash crop in the region. Table 5 shows that the TRAIL loans
led to large and statistically significant increases in potato cultivation.23 The effect is
concentrated on the intensive margin: although the TRAIL Treatment households were
just as likely to cultivate potatoes as the Control 1 households (column 1), they planted
an additional 0.09 acres (or 27%, column 2), harvested 950 kg (or 26%, column 3) more,
and earned an additional Rs. 3900 (or 27%, column 5) in sales revenue.24 Simultane-
ously they incurred an additional Rs. 1846 (or 22%, column 4) in production costs, so
that on net, value-added increased by Rs. 2060 (or 36%, column 6). When we subtract
the imputed cost of family labor, this works out to a statistically significant Rs. 1907
or 40% increase in profit (column 7).25
    The households that the GRAIL agent recommended were less likely to cultivate
potatoes in the absence of the loan: potatoes were planted in only 64% of Control
1 household-years in GRAIL villages, unlike the 72% in TRAIL villages. However,
the loans increased the likelihood that a GRAIL borrower cultivated potatoes by 13%
points (or 20%, Column 1, p < 0.001). Correspondingly, acreage (column 2) and output
(column 3) increased significantly (23% and 24%, respectively). Revenue increased by
19% (column 5), but since the cost of production increased by a larger 28% (column 4),
the GRAIL loans had a non-significant effect on value-added and imputed profit.26 The
difference in the average treatment effects on imputed profits (column 7) across the two
schemes is statistically significant at 10%.
  23
      We aggregate the data from the four-monthly surveys into a household-year level dataset capturing
the amount of land households planted with potatoes, harvested quantities, sales, revenues, production
costs, value-added and imputed profits. This allows us to align the costs of cultivation with the revenues,
since harvested potatoes can be stored and then sold at different points in the year.
   24
      Households reported to us the quantity and price of each potato sale. When they held potatoes for
self-consumption, we imputed the sales revenue by pricing the potatoes at the median sale price in the
village.
   25
      To calculate the shadow cost of family labour, we price the reported family labor time (male, female
and child labor separately) spent on the crop at the median wage reported for hired labor of that type
in that village in that year for that crop.
   26
      Since we analyse a large number of dependent variables, we correct for the increased chance of
finding statistically significant results. Following Hochberg (1988), we report a conservative p-value for
an index of variables in a family of outcomes taken together (see Kling et al. 2007). The variables are
normalized by subtracting the mean in the control group and dividing by the standard deviation in the
control group; the index is the simple average of the normalized variables. To adjust the p-value of the
treatment effect for an index, the p-values for all indices are ranked in increasing order, and then each
original p-value is multiplied by m - k + 1, where m is the number of indices and k is the rank of the
original p-value. If the resulting value is greater than 1, we assign an adjusted p-value of > 0.999.


                                                    11
    Thus, while both schemes led borrowers to plant more potatoes, only TRAIL bor-
rowers earned larger profits as a result. This is mainly because they lowered their unit
costs by 6%, whereas GRAIL borrowers' unit costs increased by 2%. The difference is
statistically significant (p < 0.05).27


5      Loan Performance
In Table 6 we examine the take-up and repayment rates for the program loans. In col-
umn 1, the dependent variable is the likelihood that a household eligible to take the loan
in a given cycle actually took the loan.28 The sample means in Panel A show that eligi-
ble TRAIL Treatment households accepted 94% of the program loans offered, whereas
eligible GRAIL Treatment households took 87% of the loan offers. The difference is
statistically significant at the 1% level. This result holds (p < 0.01) even in Panel B
when we control for household characteristics following the regression specification:

                             yhvt = 0 + 1 GRAILv +  Xivt + hvt                                     (2)

where Xivt includes the landholding, religion, caste, and the age and educational attain-
ment of the oldest male member of the household, and a vector of loan cycle dummies
to control for seasonal or other time-varying changes in take-up and repayment rates.
    We define a loan to be in default if the repayment amount due was not paid fully
by the due date. The average default rate over the three-year intervention period is an
identically low 7% in both schemes (Table 6, Panel A, column 2). The regression result in
Panel B confirms that there is no difference in the loan default rates in the two schemes.
Despite the fact that the scheme did not increase their incomes significantly, GRAIL
Treatment households repaid their loans at the same high rates as TRAIL Treatment
households.


6      Selection-based Explanation
Next we examine the mechanisms that underlie our empirical findings. We start by
examining how much of the difference in the average treatment effects in the two schemes
  27
     TRAIL borrowers also faced a smaller decline in output price (0.6% instead of 3.6%), but this
difference is not statistically significant (p = 0.14).
  28
     In loan cycles 2 and beyond, a Treatment household was only eligible to borrow if it had repaid at
least 50% of the amount previously outstanding.


                                                  12
can be explained by selection differences. This requires us to estimate a measure of the
underlying heterogeneity among farmers, based on the following simple model. The
key assumptions are that (a) farmers are heterogenous in ability, (b) more able farmers
have higher TFP and lower unit costs of production, (c) the production function follows
the Cobb-Douglas form and exhibits decreasing returns to scale, and (d) the informal
credit market is efficient because lenders have perfect information about borrower ability
and compete in Bertrand fashion. In particular, borrowers are not credit-rationed. The
program loans provide them an extra line of credit at an interest rate below the prevailing
market rate, and induce them to expand borrowing and cultivation scale.


6.1     Estimation of Ability: Control Households
Consider farmer i in village v in year t who produces according to the function:

                                                           1 1-
                                        Yivt = Pvt Ai        l                                         (3)
                                                         1 -  ivt

Pvt denotes a village-level yield or price shock, livt is the farmer's chosen scale of culti-
vation, and   (0, 1). Farmer ability Ai follows a common, given, distribution both in
GRAIL and in TRAIL villages. The cost of production per unit area ci is constant for
any given farmer, and decreases in farmer ability. Assume for now that Pvt , Ai and ci
are unaffected by the treatment.29
    A farmer in village v , year t who does not receive a program loan (henceforth, a
control farmer) borrows from informal lenders. All informal lenders face the cost of
capital vt .30 Since these lenders compete in the Bertrand fashion, the farmer pays
expected interest cost vt .
    To cultivate potatoes, the farmer must incur a fixed cost F > 0. Accordingly, the
                             c
control farmer chooses l = livt to maximize

                                               l1-
                                      Pvt Ai       - vt ci l - F
                                               1-
  29
      The current model assumes that farmer productivity and costs are correlated with a measure of
exogenous ability. This is a special case of the model in our previous paper (Maitra et al. 2017). In
Section 7 we allow the trader and agent to endogenously determine the extent to which they help and
monitor the farmers, and these in turn affect the values of Ai and ci .
  30
     In the presence of default risk, the informal interest rate also depends on, and is decreasing in, the
farmer's ability, so that the expected interest cost of the borrower is vt .




                                                    13
For control farmers with a sufficiently high ability, this yields

                                      c       1     Ai  1
                                 log livt =     log    + [Pvt - vt ]                                 (4)
                                                    ci  

Observe that log A ci
                     i
                       , or the ratio of TFP to per-unit cost, is increasing in farmer ability.
This serves as an exogenous measure of relative productivity. In equation 4 this ratio
is scaled relative to ; if  is close to 1 then it is also an absolute measure of the
ratio of TFP to per-unit cost. Accordingly, among control farmers, productivity can be
estimated as the household fixed effect in a household-year level panel regression, where
the (log) scale of potato cultivation (acreage or output) is regressed on farmer, village
and year dummies.
    Equation (4) applies only to farmers with ability above the threshold vt . These
farmers eventually earn profits that cover the fixed cost F . Farmers with ability below
this threshold would choose not to cultivate potatoes. Our data show that roughly
30 percent of Control 1 and Control 2 group farmers planted potatoes in at most one
of the three years in our study period; we cannot estimate household fixed effects for
these households. We call these households non-cultivators, and assign to them the
lower endpoint of the estimated productivity distribution among the cultivators. This
is an upper bound to their true latent productivity. None of the comparisons below are
affected if we replace this upper bound with any lower estimate. Throughout we will
use our estimate of productivity as a proxy for underlying unobserved ability.
    In Table 7 we present the results from regressing each cultivator household's produc-
tivity estimate, obtained from the household fixed effects regression following equation
(4), on household characteristics.31 As the bottom panel of Table 7 shows, there is wide
variation in the estimated productivity level across households: the 75th percentile is
more than three times the size of the 25th percentile. Although the productivity es-
timate correlates positively with landholding and having a male household head, the
R-squared indicates that variation in observable characteristics can only explain 16%
of the variation in household productivity.32 This justifies our working hypothesis that
community-based agents have local information about farmers that an outsider would
  31
      Table A2 presents the differences in demographic characteristics between the cultivators and non-
cultivators. Cultivators own more land, are more likely to be upper caste Hindus, have larger households,
are more likely to be male-headed, and the oldest male in the household is likely to be older and is more
likely to have completed primary school.
   32
      A LASSO estimator performs only slightly better than the ordinary least squares estimator. Under
the Extended Bayesian Information Criterion the selected LASSO model has an R-squared of 0.23.



                                                   14
be unable to observe.


6.2     Estimation of Ability: Treatment Households
We cannot use the same procedure as in Section 6.1 to estimate the productivity of
treated households, because the program loan would have a direct impact on treated
households' scale of cultivation. Also, treated households could have engaged differently
with their agent than control households. Instead, to recover their productivity estimate,
we employ the Order-Preserving Assumption (OPA), which states that the treatment did
not change households' rank order in terms of productivity levels. In Section 7.1 we will
provide theoretical justification for this assumption.33 Under this assumption, in each
treatment arm, we can rank Treatment farmers by cultivation scale, and assign to them
the counterfactual productivity estimate Ai of the farmer in the Control 1 distribution
at the same rank, as estimated in Section 6.1. This gives us the correct estimate for the
latent productivity of this farmer.


6.3     Differences in Selection
We can now examine whether the TRAIL and GRAIL agents systematically recom-
mended households of different productivity levels. We focus on Control 1 and Control
2 households; neither group received program loans.
    In Panel A of Figure 1, we compare the distributions of the productivity estimates for
Control 1 and Control 2 households.34 The figure on the left shows that in TRAIL vil-
lages, the cumulative distribution function for Control 1 households first-order stochas-
tically dominates that for the Control 2 households. A two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test rejects the null hypothesis that the two distributions are identical (p = 0.005).35
Thus, the TRAIL agent positively selected borrowers on productivity. The figure on
the right shows that the GRAIL agent also selected borrowers positively (K-S test
p = 0.011).36
  33
     Athey and Imbens (2006) use a similar assumption in order to identify treatment effects in non-linear
difference-of-difference settings.
  34
     The flat segment in the bottom end of the plotted CDFs depicts the upper bound of the estimates
for non-cultivators.
  35
     Since our productivity estimates are generated variables, we also simulate 2000 bootstrap samples
and run the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for each Control 1 vs Control 2 CDF comparison. In 87 percent
of the simulations, we can reject the null hypothesis that the two distributions are identical.
  36
     The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test rejects the null hypothesis that the two distributions are identical in
83 percent of our bootstrap simulations.


                                                   15
    When in Panel B we again present the cumulative distribution functions for Control
1 households, we see that the graph for TRAIL households first-order stochastically
dominates that for GRAIL households. A two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test rejects
the null hypothesis that the two distributions are identical (p = 0.06).37 Thus, the
TRAIL agent selected more productive borrowers than the GRAIL agent.
    For what follows, it is convenient to group sample households into productivity
classes, or bins. Accordingly, we place all non-cultivator households in Bin 1. Among
the rest, we use a median split to create Bins 2 and 3. Figure A2 shows that the GRAIL
agent selected more Bin 1 borrowers (34.5% versus 27.3%), and fewer Bin 3 borrowers
(32.3% versus 39.7%).38


6.4     Explaining Selection Differences
What explains this difference in selection patterns? The TRAIL agent's experience lend-
ing and trading with village residents could have given him more or better information
about their productivity levels. Alternatively, he might have had different incentives
than the GRAIL agent. For example, the prospect of increasing his middleman prof-
its might incentivize him to help farmers increase their crop volumes. Conversely, the
GRAIL agent would likely share the motives of the political party controlling the village
council. If this party pursues a pro-poor welfarist ideology, this might motivate the
GRAIL agent to select asset-poor (and possibly) low-ability farmers. Alternatively, if
the party is opportunistic and uses welfare programs clientelistically to mobilize votes,
then too the GRAIL agent would recommend poor households for the loan scheme.39
    We examine whether GRAIL agents used the loan recommendations for political
gains. In our final survey round, we asked survey respondents to participate in a straw
  37
      The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test rejects the null hypothesis that the two distributions are identical in
74 percent of our 2000 bootstrap simulations. Figure A1, in the Appendix, presents descriptive statistics
on household productivity for TRAIL and GRAIL Control 1 households. TRAIL households had higher
mean and maximum productivity estimates; the 25th, 50th and 75th percentiles or the distribution of
productivity were also higher for TRAIL Control 1 households.
   38
      The Bin 3 borrowers here could be thought of as equivalent to the gung-ho (GE) entrepreneurs in
Banerjee et al. (2019). Indeed, the Bin 1 borrowers are akin to the non-GE entrepreneurs in that they
do not cultivate potatoes absent the AIL loan. However, while Banerjee et al. (2019) argue that the
overall differences in later outcomes between GE and non-GE entrepreneurs are driven by selection, we
find in this paper that TRAIL and GRAIL borrowers have different outcomes conditional on selection,
and that this difference is caused by differences in the agents' non-program incentives. See Section 6.5.
   39
      It is a standard feature of the literature on political clientelism that political parties target swing
voters among the poor. This is because poor voters sell their vote for a lower price (see, for example,
Stokes 2005; Kitschelt and Wilkinson 2007).



                                                     16
poll. Survey investigators gave them a sheet of paper resembling a ballot, and asked
them to mark the symbol of their preferred political party, and then fold and place the
paper in a box.40 If the straw poll vote indicates the political party that the respondent
supports, then we can interpret a straw vote for the political party that was incumbent
in 2010 as support for the political party of the GRAIL agent. We use data from the
West Bengal State Election Commission to identify the incumbent political party in each
local village council in 2010. We run the regression:

                  Iiv = 0 + 1 Treatment    iv   + 2 Control 1iv +  Xiv + iv                (5)

where the dependent variable Iiv takes the value 1 if the respondent i in village v voted
for the incumbent party in the straw poll. The set of controls Xiv includes the same
household characteristics included in equation (1). We run the regression separately for
TRAIL and GRAIL villages. In Table 8 we see that the estimated treatment effect     ^1 - ^2
is positive and statistically significant in GRAIL villages (column 2), but insignificant
in TRAIL villages (column 1).
    Hence in GRAIL villages, those who were randomly selected to receive the program
loan were 8% more likely to express support for the incumbent party than comparable
households that were not offered the loan. Column 4 shows that the point estimate of
the treatment effect is largest for the lowest-ability GRAIL households. This is consis-
tent with opportunistic selection by the GRAIL agent, since clientelistic transfers are
most likely to mobilize votes among the poor. It is also consistent with the incumbent
following a pro-poor welfarist policy and thereby inducing greater gratitude among poor
beneficiaries, that they express by voting for the party.


6.5    The Role of Selection in Explaining ATE Differences
We have seen that the TRAIL agent selected more productive borrowers than the GRAIL
agent did. However it does not follow that this superior selection alone caused the
larger impacts on borrower outcomes. In what follows, we examine how much of the
differential impact of the TRAIL scheme on profits can be explained by differences
in borrower productivity levels, and how much by differential effects conditional on
productivity. Specifically, we will decompose the difference in the ATEs of the TRAIL
and GRAIL schemes into the component attributable to differences in productivity, and
  40
    Respondents were assured the response would be kept confidential and used only for research
purposes. Less than 1% of households refused to participate.


                                                17
the component due to differences in conditional treatment effects.
    In Table 9 we estimate bin-specific heterogenous treatment effects (HTEs) using the
following specification:

             3                  3                                     3
   yivt =         1k Binik +         2k (Control 1iv × Binik ) +           3k (Treatmentiv × Binik )
            k=1                i=1                                   k=1
             3                               3
        +         4k Binik × GRAILv +             5k (Control 1iv × Binik × GRAILv )                     (6)
            k=1                             k=1
             3
        +         6k (Treatmentiv × Binik × GRAILv ) +  X ivt + ivt
            k=1


Since household productivity is an estimated regressor, we bootstrap standard errors
with 2000 iterations.41 In both schemes, the HTEs on value-added (column 7) are larger
for borrowers of higher productivity, which indicates that a scheme that selects more able
borrowers will likely generate a larger average treatment effect. Comparing the TRAIL
and GRAIL HTEs for any given productivity bin, we also see that the point estimates
are larger for the TRAIL scheme, although Panel C indicates that the differences are
not statistically significant.42
    Table 10 shows the results of the decomposition. The penultimate row indicates that
holding everything else constant, if the TRAIL agents had followed the GRAIL agents'
selection patterns, then the average treatment effect of the TRAIL scheme on potato
value-added would have been 8.38% smaller than our actual estimate. The last row
shows that if the GRAIL agents had kept their own selection pattern but their selected
borrowers had had the same HTEs as the TRAIL borrowers in that productivity bin,
then the gap in the ATEs would have narrowed by 75%.
    We infer that selection differences accounted for only a small fraction of the ob-
served ATE difference. This conclusion is robust to using the continuous measure of
productivity rather than the three discrete bins: with continuous productivity, selection
  41
      For households that did not cultivate potatoes in any study year, we replace the value of potato area
cultivated, output produced or profits earned with zero, thus we continue to include these households
in the estimating sample. However the treatment effects on unit costs are only estimated in the subset
of observations where potatoes were cultivated.
   42
      Here we are abstracting from any heterogeneity of treatment effects within productivity bins. Our
findings are similar when we consider continuous productivity levels instead. In Figure A3, the vertical
difference in (smoothed) value-added between Treatment and Control 1 households gives us a visual
estimate of the treatment effect at that productivity level. As the left panel shows, the vertical difference
for TRAIL households is larger at larger productivity levels. The right panel shows that the GRAIL
treatment effects are nearly always zero.


                                                     18
differences explain 17.5% of the difference in ATEs, whereas differences in HTEs explain
82.5%.


6.6    Alternative Selection-based Explanation: Multidimensional
       Screening with Credit Rationing
A potential concern with the selection model we described above is that in the presence
of credit constraints, wealth levels affect credit access and thereby productivity (Galor
and Zeira 1993; Banerjee and Newman 1993; Moll 2014; Kaboski and Townsend 2012;
de Mel et al. 2008). If, in reality, borrowers differ both in ability and wealth, then even
between two farmers of the same ability, the wealthier farmer would cultivate more.
Further, if returns to scale are increasing, then the wealthier farmer would be more
productive at the margin (Banerjee et al. 2019). Some part of the larger treatment
effect of the TRAIL scheme could then be explained by the fact that the TRAIL agent
selected wealthier farmers. If there are pecuniary scale economies, then these farmers'
larger scale of cultivation could also explain their lower unit costs. In addition, farmers
could differ in the extent to which this happens: lower-cost farmers could face larger
reductions in unit cost as they expand their scale of cultivation. If cost and ability
are not perfectly correlated, then our sole focus on ability differences might incorrectly
attribute too little of the ATE of the TRAIL scheme to selection.
    In Section A1 in the Appendix, we present a model where farmers differ on three
dimensions: ability, wealth and cost. Assuming constant elasticity forms of the produc-
tion function and the unit cost function, and assuming also that all farmers are credit
rationed, we can use panel data on farmers' unit costs and revenue to back out these
elasticities and the three dimensional "type" of each control farmer. Specifically, the
production function is
                              log yivt = log ai + µ log livt + 2vt                      (7)

where ai denotes ability, livt denotes area cultivated, yivt denotes revenue, 2vt denotes a
village-year productivity shock and µ represents returns to scale. The cost function is

                           log uivt = log ci +  log livt + log qvt                     (8)

where uivt denotes cost per acre, ci denotes the farmer's cost type, and qvt denotes a
village-year cost shock, and  represents elasticity of unit cost with respect to the scale
of cultivation, representing pecuniary scale effects. The credit-rationed farmer's total

                                             19
cultivation cost (Civt ) is determined by his financial access according to the equation:

                                log Civt = log wi + log vt                             (9)

where wi represents a measure of the farmer's wealth, and vt is a village-year shock
to the supply of credit. The three dimensions of type: ability, cost and wealth can be
estimated as farmer fixed effects in the panel regressions corresponding to these three
equations. As shown in the Appendix, the model predicts that the treatment effect of
                                                                    Q       µ
expanding credit access by one percent equals the "quasi-profit" ivt    [ 1+  R - Civt ]
                                                                               ivt
of Control 1 household i in village v in year t, where Rivt denotes the revenue earned
by farmer i in village v in year t, and Civt is the cultivation cost, as defined above.
Taking expectations of this with respect to unit mean village-year shocks, the predicted
treatment effect for a farmer is a function of the three dimensions of the farmer's type,
according to the expression:

                                Q          wi 1+µ   wi
                                i = ai [      ] -        1                            (10)
                                           ci     (ci ) 1+

We refer to the quasi-profit as the "reduced form estimate" of the treatment effect, and
to the expression in equation (10) above as the "structural estimate".
    To examine if this model can explain our empirical results, we follow equations (7),
(8) and (9) and estimate the three dimensions for each control household in the TRAIL
and GRAIL villages. The cumulative distribution functions for each of the three types
are presented in Figure A4. We see in Panel B that control farmers in TRAIL and
GRAIL villages have almost identical ability distributions. In Panel A the cumulative
distribution functions for cost type cross, although a larger fraction of TRAIL farmers
have low unit costs over a wide range. Similarly, the CDFs for wealth cross, although a
larger fraction of TRAIL farmers have high wealth over a wide range.
    The corresponding estimates of  and µ are presented in Table 11. Row 4 displays
"reduced form" estimates of average quasi-profit in the two schemes, using observed
revenues and costs of Control 1 subjects, adjusted using the estimated elasticities. This
is multiplied by the proportional change () in the scale of cultivation (Row 2) to
generate a "reduced form" estimate of the ATEs predicted, in Row 5. The corresponding
"structural estimates" of selected farmers' quasi-profit based on their estimated types
is shown in Row 6, and the corresponding predicted percentage effect on potato value-
added in Row 7.


                                             20
    We see that the model's reduced form estimate of the TRAIL ATE (Rs. 2732) is
very similar to our actual empirical estimate (Rs. 2059, see Table 5 column 7). However
for the GRAIL ATE the model produces a vast overestimate (Rs. 3481 v. Rs. 492).
Similarly, the structural estimate of the TRAIL scheme's effect on value-added (36.48%)
is similar to the 35.92% that we obtained in Table 5, but the estimate for the GRAIL
scheme's effect (33.48%) is nearly four times as large as the estimated GRAIL ATE
(8.45%).
    Rows 8 through 12 show how the predicted ATEs are modified when we replace the
estimated returns to scale elasticity (µ) with an IV estimate.43 The predicted percentage
effects on potato value-added are not significantly altered, so the predicted GRAIL
ATE continues to be larger than the predicted TRAIL ATE. Hence allowing for credit
rationing and extending the dimensions of heterogeneity to include wealth and unit cost
does not help explain our empirical result that the TRAIL scheme generated a larger
ATE than the GRAIL scheme.
    Below we present an alternative model that instead emphasizes differences in the
TRAIL and GRAIL outcomes conditional on borrower selection.


7      A Model Of Agent-Farmer Interactions
In this model, TRAIL and GRAIL agents interact with program borrowers so as to influ-
ence their cultivation, purchase and sales choices and crop outcomes. Interactions take
the form of conversations about the weather, market prices, cultivation techniques and
harvesting times. Through these conversations agents might monitor farmers' actions,
and provide technical advice and marketing assistance.
    Agents are motivated to engage with farmers because of their program as well as
non-program incentives. Since the TRAIL agent is also a trader, he has a stake in
both the upside and downside of the farmer's cultivation project. Not only does an
abundant harvest ensure that he receives his TRAIL commission, it also earns him a
larger middleman profit. On the downside, a failed crop wipes out both his commission
and his profit. The GRAIL agent is a political appointee and so has incentives aligned
with his village council. The elected village leaders may benefit if the scheme is perceived
to be a success, and so the GRAIL agent may want to ensure that poor borrowers repay
  43
    This elasticity estimate is discussed in more detail in Section 7. It is obtained from a regression
(equation (14) below) of log output per acre on log area cultivated and village year dummies using
Treatment and Control households, with treatment dummies as an instrument for area cultivated.



                                                  21
their loans. This gives him a stake in the success of the crop, but conditional on crop
success, he has no additional benefit from a large harvest.
   In turn these different motivations will shape the specific manner in which the agents
engage with the farmer: either helping to increase the harvest size, or monitoring to
reduce default risk.


7.1    Assumptions and Predictions
Farmers vary in intrinsic ability, denoted by the single dimension . Their crop is suc-
cessful with probability p(, m) where p > 0, pm > 0, pmm < 0, pm < 0: lower ability
farmers are riskier, and monitoring (m) reduces their risk by more. In the event of suc-
cess, output is a(, m)f (l), where a > 0, am < 0, fl > 0, fll < 0, - ff
                                                                        "
                                                                          is non-increasing,
                                       44
and p varies relatively little with . Expected TFP A(, m)  a(, m)p(, m) satisfies
Am < 0. The farmer's cultivation cost is c(h, m)l, where l is area cultivated, h is the level
of help he receives, and ch < 0, chh > 0, cm > 0. We also assume chm = 0; this simplifies
the analysis but is not critical. Whereas monitoring increases unit costs and lowers risk
and expected productivity, help has no effect on risk and lowers unit cost. For instance,
monitoring induces the farmer to act to lower the chance of crop failure, such as by
spending more on pesticides. These activities are expensive and time consuming, and so
the farmer's unit cost rises and productivity fall. On the other hand, the agent can help
the farmer lower costs or raise quality of inputs, by providing valuable business advice
about the brands to purchase and where to purchase them. We also assume that the
relevant functions are smooth with well-behaved curvature, so that optimal allocations
are interior, satisfying suitable first and second order conditions.
    Traders and farmers enter into bilateral interlinked credit-cum-output contracts,
where the trader provides the farmer credit for working capital, help and monitoring, and
the farmer cultivates the specified area, and then sells his harvest to the trader. Both
parties are risk-neutral. Farmers have zero wealth, and traders have unlimited access to
credit at a constant cost . The contracts are the outcome of an efficient equilibrium
in a frictionless contract market where traders know farmers' ability. Traders incur in-
teraction costs of T (h + m) and credit costs of  per rupee loaned, and earn per unit
return of  when they sell the farmer's crop on an external market. The farmer cannot
repay the loan if the crop fails, but otherwise repays at interest rate r, and receives a
  44
     This is in comparison to how much TFP a varies with . This assumption ensures that treatment
effects of the TRAIL scheme increase in . See Maitra et al. (2017) for further details.



                                               22
lumpsum side payment s from the trader when the contract is signed. Hence a control
farmer of type  enters into a contract specifying (lc (), mc (), hc (), rc (), sc ()), where
(l, m, h) = (lc (), mc (), hc ()) maximizes joint expected payoffs of the farmer-trader
pair:
                    (1 +  )A(, m)f (l) - (1 + )c(h, m)l - T [m + h]                     (11)

The interest rate rc () is then set to "decentralize" the efficient scale decision lc () to the
farmer, so that the farmer selects the efficient area lc () in his own self-interest: l = lc ()
maximizes A(, mc ())f (l)-p(, mc() (1+rc ())cc() (h, m)l.45 The side-payment depends
on the relative bargaining power of the trader and the farmer. The details of the model
are presented in Section A2 in the Appendix.
    In an optimal contract, traders do not monitor control farmers (mc ()  0), but
they do help them (hc () > 0). Monitoring is inefficient because it lowers expected
productivity and is costly for both farmer and trader, and produces no benefits since
neither party is risk-averse. Help is efficient because it raises expected productivity, and
so it is provided as long as T is not too large. The help induces the farmer to plant
more area (l), and earn greater profit per acre. More able farmers receive more help,
because per unit of trader's time, help generates a greater expected return when the
farmer has higher ability. Hence we obtain the following testable predictions for control
farmers:

  (i) Higher ability farmers are less likely to default, and pay a lower interest rate ;

 (ii) Higher ability farmers produce more output, and incur lower unit costs.

    In TRAIL villages, a trader is selected as the agent. Suppose a farmer of type 
is offered the TRAIL loan. This allows him to supplement his informal loan from the
trader at interest rate rT < , and thus expand acreage by lt . We assume he cannot
reduce the area that was already agreed upon before the scheme was introduced, while
trader help and monitoring decisions can be freely modified. The farmer repays the
TRAIL loan only if his crop succeeds. The TRAIL agent receives a commission  < 1
per rupee interest repaid. The trader-farmer pair then modify their contract decisions
by choosing (lt , mt , ht ) = (lt (), mt (), ht ()) to maximize

(1+  )A(, m)f (lc ()+ lt ) - [(1+ )lc ()+ {1+ rT (1 -  )}p(, m)lt ]c(ht , mt ) - T (ht + mt )
                                                                                        (12)
  45                              1+
       Note that 1 + rc () =   (1+ )p(,0) ,   so rc () decreases in .


                                                         23
    Let the resulting outcomes for TRAIL treated farmer of type  be denoted lT () 
lc () + lt (), mT () = mt (), hT () = ht (). The variables lT () and hT () are increasing
in , while mT ()  0. Hence the Order-Preserving Assumption (OPA) holds. The
model then predicts:
(iii) Among treated farmers in the TRAIL scheme, those with higher ability produce
      more and receive more help, and incur lower unit costs ;

(iv ) In the TRAIL scheme, a treated farmer produces more, earns more profit and
      incurs lower unit costs than a control farmer of the same ability level.
    In the GRAIL scheme, a third party who is not a trader is appointed as the agent.
The GRAIL agent earns expected payoff v ()p(, m) - G m where v () represents a
welfare weight on the farmer, weighted by the default rate, and m is the extent to which
the agent monitors the farmer. The welfare weight is decreasing in , reflecting the
pro-poor ideological or opportunistic objectives of the political party the GRAIL agent
represents. These objectives are achieved as long as the farmer does not default on
the GRAIL loan.46 The commission enters into the welfare weight. This may bias the
GRAIL agent in favor of high ability farmers, because they borrow more, cultivate larger
areas and produce more. We assume that this consideration for personal financial gain is
outweighed by the political considerations which create a bias in the opposite direction.
Not being a trader, the GRAIL agent is not in a position to provide business advice and
help to the farmer, but can monitor him. The cost of monitoring of the GRAIL agent
is G .
    Given a farmer of type  selected for a GRAIL loan, the GRAIL agent's monitoring
level mG () will maximize v ()p(, m) - G m. Given this monitoring level, the farmer
renegotiates his contract with his trade partner. It is easy to check the trader will
continue to have no incentive to monitor the farmer. Hence, given mG (), the revised
contract will select supplementary area cultivated lg = lg () and revised help hg = hg ()
to maximize their joint payoff

 (1 +  )A(, mG ())f (lc () + lg ) - [(1 + )lc () + p(, m)(1 + rT )]c(hg , mg )lg - G h (13)

Let the resulting GRAIL treated outcomes be denoted (lG ()  lc ()+lg (), mG (), hG ()).
mG ()  0 = mT () and mG () is decreasing. We find that the Order Preserving As-
  46
     Here we simplify by assuming that the farmer's profits do not enter the GRAIL agent's objective.
More substantively, the GRAIL agent worries about only the downside risk faced by the farmers they
select, but does not obtain any benefit if the farmer avoids a default and earns a large profit.

                                                 24
sumption holds in the GRAIL scheme. We obtain the following predictions for GRAIL
treated farmers:

 (v ) The GRAIL agent interacts more with low ability agents. GRAIL borrowers are
      less likely to default on their loans than TRAIL borrowers of the same ability level.

(vi) If the production function has constant elasticity, a GRAIL treated farmer culti-
     vates a smaller area, receives less help, achieves a smaller reduction in unit costs,
     and a smaller increase in expected profits, than a TRAIL treated farmer of the
     same ability.

    This model thus explains larger heterogenous treatment effects for the TRAIL scheme,
which can account for a larger TRAIL ATE even in the absence of any selection differ-
ences. This is mainly because TRAIL treated farmers receive more help. In turn, this is
due to the different non-program objectives of the TRAIL and GRAIL agents. TRAIL
agents farmers want the borrowers to produce more, so that they can earn larger middle-
man profits. The help is more effective at raising crop output if the farmer is more able.
On the other hand, the GRAIL agent monitors treated farmers so as to reduce default
risk. This raises their unit cost and lowers their productivity, and so GRAIL treated
farmers produce less and earn smaller profits than TRAIL treated farmers. These ef-
fects are larger, the less able the farmer. Observe finally that the model also explains
the different selection incentives of the two agent types: the TRAIL agent benefits more
from more able farmers, while the GRAIL agent benefits more from less able farmers.


7.2    Testing Predictions of the Model
Before testing the predictions, we test the underlying assumption of decreasing returns
to scale. We regress per acre productivity as a double-log-linear function of log area
cultivated, farmer fixed effects and village-year shocks

                           Rivt
                    log[        ] = log ai + (µ - 1) log livt + log qvt + eivt         (14)
                           livt

The elasticity (µ - 1) with respect to area cultivated can be estimated by instrumental
variables on the sample of Treatment and Control 1 farmers, with the treatment dummy
as the instrument. We have already seen that treatment has a significant positive effect
on area cultivated, while the randomization ensures that the exclusion restriction is
satisfied. We obtain an IV estimate of (µ - 1) = -.094, which is statistically insignificant

                                                25
(p-value of the one-sided test of the null hypothesis (µ - 1) = 0 is 0.81). Hence we have
weak evidence for decreasing returns to scale.
    To test prediction (i) about the variation of control farmers' interest rates with
ability, Column 1 of Table 12 presents the OLS regression results of interest rates paid on
informal loans by Control 1 households, using the pooled sample of TRAIL and GRAIL
households. We restrict our sample to informal loans taken before our intervention
began, to avoid potential contamination from the intervention on borrowers' interest
rates.47 The coefficient estimate of productivity is negative (p = 0.11) indicating that
for control households, there is a decline in interest rate as productivity increases. The
average control household in Bin 1 reported taking loans at 21% interest per annum.
This is significantly higher than the 15% that Bin 2 (p = 0.03) and the 16% that Bin 3
households reported (p = 0.04).48 Hence the evidence confirms prediction (i).
    Next consider prediction (ii) about how output and unit cost vary with ability among
control farmers. Columns 2 and 3 of Table 12 present OLS regression results of potato
ouput (in kg) and input cost per acre in potato cultivation (in Rs.) on the productivity
estimate. The regressions control for year dummies, and pertain to all Control 1 and
Control 2 households. Consistent with prediction (ii), column 2 shows that output
is increasing in productivity, while column 3 shows that unit costs are decreasing in
productivity.
    Now turn to prediction (iii) for TRAIL treated farmers. At each four-monthly survey
interview, we asked sample households whether in the previous three days they had
spoken with the local trader or the agent (separately) about cultivation, the harvest,
or output sales. Since in the TRAIL scheme the agent is also a trader, we include
interaction with the trader as well as the agent (in case the agent is a different trader)
to measure number of interactions with traders.49 In column 4 of Table 12 we see that
TRAIL Treatment households' interacted more with the agent if they had higher ability.
Columns 5 and 6 of Table 12 present the OLS regressions of quantity of potato cultivated
and input cost per acre in potato cultivation on productivity for TRAIL Treatment
  47
     Since only 10 households in each village received the program loans, we do not believe there were
any spillover or general equilibrium effects.
  48
     These averages are presented in the left panel of Figure A6. The right panel of this Figure uses
continuous variation in productivity. Recall that we do not have a continuous measure of productivity
for those who did not cultivate potatoes; for this group we compute the mean informal interest rate and
plot it as a single point in the right panel of Figure A6. For Bins 2 and 3, we run a locally-weighted
polynomial regression of the mean interest rate on farmer productivity.
  49
     Since the GRAIL agent is not a trader, when we measure the number of interactions with the
GRAIL agent we will not include interactions with the trader.



                                                  26
households. Consistent with prediction (iii), more productive TRAIL Treatment farmers
interacted more with the agent, and produced more potatoes, at a lower input cost per
acre.
    Table 9 provides evidence about prediction (iv ). The TRAIL HTEs on potato
acreage, potato output and input cost per acre in potato cultivation (see columns 2,
3 and 10 respectively) conform to prediction (iv ), and most are statistically significant.
    Finally, we test the predictions about the GRAIL scheme, and its comparison with
the TRAIL scheme. Start with prediction (v ). Column 11 of Table 9 presents the
HTEs on agent interactions in TRAIL and GRAIL. As the results in Panel B show,
they are decreasing in ability in the GRAIL scheme indicating that the GRAIL agent
interacts more with low ability farmers. On the other hand they are increasing in ability
in the TRAIL scheme, indicating that the TRAIL agent increases his interaction with
higher-ability farmers more.
    Figure 2 presents the default rates on program loans by TRAIL and GRAIL treated
households by productivity bin. TRAIL Treatment households in productivity Bin 1
defaulted on 9.3 percent of their loans, whereas GRAIL Bin 1 Treatment households
defaulted at a significantly lower 5 percent (p = 0.03). In Bins 2 and 3 the differences
in default rates across TRAIL and GRAIL go the other way, although they are not
statistically significant. This is consistent with prediction (v ).
    To check prediction (vi), consider the results presented in Panel C of Table 9. For
every productivity bin, TRAIL treatment effects on acreage, output and value-added
exceed the corresponding GRAIL treatment effects (although the differences are not
statistically significant): see columns 2, 3 and 7. For every productivity bin, the TRAIL
treatment effects on unit costs are lower than the corresponding GRAIL treatment effects
and the difference is statistically significant for Bin 3. See column 11. This is consistent
with prediction (vi).


8    Concluding Comments
This paper finds evidence that appointing private traders as intermediaries to deliver
credit, as in the TRAIL scheme, resulted in significant impacts on borrower production
and farm incomes. When the local elected council appointed the intermediary, as in
the GRAIL scheme, this did not have a significant impact on borrower incomes, though
it did increase production. The difference was due to the different impacts on cultiva-
tion costs: TRAIL treated households reduced their unit costs of production while the

                                            27
GRAIL treated households did not. Further, although the TRAIL agent selected more
productive farmers to participate in the scheme than the GRAIL agent did, this could
only explain very little of the difference in outcomes. Instead, the TRAIL agents' inter-
action with treated farmers were far more important: they increased their interactions
with treated farmers, and to a greater extent with more productive farmers. GRAIL
agents also interacted more with treated farmers, but to a greater extent with less pro-
ductive farmers; this appears to have caused them to default less than their TRAIL
counterparts. The results are consistent with a model of endogenous agent-farmer in-
teractions where the TRAIL agent helped treated farmers reduce production costs by
providing helpful advice, while the GRAIL agent monitored treated farmers more inten-
sively, thus reducing their default rates and raising production costs. In this model, the
GRAIL agent resembles a private holder of debt, motivated primarily to reduce borrower
default risk, while the TRAIL agent is like an equity holder who shares risk evenly with
the farmer and is motivated to provide useful information and advice. Although the
TRAIL agent did not monitor the treated farmers, TRAIL and GRAIL loans still had
similar repayment rates, because the TRAIL borrowers were more able farmers to start
with, and so were less likely to default. The GRAIL agent selected a larger proportion
of low ability farmers with higher ex ante risk, and then monitored them intensively to
lower these risks.
    The more general lesson is that the role of the intermediary was not confined to
selecting beneficiaries and achieving better targeting. The differences in the nature of
network connections with the intermediary mattered significantly for the eventual success
of the program. In particular the endogenous change in this relationship resulting from
the intervention accounts for most of the differences in impacts on beneficiary incomes.
Policy interventions that employ local intermediaries could benefit from considering this
mechanism at the time of intervention design.




References
Alatas, V., A. Banerjee, R. Hanna, B. A. Olken, R. Purnamasari, and M. Wai-Poi (2016). Self-targeting:
  Evidence from a field experiment in indonesia. Journal of Political Economy 124 (2), 371 ­ 426.

Alatas, V., A. Banerjee, R. Hanna, B. A. Olken, and J. Tobias (2012). Targeting the poor: Evidence
  from a field experiment in indonesia. American Economic Review 102 (4), 1206 ­ 1240.

Athey, S. and G. W. Imbens (2006). Identification and inference in nonlinear difference-in-differences
  models. Econometrica 74 (2), 431 ­ 497.


                                                 28
Atkinson, A. B. (1970). On the measurement of inequality. Journal of Economic Theory 2, 244 ­ 263.

Bandiera, O. and I. Rasul (2006). Social networks and technology adoption in northern mozambique.
  Economic Journal 116 (514), 869 ­ 902.

Banerjee, A., E. Breza, E. Duflo, and C. Kinnan (2019). Can microfinance unlock a poverty trap for
  some entrepreneurs. Technical report, NBER Working Paper.

Banerjee, A., A. G. Chandrasekhar, E. Duflo, and M. Jackson (2013). The diffusion of microfinance.
  Science 341, 363 ­ 372.

Banerjee, A. V. and A. F. Newman (1993). Occupational choice and the process of development. Journal
  of Political Economy 101, 274 ­ 298.

Bardhan, P., S. Mitra, D. Mookherjee, and A. Nath (2015). Resource transfers to local governments:
  Political manipulation and voting patterns in west bengal. Technical report, IED Working Paper,
  Boston University.

Bardhan, P. and D. Mookherjee (2016). Clientelistic politics and economic development: An overview.
  Technical report, IED Working Paper, Boston University.

Beaman, L., A. BenYishay, J. Magruder, and M. Mobarak (2018). Can network theory-based targeting
  increase technology adoption? Technical report, NBER Working Paper 24912.

Beaman, L. and J. Magruder (2012). Who gets the job referral? evidence from a social networks
  experiment. American Economic Review 102 (7), 3574 ­ 3593.

Berg, E., M. Ghatak, R. Manjula, D. Rajasekhar, and S. Roy (2018). Motivating knowledge agents:
  Can incentive pay overcome social distance? Economic Journal 129 (617), 110 ­ 142.

Casey, K. (2018). Radical decentralization: Does community-driven development work? Annual Review
  of Economics 10, 138 ­ 163.

Chandrasekhar, A. G., A. Banerjee, E. Duflo, and M. Jackson (2018). Using gossips to spread informa-
  tion: theory and evidence from two randomized controlled trials. Review of Economic Studies Forth-
  coming.

de Mel, S., D. McKenzie, and C. Woodruff (2008). Returns to capital in microenterprises: Evidence
  from a field experiment. Quarterly Journal of Economics 123 (4), 1329 ­ 1372.

Debnath, S. and T. Jain (2018). Social connections and public healthcare utilization. Technical report,
  Mimeo, Indian School of Business.

Deserranno, E., M. Stryjan, and M. Sulaiman (2018). Leader selection and service delivery in community
  groups: Experimental evidence from uganda. Technical report, Northwestern University.

Devarajan, S. and S. Khemani (2016). If politics is the problem, how can development assistance be
  part of the solution? Technical report, World Bank.

Dey, S. and K. Sen (2016). Is partisan alignment electorally rewarding? evidence from village council
  elections in india. Technical report, University of Manchester Working Paper.

Fisman, R., D. Paravisini, and V. Vig (2017). Social proximity and loan outcomes: Evidence from an
   indian bank. American Economic Review 107 (2), 457 ­ 492.



                                                  29
Fuentes, G. (1996). The use of village agents in rural credit delivery. Journal of Development Stud-
  ies 33 (2), 188 ­ 209.

Galor, O. and J. Zeira (1993). Income distribution and macroeconomics. The Review of Economic
  Studies 60 (1), 35 ­ 52.

Heath, R. (2018). Why do firms hire using referrals? evidence from bangladeshi garment factories.
  Journal of Political Economy 126 (4), 1691 ­ 1746.

Hochberg, Y. (1988). A sharper bonferroni procedure for multiple tests of significance. Biometrika 75 (4),
  800 ­ 802.

Hussam, R., N. Rigol, and B. Roth (2018). Targeting high ability entrepreneurs using community
  information: Mechanism design in the field. Mimeo, Harvard Business School.

Kaboski, J. P. and R. M. Townsend (2012). The impact of credit on village economies. American
  Economic Review 4 (2), 98 ­ 133.

Kitschelt, H. and S. Wilkinson (2007). Patrons, Clients and Policies: Patterns of Democratic Account-
  ability and Political Competition. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge and New York.

Kling, J. R., J. B. Liebman, and L. F. Katz (2007). Experimental analysis of neighborhood effects.
  Econometrica 75, 83 ­ 119.

Maitra, P., S. Mitra, D. Mookherjee, A. Motta, and S. Visaria (2017). Financing smallholder agricul-
  ture: An experiment with agent-intermediated microloans in india. Journal of Development Eco-
  nomics 127, 306 ­ 337.

Maitra, P., S. Mitra, D. Mookherjee, and S. Visaria (2019). Evaluating the distributive effects of a
  development intervention. Technical report, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.

Mansuri, G. (2007). Credit layering in informal financial markets. Journal of Development Eco-
  nomics 84 (2), 715 ­ 730.

Mansuri, G. and V. Rao (2013). Localizing development: Does participation work? Technical report,
  Washington, DC: World Bank.

Mitra, S., D. Mookherjee, M. Torero, and S. Visaria (2018). Asymmetric information and middleman
  margins: An experiment with west bengal potato farmers. Review of Economics and Statistics C (1),
  1 ­ 13.

Moll, B. (2014). Productivity losses from financial frictions: Can self-financing undo capital misalloca-
  tion? American Economic Review 104 (10), 3186 ­ 3221.

Robinson, J. and T. Verdier (2013). The political economy of clientelism. Scandivanian Journal of
  Economics 115 (2), 260 ­ 291.

Stokes, S. (2005). Perverse accountability: A formal model of machine politics with evidence from
  argentina. Americal Political Science Review 99 (3), 315 ­ 325.

Varghese, A. (2005). Bank-moneylender linkage as an alternative to bank competition in rural credit
  markets. Oxford Economic Papers 57 (2), 315 ­ 355.

Vera-Cossio, D. A. (2018). Targeting credit through community members. Technical report, University
  of California, San Diego.

World Development Report (2004). Making Services Work for Poor People. World Bank, Washington
 D. C.

                                                   30
                                    Figure 1: Selection on Productivity: TRAIL and GRAIL

             Panel A: Productivity Distribution                                                 Panel B: Productivity estimates
             Selected v. Non-selected households                                                      Selected households




31
     Notes: In Panel A, the sample is restricted to Control 1 and Control 2 households in TRAIL and GRAIL villages. Productivity is computed using the
     logarithm of acreage under potato cultivation. The null hypothesis that the distributions of estimated productivity for Control 1 and Control 2 households
     are equal is rejected by a two sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test with p - value = 0.005 for TRAIL and 0.011 for GRAIL. In Panel B, the sample
     is restricted to Control 1 households in TRAIL and GRAIL villages. Productivity is computed using the logarithm of acreage under potato cultivation.
     The null hypothesis that the distributions of estimated productivity for TRAIL Control 1 and GRAIL Control 1 households are equal is rejected by a two
     sample Kolmogorov- Smirnov (KS) test with p - value = 0.06.
Figure 2: Default Rates on TRAIL and GRAIL Loans, by Productivity Bin




    Notes: The height of each bar measures the fraction of program loans that were not repaid fully by the
    due date. The sample is restricted to Treatment households in TRAIL and GRAIL villages with at most
    1.5 acres of land. p-value of difference between default rate between TRAIL and GRAIL for each Bin
    presented. Productivity is computed using the logarithm of the acreage under potato cultivation.




                                                     32
                      Table 1: Randomization


                                           TRAIL      GRAIL      TRAIL -- GRAIL
                                            (1)        (2)             (3)


Panel A: Village level characteristics
Number of Households                        276.04     252.21         23.83
                                           (201.59)   (238.36)
Number of Potato Cultivators                164.63     160.75         3.88
                                           (130.30)   (168.39)
Of which:
Landless                                     15.96     27.96         -12.00
                                            (18.98)   (75.63)
Own 0 - 1.25 acres                          113.88     99.67          14.21
                                           (103.22)   (78.00)
Own 1.25 - 2.50 acres                        25.58     24.63          0.96
                                            (16.27)   (25.20)
Own 2.50 - 5.00 acres                        10.88     12.83          -1.96
                                             (7.39)   (17.11)
Own 5.00 - 12.50 acres                        1.38      1.17          0.21
                                             (1.79)    (1.95)
Own more than 12.50 acres                     0.00      0.04          -0.04
                                             (0.00)    (0.20)


Panel B: Household level characteristics
Head: More than Primary School              0.407      0.420         -0.013
                                           (0.015)    (0.015)
Head: Cultivator                            0.441      0.415          0.026
                                           (0.015)    (0.015)
Head: Labourer                              0.340      0.343         -0.003
                                           (0.015)    (0.015)
Landholding (Acres)                         0.456      0.443          0.013
                                           (0.013)    (0.013)
Area of house and homestead (Acres)         0.052      0.052          0.000
                                           (0.001)    (0.002)
Separate toilet in house                    0.564      0.608         -0.044
                                           (0.015)    (0.015)
Own a motorized vehicle                     0.124      0.126         -0.002
                                           (0.010)    (0.010)
Own a Savings Bank Account                  0.447      0.475         -0.028
                                           (0.015)    (0.015)


 Notes: Panel A uses data from the houselisting exercise we carried out in 2007.
 Since 2 of the villages from the 2007 sample had to be replaced due to Maoist
 violence, Panel A uses a sample of only 46 villages. Panel B uses household survey
 data from 2010 for all 48 villages for sample households that owned no more than
 1.5 acres of land. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                         33
             Table 2: Agent Characteristics


                                        GRAIL      TRAIL      Difference
                                         (1)        (2)           (3)


Male                                       1.00      0.958        0.042
                                          (0.00)    (0.042)     (0.042)
SC/ST                                     0.208      0.083        0.125
                                         (0.085)    (0.058)     (0.102)
Non-Hindu                                 0.125      0.083        0.042
                                         (0.069)    (0.058)     (0.090)
General caste                             0.667      0.833       -0.167
                                         (0.098)    (0.078)     (0.125)
Primary Occupation: Cultivator            0.375      0.042         0.33
                                         (0.101)    (0.042)     (0.109)
Primary Occupation: Shop/business         0.208      0.958       -0.667
                                         (0.095)    (0.042)     (0.104)
Primary Occupation: Other                 0.417      0.000        0.125
                                         (0.690)    (0.000)     (0.690)
Owns agricultural land                     2.63       3.29       -0.667
                                         (0.198)    (0.244)     (0.314)
Total owned land                           4.08       5.04       -0.958
                                         (0.248)    (0.292)     (0.383)
Has pucca house                           0.375      0.458       -0.083
                                         (0.101)    (0.104)     (0.145)
Educated above primary school             0.958      0.792        0.167
                                         (0.042)    (0.085)     (0.094)
Weekly income (Rupees)                  1102.895   1668.75     -565.855
                                        (138.99)   (278.16)    (336.78)
Village society member                    0.292      0.083        0.208
                                         (0.095)    (0.058)     (0.111)
Party hierarchy member                    0.167      0.000        0.167
                                         (0.078)     (0.00)     (0.079)
Panchayat member                          0.125      0.000        0.125
                                         (0.069)     (0.00)     (0.069)
Self/family ran for village head          0.083      0.000        0.083
                                         (0.058)     (0.00)     (0.058)


 Notes: Sample consists of 24 agents in TRAIL villages and 24 agents in
 GRAIL villages. Standard errors in parenthesis.




                                   34
                              Table 3: Pre-Intervention Social and Economic Interactions with the Agent


                                                                        TRAIL                                 GRAIL                       Difference (TRAIL­GRAIL)
                                                             Non-recommended Recommended           Non-recommended Recommended           Non-recommended Recommended


                                                                     (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)


Agent and Household belong to same caste/religion category           0.45              0.53               0.61               0.68               -0.16              -0.15
                                                                   (0.021)            (0.023)            (0.020)            (0.022)            (0.03)             (0.03)
Respondent knows Agent                                              0.90               0.96               0.91               0.97               -0.01              -0.01
                                                                   (0.013)            (0.009)            (0.012)            (0.008)            (0.02)             (0.02)
Respondent meets Agent at least once a week                          0.98              1.00               0.98               1.00               -0.01              0.00
                                                                   (0.007)            (0.002)            (0.006)            (0.003)            (0.01)             (0.00)
Household member invited by Agent on special occasions               0.31              0.45               0.27               0.39                0.04              0.06
                                                                   (0.020)            (0.024)            (0.019)            (0.023)            (0.03)             (0.03)
Agent is one of the two most important
Moneylenders                                                         0.17               0.21              0.08                0.10              0.08               0.11
                                                                   (0.016)            (0.019)            (0.012)            (0.014)            (0.12)             (0.02)
Input suppliers                                                      0.18               0.24               0.08               0.09              0.10               0.14
                                                                   (0.016)            (0.020)            (0.011)            (0.014)            (0.02)             (0.02)
Output buyers                                                       0.18               0.25               0.02               0.04               0.16               0.21
                                                                   (0.016)            (0.020)            (0.006)            (0.009)            (0.02)             (0.02)
Employers                                                            0.12              0.10               0.08               0.07               0.04               0.03
                                                                   (0.013)            (0.014)            (0.011)            (0.012)            (0.02)             (0.02)
In the last 3 years household has
Bought from Agent                                                    0.33               0.41              0.05                0.07              0.28               0.34
                                                                   (0.020)            (0.023)            (0.009)            (0.012)            (0.02)             (0.03)
Borrowed from Agent                                                  0.14               0.25               0.04               0.09              0.10               0.16
                                                                   (0.015)            (0.020)            (0.008)            (0.013)            (0.01)             (0.02)
Worked for Agent                                                     0.10               0.13              0.09                0.11              0.01               0.02
                                                                   (0.012)            (0.016)            (0.012)            (0.014)            (0.02)             (0.02)


Household Sold Potatoes to Agent (% of Transactions)                0.109              0.171              0.020              0.027              0.089              0.143
                                                                   (0.312)            (0.377)            (0.142)            (0.163)             (0.02)             (0.02)
Household has been selling Potatoes to Agent                        0.870              0.877              0.556              0.615              0.315              0.261
  for longer than one year                                         (0.339)            (0.331)            (0.527)            (0.506)            (0.133)            (0.107)


 Notes: The TRAIL agent was a randomly selected trader in the village. The GRAIL agent was selected by the local government. Recommended households include Treatment
 and Control 1 households. Non-recommended households include Control 2 households. Sample restricted to all households with 1.5 acres of land in TRAIL and GRAIL villages. :
 The farmer belongs to same the religion category (Hindu/Non-Hindu) or caste category (Scheduled caste/Scheduled tribe, or General) as the agent.  : Conditional on selling to
 the agent.  : Conditional on knowing the agent.  : The differences in columns 5 and 6 denote TRAIL--GRAIL for the specific sub-group (Non-recommended or Recommended)
 households.
Table 4: Average Treatment Effects on Agricultural Borrowing, Farm Value
Added, Non Agricultural Income and Total Household Income



                        Agricultural Loans               Farm                   Income
                        All   Non-Program             Value Added     Non Agricultural Household
                       (Rs.)          (Rs.)              (Rs.)               (Rs.)              (Rs.)
                        (1)            (2)                (3)                  (4)               (5)


TRAIL Treatment        2868           -448.50          2147.874             1506.785           5612.479
                     (658.90)        (634.80)          (723.935)           (3655.543)         (4125.591)
Mean TRAIL C1          2096             2096           10336.511           33617.764          49765.238
% Effect TRAIL        136.83           -21.39           20.779                4.482             11.278
GRAIL Treatment        2754           -104.90           138.905             -4326.522          -5434.789
                     (593.40)        (551.30)          (929.675)           (3225.654)         (4496.421)
Mean GRAIL C1          1931            1931            10501.064           37170.751          56082.489
% Effect GRAIL        142.62           -5.43             1.323               -11.640             -9.691
TRAIL v. GRAIL        114.50          -343.6            2008.969            5833.307          11047.268
Treatment            (890.60)        (842.6)           (1183.349)          (4879.593)         (6110.838)


Sample Size            6,156          6,156              6,156               6,159              6,156


  Notes: Treatment effects are computed from regressions that follow equation (1) in the text and are
  run on household-year level data for all sample households in TRAIL and GRAIL villages with at most
  1.5 acres of land. Regressions also control for the religion and caste of the household, age, educational
  attainment and occupation of the eldest male member of the household, household's landholding, a set
  of year dummies and an information village dummy. % Effect: Treatment effect as a percentage of the
  mean of the relevant Control 1 group.  : Non-Program loans refer to loans from sources other than the
  TRAIL or GRAIL schemes. Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the hamlet level. .




                                                 36
                                        Table 5: Average Treatment Effects in Potato Cultivation


                          Cultivate   Acreage    Production      Cost of         Price       Revenue       Value      Imputed     Input Cost     Input Cost      Index
                                                                Production                                 Added       Profit                     Per acre      Variable
                                      (Acres)       (Kgs)          (Rs.)      (Rs./Kgs)       (Rs.)        (Rs.)       (Rs.)         (Rs.)       (Rs./Acres)
                             (1)         (2)          (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)           (10)          (11)


     TRAIL Treatment        0.040       0.093      946.368       1846.025        -0.030      3898.401    2059.235     1906.696      3049.126      -2908.838      0.180
                           (0.028)     (0.028)    (302.239)      (722.561)      (0.099)     (1204.271)   (631.241)    (600.595)    (1316.601)    (1015.032)     (0.054)
     Mean TRAIL C1          0.715       0.336     3646.124       8481.751         4.627     14285.467    5732.357     4733.770     16288.501     49076.876
     % Effect TRAIL         5.63        27.58       25.96          21.76         -0.650        27.29       35.92        40.28        18.719         -5.927
     GRAIL Treatment        0.130       0.069      770.916       2007.117        -0.176      2500.996     492.395      190.292      3886.833      554.147        0.142
                           (0.029)     (0.029)    (340.084)      (779.852)      (0.110)     (1377.891)   (744.349)    (720.068)    (1389.776)    (1098.176)     (0.062)
     Mean GRAIL C1          0.641       0.296     3236.730       7070.653        4.800      12964.776    5827.663     4941.511     13454.993     47510.733




37
     % Effect GRAIL         20.33       23.25       23.82          28.39         -3.665        19.29        8.45         3.85        28.888        1.166
     TRAIL v. GRAIL         -0.090      0.024      175.452       -161.092        0.146       1397.405    1566.839     1716.404      -837.707      -3462.985      0.038
     Treatment             (0.040)     (0.041)    (457.836)     (1067.944)      (0.145)     (1838.410)   (979.876)    (941.279)    (1923.972)    (1499.369)     (0.083)


     Sample Size            6,150       6,150       6,150          6,150         3,820        6,150        6,150        6,150         6150          4038         6150


      Notes: Treatment effects are computed from regressions that follow equation (1) in the text and are run on household-year level data for all sample households
      in TRAIL and GRAIL villages with at most 1.5 acres of land. The dependent variable in column 1 takes the value of 1 if the household cultivated potato in that
      year, 0 otherwise. The dependent variables in columns 2--9 take the actual value reported by the household if it did, or take the value zero if it did not cultivate
      potatoes in that year. In column 10, households that did not cultivate potatoes in a year are dropped from the estimating sample. Regressions also control for the
      religion and caste of the household, age, educational attainment and occupation of the eldest male member of the household, household's landholding, a set of year
      dummies and an information village dummy. % Effect: Treatment effect as a percentage of the mean of the relevant Control 1 group. Imputed profit = Value Added
      ­ shadow cost of labour. In column 11, the dependent variable is an index of z-scores of the outcome variables in the panel; the p-values for treatment effects in
      this column are computed according to Hochberg (1988)'s step-up method to control for the family-weighted error rate across all index outcomes. Standard errors
      in parentheses are clustered at the hamlet level. .
        Table 6: Loan Performance



                               Take-up     Default
                                 (1)         (2)


Panel A: Sample Means
TRAIL                            0.937       0.070
                                (0.006)     (0.007)
GRAIL                            0.872       0.070
                                (0.009)     (0.008)
Difference (TRAIL­GRAIL)         0.065       0.000
                                (0.011)     (0.010)


Panel B: Regression Results
GRAIL                            -0.066      0.005
                                (0.011)     (0.010)


R2                               0.08        0.05
Sample Size                      2667        2422


 Notes: The sample consists of household-cycle
 level observations of Treatment households in
 TRAIL and GRAIL villages with at most 1.5 acres
 of landholding. The dependent variable in column 1
 takes value 1 if the household took the program loan
 in the particular cycle, provided the household was
 eligible for the loan in that cycle. The dependent
 variable in column 2 takes value 1 if a borrowing
 household fails to fully repay the amount due on
 the loan taken in that cycle on the due date. The
 regression specification In Panel B is given by equa-
 tion (2). Regressions also control for landholding,
 religion and caste of the household and age and edu-
 cational attainment of the oldest male in the house-
 hold. Robust standard errors.




                        38
Table 7: Variation of Productivity with
Observable Household Characteristics



 Regression Results
 Landholding                                  1.103
                                            (0.115)
 Non Hindu                                   -0.157
                                            (0.147)
 Low Caste                                   -0.110
                                            (0.120)
 Household Size                               0.019
                                            (0.021)
 Female-headed Household                     -0.457
                                            (0.217)
 Age of Oldest Male                          -0.004
                                            (0.003)
 Oldest Male: Completed Primary School        0.080
                                            (0.084)
 Constant                                     1.212
                                            (0.188)


 Sample Size                                 1,000
 R-squared                                   0.163


 Descriptives on farm productivity
 Mean of Productivity                        1.707
 SD of Productivity                          1.148
 Minimum Productivity                        -1.294
 Productivity Quartile 25%                   0.811
 Productivity Quartile 50%                   2.014
 Productivity Quartile 75%                   2.638
 Maximum Productivity                        3.702


   Notes: The dependent variable is the household
   productivity estimate. Standard errors in paren-
   theses are clustered at the hamlet level. The eti-
   mating sample includes cultivator Control 1 and
   Control 2 households in TRAIL and GRAIL vil-
   lages with at most 1.5 acres of land.




                        39
      Table 8: Effect of Treatment on Voting Patterns in Straw Poll



                          Average Treatment Effect        Heterogeneous Treatment Effect
                          TRAIL        GRAIL              TRAIL           GRAIL

                             (1)             (2)             (3)                 (4)


Treatment Effect           0.0241          0.0782
                          (0.0496)        (0.0340)
Treatment Effect: Bin 1                                    0.0915               0.130
                                                          (0.0868)            (0.0697)
Treatment Effect: Bin 2                                    -0.0741             0.0309
                                                          (0.0805)            (0.0702)
Treatment Effect: Bin 3                                    0.0568              0.0135
                                                          (0.0564)            (0.0743)


Selection Effect           -0.0649         0.0825
                          (0.0447)        (0.0369)
Selection Effect: Bin 1                                     -0.133             0.0217
                                                          (0.0610)            (0.0580)
Selection Effect: Bin 2                                    -0.0291              0.117
                                                          (0.0738)            (0.0664)
Selection Effect: Bin 3                                    -0.0343              0.105
                                                          (0.0594)            (0.0718)


Sample Size                1,011            1,026           1,021              1,044


  Notes: Estimating sample includes all sample households in TRAIL and GRAIL villages with
  atmost 1.5 acres of land. OLS regression results presented. Standard errors in parenthesis
  clustered at the hamlet level. Estimating sample includes all sample households in TRAIL and
  GRAIL villages with at most 1.5 acres of land. Productivity computed using logarithm of acreage
  under potato cultivation.




                                              40
                         Table 9: HTEs by Productivity Bin. Potato Cultivation and Interaction with Agent


                   Cultivate    Acreage     Output     Cost (Total)      Price       Revenue     Value Added      Imputed Profit     Input Cost    Input Cost (Per acre)        Agent
                    (0/1)       (Acres)     (Kgs)         (Rs.)        (Rs./Kgs)      (Rs.)          (Rs.)            (Rs.)             (Rs.)          (Rs./Acres)           Interaction
                     (1)          (2)        (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)            (7)              (8)               (9)               (10)                  (11)


     Panel A: TRAIL
     Bin 1        0.08            0.04      383.82         696.46          0.27       1740.24       1040.43            930.02         1404.31             -1701.34              0.04
                 (0.03)          (0.02)    (179.66)       (444.71)       (0.19)       (799.82)      (461.01)          (439.59)        (867.58)           (5217.85)             (0.03)
     Bin 2        0.01            0.09      909.28        2132.54         -0.13       3701.22       1561.19           1458.58         3629.66             -2320.53              0.06
                 (0.02)          (0.03)    (274.25)       (638.20)       (0.11)      (1116.50)      (616.88)          (590.20)       (1380.78)           (1624.29)             (0.08)
     Bin 3        0.00            0.11     1126.38        1814.68          0.03       4617.76       2834.05           2668.16         2614.40             -3737.34              0.32
                 (0.00)          (0.04)    (488.62)      (1252.25)       (0.16)      (2127.12)     (1296.70)         (1268.49)       (2162.73)           (1334.26)             (0.13)


     Panel B: GRAIL
     Bin 1        0.26            0.03      287.04         892.40         -0.21        923.13         30.37            -265.08        1882.20             6768.55               1.47
                 (0.04)          (0.02)    (191.71)       (392.02)       (0.16)       (754.42)      (436.82)          (419.17)        (782.34)           (2949.59)             (0.54)
     Bin 2        0.12            0.08      844.40        2461.04         -0.27       3022.03        551.22            301.55         4002.05             -1881.26              0.36
                 (0.02)          (0.03)    (277.39)       (622.18)       (0.22)      (1214.53)      (776.04)          (752.09)       (1350.70)           (1708.23)             (0.30)




41
     Bin 3        0.00            0.11     1418.74        3210.20         -0.12       4499.38       1291.41             900.73        6777.32             1552.87               0.12
                 (0.00)          (0.05)    (570.73)      (1254.91)       (0.10)      (2438.55)     (1705.78)         (1713.97)       (2271.26)           (1561.18)             (0.03)


     Panel C: TRAIL ­ GRAIL Difference
     Bin 1        -0.18   0.01      96.79                  -195.94        0.47        817.11        1010.06           1195.10          -477.89            -8469.90              -1.42
                 (0.05)  (0.02)   (269.90)                (608.30)       (0.25)      (1135.25)      (652.15)          (622.94)       (1197.94)           (5981.13)             (0.54)
     Bin 2        -0.11   0.00      64.88                  -328.49        0.14         679.19       1009.97           1157.03          -372.38             -439.27              -0.31
                 (0.03)  (0.04)   (388.58)                (887.63)       (0.24)      (1650.43)      (997.51)          (962.31)       (1921.03)           (2374.94)             (0.31)
     Bin 3         0.00   0.00     -292.36                -1395.52        0.16         118.38       1542.63           1767.44         -4162.92            -5290.21              0.20
                 (0.00)  (0.06)   (751.62)               (1773.03)       (0.19)      (3235.01)     (2147.61)         (2137.38)       (3134.61)           (2061.19)             (0.12)


     Sample Size     6,150       6,150       6,150         6,150          3,820        6,150         6,150             6,150            6,150               4,038               2760


      Notes: The estimating equation follows equation (6) in the text. The estimating sample includes all sample households in TRAIL and GRAIL villages with at most 1.5 acres
      of land. The dependent variable in column 1 takes the value of 1 if the household cultivated potato in that year, 0 otherwise. The dependent variables in columns 2--9 take
      the actual value reported by the household if it did, or take the value zero if it did not cultivate potatoes in that year. In column 10, households that did not cultivate potatoes
      in a year are dropped from the estimating sample. In column 11, agent-farmer interaction is measured by the number of times in the past year the responder talked to the
      agent about agricultural cultivation related matters. In this column the sample includes Treatment and Control 1 households in TRAIL and GRAIL villages with at most 1.5
      acres of land. The regressions also control for the religion and caste of the household, age, educational attainment and occupation of the eldest male member of the household,
      household's landholding, a set of year dummies and an information village dummy. Productivity is computed using the logarithm of the acreage under potato cultivation.
      Standard errors in parentheses are clustered at the hamlet level.
     Table 10: Decomposition of ATE Differences in Value-added from Potato Cultivation;
     TRAIL v. GRAIL


             T
             k      G
                    k      T - G
                           k          TRAIL HTEs      GRAIL HTEs      TRAIL­GRAIL HTEs          T - G ) × T T    G × (T T - T G )
                               k                                                              ( k   k      k     k     k     k
                                           T)
                                         (Tk               G)
                                                         (Tk                T - T G)
                                                                          (Tk    k

             (1)    (2)      (3)           (4)               (5)               (6)             (7 = (3) × (4))    (8 = (2) × (6))


     Bin 1   0.27   0.34     -0.07        1040.4           30.4               1010.1                -74.1              348.2
     Bin 2   0.33   0.33     0.00         1561.2           551.2              1010.0                 -4.5              335.2




42
     Bin 3   0.40   0.32     0.07         2834.1          1291.4              1542.6                209.8              498.9


     ATE                                  2059.2          492.4               1566.8


     % of ATE due to Selection                                                                                         8.38
     % of ATE due to CTE                                                                                               75.46


              T denotes the proportion of TRAIL households in Bin k ;  G denotes the proportion of GRAIL households in Bin k . % of
       Notes: k                                                       k
                                                T   G    T
                                          3   ((k -k  )×Tk
       ATE due to selection computed as   k=1                .
                                                  ATE
Table 11: Estimates from the Multidimen-
sional Screening Model


Variable                                          TRAIL         GRAIL
                                                     (1)              (2)


(1)                                                         -0.076
(2)                                                 0.21             0.28


(3)    µ (Fixed Effect Estimate )                            1.39
Reduced Form Estimates:
                      µ
(4)    Quasi Profit: 1+  R - Civt
                         ivt
                                                  13008.29      12432.64
                         µ
(5)    Predicted ATE: [ 1+ R - Civt ] × 
                            ivt
                                                   2731.74       3481.14

Structural Estimates:
                µ
(6)    [ai [ w
             c
               i 1+
                ]   -     wi
                               1   ]×               1.35             1.46
            i
                        (ci ) 1+
(7)    Percentage Effect on Value Added             36.48            33.48


(8)    µ (IV Estimate )                                      0.90
Reduced Form Estimates:
                      µ
(9)    Quasi Profit: 1+  R - Civt
                         ivt
                                                   5432.67          5557.38
                         µ
(10)   Predicted ATE: [ 1+ R - Civt ] × 
                            ivt
                                                   1140.86          1556.07

Structural Estimates:
                µ
(11)   [ai [ w
             c
               i 1+
                ]   -     wi
                               1   ]×               1.31             1.48
            i
                        (ci ) 1+
(12)   Percentage Effect on Value Added             35.27            33.95


 Notes:  : Estimate of µ obtained from a household fixed effects re-
 gression of log quantity of potato cultivates on log acreage and village­
 year dummies. Sample includes Control 1 and Control 2 households
 in TRAIL and GRAIL villages with at most 1.5 acres of land.  : Es-
 timate of µ obtained from a regression of average productivity on log
 acreage, household fixed effects and village-year dummies, with the
 treatment dummy as the instrument.  defined as the proportional
 increase in the cost of cultivation owing to the treatment defined by
 the treatment effect as a proportion of the Mean for Control 1 house-
 holds in column 4 of Table 5. R and C defined by the mean Revenue
 and Cost of cultivation for Control 1 households in columns 6 and 4
 of Table 5. Sample includes Treatment and Control 1 households in
 TRAIL and GRAIL villages with at most 1.5 acres of land.




                                    43
     Table 12: Variation of Informal Interest Rate, Trader Interactions, Output and Input
     Cost per acre by Productivity



                                TRAIL and GRAIL Control Households                        TRAIL Treatment Households
                                Interest Rate Output    Input Cost                 Trader Interactions Output   Input Cost
                                                         (per acre)                                              (per acre)


                                      (1)              (2)             (3)                   (4)                 (5)            (6)


      Productivity                   -0.007         907.774        -182.203                0.368             1,219.652     -1,042.832
                                    (0.004)         (40.407)      (194.776)               (0.068)             (133.88)      (375.664)




44
      Productivity squared            0.001         679.859        -352.578                -0.033             685.131        -101.632
                                    (0.002)         (23.831)       (89.164)               (0.044)             (48.367)      (168.138)
      Constant                        0.196         486.300       42,641.482                3.100             697.368      41,291.774
                                    (0.012)        (139.244)      (705.384)               (0.430)            (255.379)     (1090.398)


      Sample Size                     524            2,876           2,876                  681                 500            500


       Notes: OLS regression results presented. In column 1, the dependent variable is average interest rate paid on informal loans by
       households prior to the intervention. In columns 2 and 5, the dependent variable is the quantity of potato produced (in Kgs). In
       columns 3 and 6, the dependent variable is input cost per acre in potato cultivation (in Rs.). In column 4, the dependent variable
       is interactions with traders, measured as the number of times in the year the household reported engaging with local traders on
       agricultural matters. Sample in columns 1­3 restricted to Control 1 and Control 2 households in TRAIL and GRAIL villages with
       at most 1.5 acres of land. Sample in columns 4­6 restricted to Treatment households in TRAIL villages with at most 1.5 acres of
       land. In columns 2­6, the regressions also control for year dummies. Standard errors in parentheses are cluster-bootstrapped at the
       hamlet-level with 2000 iterations. Productivity is computed using the logarithm of the acreage under potato cultivation.
