                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                THE ALLOCATION OF AUTHORITY IN ORGANIZATIONS:
                     A FIELD EXPERIMENT WITH BUREAUCRATS

                                        Oriana Bandiera
                                       Michael Carlos Best
                                       Adnan Qadir Khan
                                          Andrea Prat

                                       Working Paper 26733
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26733


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020


We are grateful to the World Bank, the International Growth Centre, and the JPAL Governance
Initiative for financial support. We thank Ahsen Omar Majid, Sher Afghan Asad, Maha Rehman,
Ameera Jamal, Omar Gondal, Khawaja Hussain Mahmood, Subhan Khalid, Sophia Tahir Mir,
Ovais Siddiqui, Noor Sehur, Zain ul Abideen, Ahsan Farooqui, Natasha Ansari and Reem Hasan
for outstanding research assistance in Lahore, and Hamza Husain, Sakshi Gupta and Advitha
Arun for outstanding research assistance at Columbia. We thank the Government of Punjab and
in particular Naeem Sheikh, Imdad Bosal, Umer Saif, Zubair Bhatti and Ali Bahadar Qazi for
their collaboration over the years. We thank many seminar participants and especially Abhjit
Banerjee, Ernesto Dal Bo, Bob Gibbons, Imran Rasul, and Guido Tabellini for helpful comments
and discussion. All errors are our own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26733.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Oriana Bandiera, Michael Carlos Best, Adnan Qadir Khan, and Andrea Prat. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Allocation of Authority in Organizations: A Field Experiment with Bureaucrats
Oriana Bandiera, Michael Carlos Best, Adnan Qadir Khan, and Andrea Prat
NBER Working Paper No. 26733
February 2020
JEL No. D02,D04,D2,D23,D73,H1,H11,H57,H83,M42,M48,M52,O1,O12,O2,O23,O38,O53,P16

                                           ABSTRACT

We design a field experiment to study how the allocation of authority between frontline
procurement officers and their monitors affects performance both directly and through the
response to incentives. In collaboration with the government of Punjab, Pakistan, we shift
authority from monitors to procurement officers and introduce financial incentives to a sample of
600 procurement officers in 26 districts. We find that autonomy alone reduces prices by 9%
without reducing quality and that the effect is stronger when the monitor tends to delay approvals
for purchases until the end of the fiscal year. In contrast, the effect of performance pay is muted,
except when agents face a monitor who does not delay approvals. The results illustrate that
organizational design and anti-corruption policies must balance agency issues at different levels
of the hierarchy.

Oriana Bandiera                                   Adnan Qadir Khan
London School of Economics                        London School of Economics
International Growth Centre                       International Growth Centre
Houghton Street                                   Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE, UK                               London WC2A 2AE, UK
o.bandiera@lse.ac.uk                              a.q.khan@lse.ac.uk

Michael Carlos Best                               Andrea Prat
Department of Economics                           Columbia Business School
Columbia University                               3022 Broadway, Uris 624
420 West 118th Street                             New York, NY 10027-6902
New York, NY 10027                                andrea.prat@columbia.edu
and NBER
michael.best@columbia.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/610
1    Introduction
Organizations bring together people with different interests, information and skills to
work towards a common goal. To achieve this, organizations make two interdependent
choices: how to allocate decision making rights to agents at different layers of the organi-
zation's hierarchy, and how to monitor and motivate their behavior.
    Organization theory, from the foundational work of Coase (1937) and Simon (1951) to
the recent contributions reviewed by Bolton & Dewatripont (2013) and Gibbons & Roberts
(2013), points to the allocation of authority as one of the choices at the core of organization
design. By contrast, field work, guided by the single-layer principal-agent framework,
tends to focus on performance rewards, while holding the architecture of the organization
fixed (see, e.g. Bandiera et al. , 2011; Finan et al. , 2017, for reviews).
    This paper brings the two design choices--incentive provision and authority alloca-
tion--together by means of a large-scale field experiment conducted in collaboration with
the government of Punjab, Pakistan. Our context is public procurement, an activity that
represents approximately 12% of GDP in the average OECD country, and which is noto-
riously subject to agency problems: Procurement officers are tasked with buying goods
they do not use with money they do not own (Laffont & Tirole, 1994) and they operate
in an environment characterized by contract incompleteness and high transaction costs
(Bajari & Tadelis, 2001). How best to tackle this is subject to intense debate, with one
camp strongly in favor of strict rules and intense monitoring (OECD, 2009) and the other
arguing in favor of simplification and autonomy (Kelman, 1990). We study how the allo-
cation of authority between officers and their monitors, who face their own agency issues,
determines performance.
    Our sample covers over 20,000 purchases, made by 600 procurement officers across the
province over the course of two years and monitored by 26 offices of the Accountant Gen-
eral. To maintain comparability we focus on purchases of generic goods and develop an
online reporting system to collect detailed information on the attributes of each purchase.
The outcome of interest is price conditional on quantity and the precise nature of the good
being purchased, including delivery speed and transport costs.
    We model the interaction between officers and monitors, following Shleifer & Vishny
(1993). Both agents are defined by a type that determines how aligned they are with the
organization. Officers choose a mark-up to maximize their utility which depends on their
type, the type of the monitor they face, the allocation of authority, and the financial in-

                                              1
centives they face. Mark-ups can be interpreted as bribes or as lack of effort. Monitors
perform both positive and negative roles. On the positive side, they provide officers an
incentive to behave better by auditing purchases and inflicting punishments proportional
to the markups charged by the officer. On the negative side, the monitor's intervention
creates an additional cost proportional to his type, which--as for the officer--captures
both bribes and inefficiency. This is where the complexity of the organization comes into
play: In the simple principal-agent model the monitor is perfectly aligned with the prin-
cipal and would not impose inefficient monitoring costs on the organization.
    The equilibrium price is a function of the strength of incentives and the officers' and
monitors' types, with weights depending on the allocation of authority. When the monitor
has more decision rights, his type matters more. Thus shifting authority from the moni-
tor to the officer lowers prices if and only if the monitor's type is sufficiently misaligned
relative to the procurement officer's, and the reduction is larger the more misaligned the
monitor is. Conversely, performance pay for the officer decreases prices only if the moni-
tor is sufficiently aligned. If he is not, the officer cannot do much to reduce prices as these
are mostly kept high by the monitor's markup. Since the two treatments are effective in
different parts of the parameter space, offering them jointly will not have an additional
effect on prices. This is a direct implication of the fact that the monitors' interests might
also be misaligned with the principal's. In a standard principal-agent model, only the
officer's type matters and the two treatments are complementary because the officer has
more leeway to respond to incentives when she has more autonomy.
    To create variation in the policy parameters we randomly allocate 600 procurement of-
ficers to four groups: a control group, an autonomy group, a pay for performance group
and a group that gets both. The autonomy treatment shifts decision making rights from
the monitors to the officers by removing the monitor's discretion over the list of docu-
ments that they can demand as part of the audit, and by giving the officers full decision
rights over purchases in cash up to 10% of the average PO budget. The pay for perfor-
mance treatment is a rank order tournament within district and administrative depart-
ment which pays prizes ranging from half a month's salary to two months' salary on the
basis of value for money.
    The experiment lasts two years and we stagger the introduction of the two treatments
so that performance pay is offered from the first year whilst autonomy only kicks in in
the second year. This allows us to use the control group in the first year as a benchmark
for the status quo and to build a proxy for the monitor's type because each district has its
own monitors.
    Our findings are as follows. First, consistent with the fact that procurement officers are


                                              2
given orders to fill based on the needs of the organization, the treatments do not affect the
composition, quantity or attributes of the items purchased.
    Second, autonomy reduces prices by 9% on average either on its own or in combination
with performance pay. Performance pay on its own reduces prices by 3% but we cannot
reject the null that the effect is equal to zero. Our findings are consistent with and pro-
vide micro foundations for the result that autonomy, but not incentives, is correlated with
performance in bureaucracies (Rasul & Rogger, 2018; Rasul et al. , 2019), that autonomous
schools have better performance (Bloom et al. , 2015b,a) and that reducing discretion in
environmental inspections increases costs without reducing pollution (Duflo et al. , 2018).
    Guided by the model we allow the effects to vary with the monitor's type, which we
measure with the share of transactions approved at the end of the fiscal year (Liebman &
Mahoney, 2017). This captures both inefficiency, ie. a slow monitor, and corruption, i.e.
a monitor who holds officers up until their budget lapses. We find that performance pay
reduces prices by 6% when the monitor approves transactions quickly over the year while
the effect goes to zero when the monitor holds up more than 40% of transactions until the
end of the fiscal year. The effect of autonomy has the opposite pattern: it is zero when
the monitor is "good" and it reduces prices up to 20% when the monitor is "bad". Taken
together the results indicate that the two policy instruments are effective under different
circumstances: giving autonomy to the agent is desirable when it means taking it away
from an extractive monitor while incentives are ineffective in this case because the agent
has limited control over prices, and vice versa. In line with this, the effect of the combined
treatment always falls between the other two.
    To conclude we analyze the effect of the autonomy treatment on delays in approval.
We find a 25% drop in delays longer than eight months which is driven by reductions in
delays by ineffective monitors. To zero in on the hold-up mechanism, we focus on the like-
lihood that the monitor waits until the very end of the year to approve a purchase. Again,
we find that extremely long delays are 15% less likely in the autonomy treatment, and that
the effect is driven by offices facing ineffective monitors. Taken together, these results sug-
gest that the mechanism through which the autonomy treatment improves performance
is by removing monitors' ability to hold up approvals.
    To benchmark the effects we compare the savings from our treatments to the cost of
public goods. Our point estimates suggest that the savings from the autonomy treatment
from the relatively small group of offices in our experiment are sufficient to fund the oper-
ation five schools or to add 75 hospital beds. This is twice the savings from the combined
treatment and six times the savings from the incentive treatment. Despite the modest sav-
ings, the rate of return from the incentives treatment is 45% since the small per-purchase


                                              3
savings are applied to a large base of expenditure.
    Our findings point to the importance of understanding the drivers of bureaucrats' be-
havior when seeking to improve performance in the public sector. Policies based on the
assumption that most bureaucrats are corrupt are likely to backfire when this is not in
fact the case, for instance by distorting incentives to undertake socially optimal actions
for fear of reputational damage (Leaver, 2009) or of being punished for breaking the rules
(Shi, 2008). The results also speak to recent non-experimental field studies that show how
anti-corruption measures such as audits are uneffective or even detrimental once the re-
sponse of private sector agents is taken into account (Yang, 2008; Gerardino et al. , 2017;
Lichand & Fernandes, 2019). Our paper also contributes to the debate on the optimal
amount of discretion in procurement (Szucs, 2017; Coviello et al. , 2018).
        The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we present the empirical
context for our experiment, and section 3 describes the experimental design. Section 4
develops the conceptual framework we use to guide our empirical analysis. Section 5
presents our results, and our conclusions are in section 7.


2        Context and Data
In this section we present the context for our empirical application in section 2.1 and our
approach to measuring bureaucratic performance in section 2.2.


2.1        Procurement in Punjab
Our study takes place in Punjab, Pakistan. The province of Punjab is home to 110 million
people and is divided into 36 administrative districts. Our study took place in 26, covering
80% of the population and the largest districts. These districts were chosen on the basis of
logistical feasibility, being geographically contiguous and ruling out the most remote dis-
tricts.1 In this study we work with different agencies in the government of Punjab. These
include the Punjab Procurement Regulatory Authority (PPRA) and the Punjab Informa-
tion Technology Board (PITB). We also worked with four administrative agencies - the
departments of Higher Education, Health, Agriculture and Communication and Works.
    Each office of the government of Punjab has one employee who is designated as the
Procurement Officer (PO). He or she wields the legal authority to conduct small and
medium sized public procurement purchases.2 Procurement officers manage procurement
    1
        Appendix figure A.5 shows the location of the offices.
    2
        The title of this position is known as the "Drawing and Disbursement Officer" of the office.


                                                         4
on behalf of offices that are allocated budgets under a range of accounting headers (salary,
repairs, utilities, etc.)--including procurement--by the finance department. Before mak-
ing payments to vendors, the POs are required to submit their purchases for pre-audit
approval by an independent agency of the federal government known as the Accountant
General's office (AG). The AG has offices in each of the districts of the province, monitor-
ing the purchase of offices in that district.
    A typical procurement process for the purchase of a generic item like the ones we
study proceeds in five steps, as summarized in panel A of figure 1. First, an employee of
the of the office makes a request for the purchase of an item (for example, a teacher might
request the purchase of pens for the classroom). Second, the PO approves the purchase
and surveys the market for vendors who can supply the required item and solicits quotes
for the item. Once the PO has received enough quotes for the item, he/she chooses which
vendor to allocate the contract to.3 Third, the vendor delivers the items to the public
body and the PO verifies receipt of the items. Fourth, the PO prepares the necessary
documentation of the purchase and presents it to the AG office. Fifth, the AG reviews the
paperwork. If the AG is satisfied with the documentation, he/she sanctions the payment
and gives the PO a check made out to the vendor. If the AG is not satisfied, he/she
can demand more thorough documentation that the purchase was made according to the
rules. This ability to delay approvals is the key source of the AG's power over POs.


2.2    Measuring Bureaucratic Performance
The government of Punjab considers that the primary purpose of public procurement
transactions is to ensure that "...the object of procurement brings value for money to the
procuring agency..." (Punjab Procurement Regulatory Authority, 2014). In line with this,
we developed a measure of bureaucratic performance that seeks to measure value for
money in the form of the quality-adjusted unit prices paid for the items being purchased
by POs. The backbone of our approach is to collect detailed data on the attributes of
the items being purchased with which to measure the precise nature--the variety--of the
items being purchased.
   To achieve this, we proceed in two steps. First, we restrict attention to homogeneous
goods for which we believe that by collecting detailed enough data we will be able to ad-
equately measure the variety of the item being purchased (similar to the approach taken
in Bandiera et al. 2009 and Best et al. 2019).4 Second, for these homogeneous goods, we
   3
     For very small purchases, only one quote is needed. For most of the purchases we consider, POs must
obtain three quotes and then choose the cheapest one.
   4
     To do this, we chose accounting codes from the government's chart of accounts that we expected to


                                                   5
partnered with the Punjab IT Board (PITB) to build an e-governance platform--the Punjab
Online Procurement System (POPS). This web-based platform allows offices to enter de-
tailed data on the attributes of the items they are purchasing. We trained over a thousand
civil servants in the use of POPS and the departments we worked with required the of-
fices in our experimental sample (as described below) to enter details of their purchases of
generic goods into the POPS system. To ensure the accuracy of the data we randomly vis-
ited offices after they had purchases approved to physically verify the attributes entered
into POPS and collect any missing attributes required.5
    After running the POPS platform for the two years of the project and cleaning the data
entered by the officers, our analysis dataset consists of the 25 most frequently purchased
goods: a total of 21,503 purchases of 25 homogeneous goods. Dropping the top and bot-
tom 1% of unit prices results in a dataset of 21,183 observations.6 Figure 2 shows summary
statistics of the purchases in the POPS dataset. The 25 items are remarkably homogeneous
goods such as printing paper and other stationery items, cleaning products, and other of-
fice products. While each individual purchase is small, these homogeneous items form a
significant part of the procurement budgets of our offices. As table 1 shows, generic coods
are 53% of the typical office's budget.
    Despite the homogeneous nature of the items being purchased, prices are quite dif-
ferent. Figure 2 shows this variation for each product, and figure A.1 shows the joint
distribution of prices paid and the standardized price of each purchase (a measure of the
item's variety that can be interpreted as the predicted expected price if the item had been
purchased in the control group as described in section 5.1). Both figures display variation
in prices, even for items of the same variety, suggesting different bureaucrats are paying
different amounts for identical products. This degree of price dispersion for very homoge-
neous goods is not uncommon in the public sector, similar levels have been documented
in the United Kingdom (National Audit Office, 2006), Italy (Bandiera et al. , 2009) and
Russia (Best et al. , 2019).
    To elicit procurement officers' perceptions of their incentives to perform procurement
well, we asked officers what types of errors would be detrimental to their career progress.
Since civil servants in Punjab are not typically paid based on their performance, the main
incentive they face to perform well is that their performance is considered when decisions
are made on their postings and to progress up the civil service hierarchy. Specifically, two
contain mostly or exclusively generic goods. The list of accounting codes is contained in appendix table
A.1.
    5
      Somewhat surprisingly, our random audits did not uncover any instances of misreporting of goods'
attributes.
    6
      The majority of these outliers are the result of officers adding or omitting zeros in the number of units
purchased.


                                                      6
of the options we asked officers about are how detrimental overpaying in their procure-
ment purchases would be, and how detrimental failing to complete the required docu-
mentation would be. Appendix figure A.2 shows the results. While the officers respond
that both transgressions would be detrimental for their careers, they report that having in-
complete documentation is a severe impediment much more often than overpaying. This
stands in clear contrast to the government's stated goal when conducting public procure-
ment--to achieve value for money (Punjab Procurement Regulatory Authority, 2014), and
motivates our two treatments.7


3       Experimental Design

3.1     Design of Experimental Treatments
In the status quo, the authority to approve purchases and pay vendors lies with the
Accountant General (AG). Our autonomy treatment shifted decision-making power over
which documents can be required in order to issue a payment to a vendor away from
the AG. To achieve this, we conducted focus groups with Procurement Officers (POs) and
their staff to elicit their demand for policy changes to empower them to achieve greater
value for money. We then brought their proposals to the government and reached an
agreement on which policy changes to implement.8
    Our treatment altered the procurement process to limit the AG's power in two ways.
First, we offered each PO a cash balance of Rs. 100,000 (approximately USD 1,000 at that
time), over which they had full authority. That is, they could use this money to make
payments to vendors without having to seek pre-audit approval from the AG, thus com-
pletely removing the AG's authority over the documentation of this part of the office's
spending, as illustrated in the top path in panel B of figure 1.9
    Second, we created and distributed a checklist of the documents that the AG can law-
fully require in order to approve a purchase, even when the payment is not to be made
    7
      Paragraph 4 of Punjab's procurement rules (Punjab Procurement Regulatory Authority, 2014) states
"Principles of procurements.­ A procuring agency, while making any procurement, shall ensure that the
procurement is made in a fair and transparent manner, the object of procurement brings value for money to
the procuring agency and the procurement process is efficient and economical."
    8
      The importance of these policy changes is confirmed in our endline survey. Figure A.3 shows the re-
sponses the control group gave when asked to allocate 100 points between a set of potential reasons for
the lack of value for money in public procurement. The three most important reasons are that budgets are
relased late, that POs do not have enough petty cash to make purchases quickly, and that the AG's require-
ments are not clear.
    9
      Petty cash is still subject to all the same legal scrutiny and documentary requirements as ordinary spend-
ing during post audit after the conclusion of the financial year. The only difference is that it does not require
pre-audit approval by the AG.

                                                       7
with petty cash, as shown in the bottom path in panel B of figure 1. The list limits the
AG's authority to decide which documents are required for payment by restricting them
to the documents in the checklist. The finance department endorsed and sent the checklist
to the offices, making it a credible signal of what the requirements were. The AG was also
informed by the finance department that these were the requirements it wanted the AG
to check during pre audits.10
    Giving more autonomy to procurement officers can improve outcomes by reducing
payment delays, allowing them to buy from a wider range of vendors and generally avoid
mark-ups imposed by the AG. Autonomy, however, also makes it easier for POs to em-
bezzle funds and limits the AG's discretion in identifying and combatting new loopholes
POs may attempt to exploit to circumvent procurement rules. Finally, while our treatment
is tailored to the institutional context, it is easily adaptable to any situation in which an
agent's decision making power is constrained by another agent.
    Our incentives treatment aligned POs' incentives with the government's by providing
them with financial incentives to improve value for money. Officers' performance was
evaluated by a committee established for this purpose. The committee was co-chaired by
the President of the Institute of Chartered Accountants Pakistan (ICAP), a well-respected,
senior, private-sector monitor, and the director of the Punjab Procurement Regulatory Au-
thority (PPRA). Delegates from each of the line departments, the finance department, and
the research team rounded out the committee. Based on common practice in the private
sector, the committee was tasked with ranking the procurement officers' performance by
applying a wholistic assessment to the officer's performance at achieving the aims of pub-
lic procurement. To seed the discussions, the research team provided an initial ranking of
the procurement officers according to our measure of value added described in section
2.2, though the committee were told they had absolute freedom to alter the ranking.
    Based on the committee's ranking, bonuses were paid. The gold group, comprising the
top 7.5% of officers, received two months' salary. The silver group, the next 22.5% of offi-
cers, received one month's salary. The bronze group, the next 45% of officers, received half
of a month's salary. Finally, the remaining 25% of officers did not receive an honorarium.
The committee met twice a year. Based on the interim rankings at the middle of the year,
officers received payments of half of the bonus amounts, which were then credited against
the bonuses received in the final ranking at the end of the year.
    We made several design choices to increase the salience, credibility and feasibility of
this treatment that are worth noting. First, we chose a form of incentives that is allowed
  10
    To increase the power of these treatments, a third component attempted to improve the frequency and
regularity of budget releases. However, as we document in appendix figure A.4, it was not possible to
implement this.


                                                  8
under the existing rules so that it is both feasible and easily scaleable should the govern-
ment choose to do so. Second, we chose a prize structure that meant that 75% of officers
received a prize. Third, we chose to have the committee meet twice a year. Together,
these meant that many POs would experience receiving a prize, and that the bonuses
were salient during the second half of the year when the bulk of procurement expendi-
ture takes place. Moreover, the incentive treatment was in place during the pilot year to
build credibility so officers already had experience with the treatment when the second,
focal year began.


3.2   Experimental Population and Randomization
The experiment was conducted in collaboration with several agencies of the government
of Punjab. The finance department and the Accountant General's (AG) office imple-
mented the autonomy treatment together with the four line departments from which our
sample was drawn. We sampled offices from the four largest departments in the gov-
ernment, the departments of education, health, agriculture, and communication & works.
Due to logistical considerations and some uncertainty regarding administrative restruc-
turing of the province at the time of the development of the experiment, we restricted
ourselves to 26 of the 36 districts in Punjab, covering over 80% of the population of the
province of over 110 million people. Within these departments and districts we sampled
from offices with procurement budgets in the 2012­13 fiscal year of at least Rs. 250,000
(USD 2,500).
    In June 2014, we randomized 688 offices into the four treatment arms, stratifying by
district × department to ensure balance on geographical determinants of prices and the
composition of demand. Offices were told by their departments that they were part of
a study to evaluate the impact of policy reforms under consideration for rollout across
the province and that their participation was mandatory, including entering data into the
POPS system and cooperating with occasional survey team visits. With this backing, 587
offices, or 85% of the sample, participated in trainings on the POPS system and on the
implications of their treatment status for how they conduct procurement.
    Table 1 presents summary statistics on a range of variables in the participating offices.
The table shows that the participation rate is balanced across the treatment arms, as are
the vast majority of office characteristics and budgetary variables available in the finance
department's administrative data. We regress each variable on dummies for the three
treatments and report the coefficients along with their robust standard errors in parenthe-
ses and p-values from a randomization inference test of the null of a zero effect. For each


                                             9
variable we also report the F statistic on the test that all treatments have no effect with its
corresponding p-values using the asymptotic variance, and the randomization inference
p-value. Of the 30 variables presented, the hypothesis that all treatments have no effect
is rejected for only one variable--the number of accounting entities the office controls,
and so we control for this in our estimation of treatment effects.11 Overall, we conclude
that the randomization produced a balanced sample and that compliance was high and
balanced across the treatment arms.
    Table A.2 summarizes the timeline of the project. The 2014­15 fiscal year was the pilot
year for the project. The POs were informed of the project and introduced to POPS. All
POs were invited to receive training on the use of POPS and to start entering data into
the system. The incentives treatment was in place so that the members of that treatment
group would experience receiving the bonuses, but the autonomy treatment was not.12
Then, in year 2 (the 2015­16 fiscal year), the autonomy treatment was also rolled out.
The experiment ended at the end of June 2016, following which we conducted an endline
survey and gathered missing data.


4        Conceptual Framework
We model the interaction between a (potentially corrupt) purchasing officer and a (poten-
tially corrupt) monitor who is supposed to monitor the purchasing manager. Our goal is
to understand what happens when we give the purchasing officer an extrinsic reason to
save money (the incentive treatment) and when we change the allocation of authority by
giving the officer more freedom.
    The starting point of our model is Shleifer & Vishny (1993)'s analysis of the institutional
determinants of misbehavior of public agencies. They show that the way that decision-
making power is distributed among agencies is an important determinant of the overall
level of corruption. The goal of our model is not to develop a general theory of the "orga-
nization of corruption" (like the ones in Guriev, 2004 and Banerjee et al. , 2012). Instead,
we offer a parsimonious framework that delivers highly stylized predictions to guide the
analysis.
    11
      This is likely to have occurred because the office that controls a small number of accounting entities was
incorrect in the administrative data used for the randomization. When this occurred, we assigned account-
ing entities to the treatment received by their actual office. Since offices with more accounting entities have
a greater chance of having one incorrectly recorded, this can lead to this imbalance.
   12
      Discussions between the research team and the government about the precise nature of the treatment
and how to implement it were still ongoing.




                                                      10
4.1   Set-up
This simple model describes our context, where procurement decisions are taken by an
officer and monitored by a monitor with veto power.
     For each purchase, the officer selects a mark-up x  0. The mark-up x captures different
forms of misalignment between the interests of the officer and her principal, the taxpayer.
It can be interpreted as active waste (bribes), passive waste (inefficiency), or a combination
of both. We will discuss both interpretations below.
     The officer operates under a monitoring agency. The purchase is audited by the mon-
itor with probability 1 - a (where a stands for autonomy ­ the probability that the officer
is not audited). The purchase price is thus

                                    p = c + x +  (1 - a) ,

where c is the cost of the good, x is the officer's mark-up, and  is an additional cost
introduced by the monitor.
    If a purchase is audited, the officer receives a punishment proportional to the markup
x. Finally, the officer faces an incentive to spend less. Her utility is:

                                u =  ln x - µ (1 - a) x - bx,

where: the first term is the benefit the officer receives from the mark-up, which is scaled
by , the weight the officer puts on her private utility; the second term is the cost the
officer incurs if she is audited on the procured good, which depends on the effectiveness
of the monitoring process, µ; and b in the third term represents the strength of a monetary
incentive scheme whereby the officer is rewarded for spending less.
    The model has two interpretations. In the active waste interpretation, the officer re-
ceives a bribe from the supplier in exchange for increasing the purchase price above
the supply cost. The underlying assumption is that there is a bribing technology that
transforms a mark-up x into a benefit for the officer  ln x. In this interpretation a higher
markup has three effects: it increases the price of the purchased good by x; it produces
utility for the officer, who enjoys the bribe, given by  ln x, and it imposes a risk of sanction
on the officer given by µ (1 - a) x.
    In the passive waste interpretation, the officer is lazy and prefers not to exert effort
to locate the cheapest supplier or wring the lowest price from the chosen supplier. The
underlying assumption is that there is a search/bargaining technology that transforms a
mark-up x into a benefit for the officer  ln x: less work leads to higher prices. In this in-
terpretation a higher mark-up has three effects too: it increases the price of the purchased

                                              11
good by x; it produces utility for the officer, who enjoyes the lower effort, given by  ln x,
and it imposes a risk of sanction on the officer given by µ (1 - a) x. Of course, it is also
possible to interpret the model as a mix of active and passive waste.
    The role of the monitor can also be interpreted in two ways. In the active waste inter-
pretation, the monitor also receives a bribe and that raises the purchase price by  (1 - a).
The monitor also punishes the officer for accepting bribes through µ (1 - a) x. In the pas-
sive waste interpretation, the monitor too dislikes effort: if there is an audit he may add to
the price of good by taking a long time to process the purchase (perhaps because suppliers
predict that it will take them a long time to be paid). This too raises the purchase price
by  (1 - a). The monitor also punishes the officer for engaging in passive waste through
µ (1 - a) x.
    In both interpretations the monitor has a positive effect and a negative effect. The pos-
itive effect consists in disciplining the officer through µ (1 - a) x. As we shall see shortly,
this induces the officer to decrease her mark-up x. The negative effect instead operates
through  (1 - a): it is the additional passive or active waste that the monitor generates.
The rest of the analysis will show that the overall effect of the monitor will depend on
relative size of these two effects.
    We now proceed with the analysis (normalizing c to zero without loss of generality).
The officer selects the optimal mark-up level given her preference parameters and the
environment she faces:
                                                   
                                        x=
                                            µ (1 - a) + b
and the price is
                                           
                                p=                 +  (1 - a)
                                     µ (1 - a) + b
   The price formula embodies the autonomy tradeoff: the first term captures the moni-
tor's disciplining effect on the officer, while the second represents the additional mark-up
imposed by the monitor.
   This simple model thus captures the trade-off at the heart of the allocation of authority:
giving more autonomy to the officer (higher a) increases markups especially if the officer
puts a large weight on her private benefits  , but it reduces supervision costs at the same
time.


4.2   Treatment effects
Our two experimental treatments involve an increase in autonomy (higher a) and an in-
crease in the power of incentives (higher b). The effects of the two treatments on prices (in


                                              12
percentage terms) are as follows

Proposition 1. (i) An increase in autonomy decreases p if and only if  is sufficiently large relative
to  , and the decrease is larger when  is large
   (ii) An increase in incentive power always decreases p, but the decrease is larger when  is
small and tends to zero as   .

Proof. For (i):

                                                               µ
      p
                    a    µ(1-a)+b
                                    + (1 - a)              (µ(1-a)+b)2
                                                                         -                              µ
      a
                =                                      =                     < 0 iff  > ¯
        p                           p                             p                              (µ (1 - a) + b)2
                    p                                             p
                                                                            1
   Clearly          a
                     p
                         is decreasing in  and lim                a
                                                                   p
                                                                       = - 1- a
   For (ii):

                                                                                        
                           p
                                        b   µ(1-a)+b
                                                       + (1 - a) s                 (µ(1-a)+b)2
                           b
                               =                                         =-       
                           p                           p                      µ(1-a)+b
                                                                                         + (1 - a) 
                                                             
                               = -
                                        (µ (1 - a) + b) ( + (1 - a)2 µ + µ(1 - a)b)
        p
                                                           p/b
hence   b
            p
                is increasing in  and lim                   p
                                                                 = 0.

    This simple framework makes precise that the effectiveness of the two policy levers
depends on the efficiency of the monitor relative to the procurement officer. Because of
this, offering the two jointly is either detrimental or inconsequential:

Proposition 2. A joint increase in autonomy and incentives:
   (i) reduces prices by less than incentives alone when  is low relative to h
   (ii) converges to the effect of autonomy alone as   .

Proof. Consider the combined treatment that changes autonomy by da and incentives by
db. The effect of this is to change prices by

                      p      p          2p
            dp =        da + db +          dadb
                      a      b        ab
                             µ                                               2µ
                    =                 2 -  da -                 2 db -                  dadb
                      (µ (1 - a) + b)           (µ (1 - a) + b)        (µ (1 - a) + b)3

To see (i) compare the price change from the combined treatment to the price change
resulting from a treatment that changes incentives by the same amount db but leaves au-


                                                                13
tonomy unchanged. It is

                     da                                            3
                             3 µ (µ (1 - a) + b) -  (µ (1 - a) + b) - 2µdb
              (µ (1 - a) + b)

                                            2µ
which is negative as long as  <     ¯ - (µ(1- a)+b)3
                                                     db where ¯ is as defined in the proof of
proposition 1. (ii) follows from application of l'Hôpital's rule: lim dp/p = 1/ (1 - a)
which is the same as the limit of the autonomy treatment effect.

   The predictions of the model for the treatment effects and how they vary with the
misalignment of the monitor  are summarized graphically in figure 3.


5     Procurement Performance
With the conceptual framework of section 4 to guide the analysis, this section analyzes
the overall impacts of the experiment on bureaucratic performance. The main task of a
procurement officer is to receive requests for goods from his/her colleagues and purchase
them at a good price. Therefore a priori we don't expect other aspects of procurement per-
formance to be affected by the treatments since the demand for the good is coming from
a different officer than the person in charge of procurement. Nevertheless we investigate
the impact of the treatments on a range of procurement performance outcomes.


5.1   Measuring Good Varieties
To be able to isolate the effects of the treatments on the prices procurement officers pay,
we need to be able to compare purchases of exactly the same item, to avoid conflating
differences in the precise variety of the goods being purchased with the prices paid for
them. Moreover, the treatments may have affected the varieties of goods POs purchase
and these are treatment effects we are interested in in their own right.
    The goods in our sample are chosen precisely because they are extremely homoge-
neous, but there may still be some vertical differentiation in products, and so we use four
measures of the variety of the goods being purchased. First, we use the full set of at-
tributes collected in POPS for each good. This measure of good variety has the advantage
of being very detailed, but comes at the cost of being high-dimensional. Our other three
measures reduce the dimensionality of the variety controls. To construct our second and
third measures, we run hedonic regressions using data from the control group to attach




                                             14
prices to each of the goods' attributes. We run regressions of the form

                                 pigto = Xigto g + g qigto + g + igto                          (1)

where pigto is the log unit price paid, qigto is the quantity purchased, g are good fixed
effects, and Xigto are the attributes of good g .
     Our second, "scalar" measure of good variety uses the estimated prices for the at-
tributes   ^ g to construct a scalar measure vigto =               ^
                                                           j A(g ) j Xj where A (g ) is the set of
attributes of item g . vigto can therefore be interpreted as the expected price paid for a good
with these attributes if purchased by the control group, aggregating the high-dimensional
vector of attributes down to a scalar. Our third, "coarse" measure studies the estimated
^ g s for each item and partitions purchases into high and low price varieties based on the

^ g s that are strong predictors of prices in the control group. Our fourth and final "ma-

chine learning" measure develops a variant of a random forest algorithm to allow for non-
linearities and interactions between attributes that the hedonic regression (1) rules out.
Appendix B provides further details.


5.2   Identification
To estimate the treatment effects on bureaucratic performance we estimate equations of
the form
                             3
               yigto =  +         k Treatmentk
                                             o + Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + igto               (2)
                            k=1

    where yigto is the outcome of interest in purchase i of good g at time t by office o; qigto
is the quantity purchased, capturing good-specific bulk discounts; s and g are stratum
and good fixed effects, respectively; and Xigto are purchase-specific controls. We weight
regressions by expenditure shares in the control group so that treatment effects can be
interpreted as effects on expenditure, and the residual term igto is clustered at the cost
centre level.
    The random allocation of offices to treatments means that the coefficients k estimate
the causal effect of treatment k on unit prices under the assumption of stable unit treat-
ment values (SUTVA) (Rubin, 1980; Imbens & Rubin, 2015). This might be violated if, for
example, the AG extracts more from the offices in the control group because it is more
difficult to extract from offices in the autonomy treatment. In practice, this is unlikely to
affect our estimates because, as shown in Appendix figure A.6, AG officers have typically
fewer than 20% of their cost centers in any treatment group.
    The fact that we observe control cost centers before and after the roll out of auton-

                                                 15
omy also allows us to test SUTVA directly. To do so we estimate whether price increases
between year 1 (before the roll out of the autonomy treatment) and year 2 (after the roll
out) are larger for offices whose AG office monitors a larger share of offices receiving the
autonomy treatment. The evidence in Appendix figure A.7 supports SUTVA. We see no
evidence that prices increase more when a larger share of offices receives the autonomy
treatment. If anything, the point estimate is negative.
    When the outcome we are interested in is prices, we need to ensure that we are compar-
ing purchases of exactly the same varieties of items to avoid conflating price effects with
differences in the composition of purchases. However, if the treatments affect the vari-
eties of items being purchased, the k coefficients estimate a combination of the treatment
effects on quality-adjusted prices and the composition of purchases. To see this, consider
a simplified version of our setting. Suppose that purchases are associated with poten-
tial prices p (D, V ) depending on a binary treatment D  {0, 1} and binary good variety
V  {0, 1}, and with potential quality levels V (D) depending on treatment. The ran-
dom assignment in the experiment implies that the potential outcomes are independent
of treatment status conditional on the randomization strata Si : {pi (D, V ) , Vi (D)}  Di |Si .
We can now see that a comparison of expected prices between treated and control units
conditional on item type combines a treatment effect on price with a potential composi-
tion effect coming from changes in the set of purchases of high or low type in treatment
versus control units:



 E [p|D = 1, V = 1] - E [p|D = 0, V = 1] = E [p (1, 1) |V (1) = 1] - E [p (0, 1) |V (1) = 1]
                                                            treatment effect on price

                                             + E [p (0, 1) |V (1) = 1] - E (p (0, 1) |V (0) = 1)
                                                                composition effect=0?

                                                                                               (3)

    With this in mind, below we directly estimate treatment effects on the varieties of items
being purchased. These effects are interesting in their own right and also allow us to gauge
the magnitude of the potential composition effect described above. To do this, we estimate
equation (2) with our scalar, coarse, and machine learning variety measures as outcomes.
    Two additional concerns relating to the varieties of items being purchased may affect
our interpretation of treatment effects on prices as effects on the performance of the PO.
First, POs may pay low prices but buy inappropriate goods that are ill suited to the needs
of the office they are serving. However, as table 2 shows, there are no effects of the treat-
ments on the varieties of items being purchased. Therefore, while the goods purchased

                                              16
may well be badly matched to the needs of the end users in the offices, they are not more
or less so as a result of the treatments.
    Second, changes in PO behavior may cause supply-side responses by government sup-
pliers and so price changes reflect both the effects of changes in demand by POs and
changes in supply by vendors. While this is likely for products in which the government
is a large seller (see, for example, Duggan & Scott Morton, 2006 for evidence that pharma-
ceutical producers' private-sector prices respond to government procurement), the prod-
ucts in our sample are extremely homogeneous and consumed throughout the economy
and the government's market share is likely to be small. Moreover, our experimental sub-
jects are only part of the total demand for these products from the government.


5.3      Average Treatment Effects
We begin by studying the impact of the experiment on the prices and the varieties of goods
purchased. Table 2 shows the average treatment effects estimated using equation (2) using
data from the second year of the project, in which all treatments were in place. Below each
coefficient we report its standard error clustered by office in parentheses and the p-value
from randomization inference under the null hypothesis of no treatment effect for any of-
fice in square brackets.13 Columns 1­3 estimate treatment effects on the scalar, coarse and
machine learning measures of good variety, respectively. Columns 4­8 estimate treatment
effects on log unit prices paid. Column 4 estimates treatment effects without controlling
for the variety of good purchased. In the remaining columns we control for the item's va-
riety using the full set of good attributes (column 5), the scalar (column 6), coarse (column
7) and machine learning (column 8) good variety measures.
    Somewhat surprisingly, table 2 shows no evidence that the experiment affected the
varieties of goods being purchased. Eight of the nine coefficients in columns 1­3 have p-
values above 0.25, and in all three columns the p-value on the hypothesis that none of the
treatments affected good variety in any office is insignificant. This is likely because offices'
demand is relatively inelastic from year to year and because the procurement officer is
charged with acquiring a particular good at a good price and has limited discretion over
which variety of good is purchased. Consequently, good varieties are not endogenous
when included as controls in regressions with prices as outcomes, as discussed in section
5.2. We therefore include controls for the variety of goods being purchased to improve
power, and show that our price results are robust to omiting controls for the good variety
being purchased.
  13
       We thank Young (2019) for producing the randcmd package for stata that greatly facilitates this.



                                                     17
    As an alternative way of controlling for the composition of purchases, we exploit the
data from year 1 of the project to estimate treatment effects of the introduction of auton-
omy through a difference in differences approach. This allows us to control for office fixed
effects so that we exploit only within-office changes, allowing us to hold constant the com-
ponent of the composition effect E [p (0, 1) |H ] that comes from office-level variation in the
types of items demanded. Appendix table A.3 shows the results. The table shows again
that there are no discernible effects on the varieties of the goods being purchased, and that
the treatment effects on prices are, if anything, slightly larger than in table 2.
    Turning to the treatment effects on prices, three key findings emerge. First, the point
estimates of the impacts of the treatments are negative for all three treatments. However,
the average impact of the incentives treatment is statistically indistinguishable from zero.
This surprising finding for the incentives treatment already hints at how important it is
that people who are incentivzed have the autonomy to respond to the incentives they are
provided, a theme we return to in section 6.
    Second, the autonomy treatment reduces average unit prices paid by 8­9%, indicating
that giving bureaucrats greater autonomy leads them to use it in the interests of taxpay-
ers by procuring the goods they purchase at lower prices. Viewed through the lens of
the model in section 4, this implies that the accountant general is sufficiently misaligned
with the principal relative to the misalignment of the procurement officer ( >         ¯ ) that
removing the waste caused by complying with the monitoring activities of the accoun-
tant general more than offsets the loss of the benefits the accountant general's monitoring
provides.
    Third, the findings on the impact of the treatments on quality-adjusted prices paid
are robust to alternative measures of the variety of good being purchased or not control-
ling for the goods' varieties. Intuitively, the asymptotic standard errors of the estimates
are smaller when using the lower-dimensional measures of good variety as the model has
more degrees of freedom. However, the p-values from randomization inference are small-
est when using the full vector of good attributes as controls, consistent with the finding
in Young (2019) that the benefits of using randomization inference are largest when the
estimated models are high-dimensional.
    We also do not find evidence that the experiment had delayed effects due to procure-
ment officers learning over time that the treatments were effective. In appendix table A.4
we reestimate the effects of the treatments, interacting them with the time at which the
purchase was made and the order in which the purchases were made. We find no evi-
dence that the treatments had any dynamic effect on procurement performance. The esti-
mated treatment effects at the beginning of the year are indistinguishable from the overall


                                              18
effects in table 2, and all the interaction terms are indistinguishable from zero. This also
suggests that POs did not try to game the incentive treatment by reducing prices early on
to win an interim prize and then recouping their losses later in the year.14
    The results in table 2 lead us to conclude that the treatments lowered prices paid with-
out affecting the varieties of the items being purchased. We might naturally expect that if
the prices at which goods can be procured go down, offices react by increasing demand
for goods. On the other hand, since the demand for goods is coming from end users, while
the procurement officer simply fulfils their orders, we might not expect these lower prices
to pass through to end users' demand.
    To investigate the impacts of the treatments on the quantities purchased and the com-
position of expenditure, we aggregate the purchases to the office-good-month level, valu-
ing each purchase using the price predicted for the purchase if purchased by the control
group in year 1 (as in the scalar variety measure). That is, for each purchase, the control
group-weighted quantity is eigto = exp (vigto + qigto ) where vigto is the scalar good variety
measure, which, as discussed above, can be interpreted as the price we predict for the
item if purchased by a PO in the control group, and qigto is the log number of units pur-
chased. Using the aggregated data we then estimate good-specific treatment effects by
multivariate regression with the following specification for each item

                                        3
                              egto =         kg Treatmentk
                                                         o + s + t + gto                                (4)
                                       k=1


    where egto is the quantity purchased of good g in month t by office o; the kg are good-
specific treatment effects; s and t are stratum and month fixed effects respectively; and
gto are residuals clustered by office. Table 3 shows the results. For each good, we display
the estimated kg coefficients and their standard errors clustered by office, as well as the
F statistic for the hypothesis that all three kg s are equal to zero and its p-value in square
brackets. We also display F statistics for the hypothesis that each treatment has zero effect
on any item, and the F statistic on the hypothesis that none of the treatments affect any of
the items.
    Of the 75 estimated kg treatment effects, only two are statistically significant at the
5% level, consistent with what would be expected purely by chance, and for all but three
items, we fail to reject the hypothesis that all three treatments have no effect. Similarly, we
  14
    We do, however, find that the experiment had larger effects on offices for whom generic goods form a
larger share of their annual budget, as shown in table A.5. These are offices where purchasing generics is a
larger part of the job of the procurement officer and so the treatments have a bigger impact as one would
expect.



                                                    19
cannot reject the hypotheses that each treatment affects none of the items or the hypothesis
that no treatment affects any item. As a result, we conclude that there is no evidence
that any of the treatments affected the composition of offices' expenditure or the overall
amount they purchase. Of course, this inelastic demand could be because end users truly
have inelastic demand (for example due to capacity constraints) or because of agency
issues within the office whereby price reductions achieved by the procurement officer are
not passed through to end users, however distinguishing between these two remains an
open question.
    A final margin along which procurement officers might respond is by changing the
timing of their procurement. If there is predictable seasonality in prices, the incentives
treatment might cause procurement officers to shift purchases into lower-price times of
the year. If monitoring by the AG leads to delays in procurement, we might expect the
autonomy treatment to permit procurement officers to make purchases more quickly. On
the other hand, table 3 suggests offices' demand is inelastic with respect to price, and
so if the timing of demand is also inelastic (e.g. goods are required to coincide with the
start of the school year) then we might not expect our experiment to affect the timing of
procurement.
    Figure 4 shows estimates of treatment effects on the timing of deliveries and expendi-
ture. The estimates are from seemingly unrelated regressions of the form

     1 {Monthi = m} =  + A Autonomyi + I Incentivesi + B Bothi + g + s + i

where g are good fixed effects, s are randomization strata fixed effects, and i are resid-
uals clustered by office. The figures show the 95% confidence intervals of the estimated
A , I and B with p-values of 2 tests of the hypothesis that each treatment's effect is 0
in all months, and the hypothesis that all treatments have no effect in all months. The
95% confidence intervals include zero for all months and treatments except the autonomy
treatment in December. Moreover, we are unable to reject the hypotheses that each treat-
ment has zero effect in all months or the hypothesis that none of the treatments affect the
probability of delivery in any month.
    Overall, we conclude that on average, providing procurement officers with additional
autonomy led to reduced prices without having an effect on the variety of goods pur-
chased, the amount or composition of goods purchased, or the timing of procurement
expenditure. We also do not see evidence for strong effects of the incentives treatment on
any outcome.
    To benchmark these findings, figure 5 shows a cost benefit evaluation of the implied


                                            20
                                      -k                                  k
savings. Savings are calculated as 1+   k   o Expenditureo × Treatmento where k are the
estimated treatment effects in table 2 and Expenditureo is the total spending by office o on
generic goods (standard errors are calculated by the delta method). The solid lines denote
savings net of the cost of the incentives treatment, while dashed lines are gross savings.
The figure reinforces our findings. The incentives treatment led to modest savings, while
the autonomy and combined treatments led to large savings. The point estimate of the
savings from the autonomy treatment is larger than the upper bound of the 95% confi-
dence interval on the net savings from the incentives treatment. For comparison, the fig-
ure also shows the cost of operating 150 hospital beds, and the cost of operating 10 schools.
Our point estimates suggest that the savings from the autonomy treatment from the rel-
atively small group of offices in our experiment are sufficient to fund the operation of an
additional 5 schools or to add 75 hospital beds. For the incentives and combined treat-
ments, the figure also shows the implied rates of return on the performance pay bonus
payments. Despite the modest savings from the incentives treatment, these calculations
imply a 45% rate of return on the incentives treatment since the small per-purchase sav-
ings are applied to a large base of expenditure. This rate of return is comparable to what
Khan et al. (2016) find for performance payments to property tax inspectors in the same
context.
    Our findings are consistent with what our model in section 4 predicts will happen
when complying with the demands of the accountant general monitoring procurement is
so costly that it outweighs the disciplining benefits of monitoring procurement ( >       ¯ ).
In the next section we explore other implications of the model empirically to understand
the effects of the experiment better and their implications for the design of monitoring of
public officials more broadly.


6     Mechanisms

6.1   Monitor Alignment
Our conceptual framework in section 4 makes clear that shifting authority to the agent
lowers prices only when the incentives of the agents are better aligned than those of the
monitor. It thus predicts that we should expect to see heterogeneity in the treatment ef-
fects according to the alignment of the accountant general  . In particular, the model pre-
dicts that the beneficial effects of the autonomy treatment should be concentrated among
POs monitored by a relatively misaligned AG (high  ) while the effects of the incentives
treatment should be seen when the AG is well aligned (low  ). In this section we estimate


                                             21
heterogeneous treatment effects using a proxy for the alignment of the accountant general.
   Each district has its own AG office and so we construct a proxy for each district AG's
misalignment that combines two elements. First, we note that the main power of the
accountant general is to delay payments and require additional paperwork. Second, in
Punjab, as is common around the world, government offices' budgets lapse at the end of
the fiscal year if they remain unspent. As documented in Liebman & Mahoney (2017) in
the US context, lapsing budgets lead to a rush to spend at the end of the year. Combined
with the first element, we expect this end of year rush to be stronger in districts where
the accountant general delays payments more. Our proxy for the misalignment of the
accountant general monitoring an office    ^ o is therefore the fraction of purchases in the
district in year 1 that were approved in the last month of the fiscal year.15
   We augment equation (2) to include interactions with our proxy     ^ o semi-parametrically
using the approach of Robinson (1988) as follows


                                                                             3
pigto = vigto + g qigto + s Departmento × Districto + g + f (^
                                                             o )+                 Treatmentk
                                                                                           o × tk (^
                                                                                                   o )+ igto
                                                                            k=1


where terms are as previously defined, f (·) is a non-parametric function of AG misalign-
ment, and tk (·) are non-parametric treatment effect functions.16 Figure 6 shows the results.
Three key findings emerge consistent with the predictions of the model. First, the incen-
tives treatment does reduce prices when the monitor is relatively more aligned (low       ^ o ),
and the treatment effect of incentives shrinks to zero as monitors get less aligned, reaching
zero when the June share    ^ is around 0.35. If purchases are approved evenly throughout
the fiscal year incentives reduce prices by around 6%. Second, the autonomy and com-
bined treatments reduce prices more strongly when the monitor is relatively misaligned
  15
      Appendix figure A.10 shows that the variation in this measure is not driven by variation across districts
in the rate at which POs submit bills at the end of the year. Even conditional on the share of bill ssubmitted
at the end of the year, there is significant variation in the share of bills approved at the end of the year. We
measure the fraction of purchases approved in June in our POPS data. However, the results are robust to
measuring this in the finance department's administrative data instead.
   16
      To implement this we follow Robinson's (1988) approach. Rewriting the model as pigto = xigto  +
            3
   o ) + k=1 Treatmentk
f (^                      o × tk (^
                                  o ) + igto we proceed in four steps. First, we run treatment-group specific
non-parametric regressions of pigto on ^ o to form conditional expectations E pigto |^ o , Treatmentk
                                                                                                    o   m    )
                                                                                                        ^ k (^
                                                                   3                                   ^
and linear regressions of the control variables xigto =  +  ^o +   k=1   k Treatmentk              k
                                                                                    o + k Treatmento × s +

igto to form conditional expectations E xigto |^ o , Treatmentk
                                                              o
                                                                    ^   ). Second, we regress pigto - m
                                                                    j (^                                   ) =
                                                                                                      ^ k (^
 xigto - ^    )  + igto . Third, we non-parametrically regress pigto - xigto 
          j (^                                                               ^ = rk (^
                                                                                     o ) + igto separately in
the control group (k = 0) and the three treatment groups. Fourth, we form the estimates f    ^ (^
                                                                                                o ) = r   o )
                                                                                                      ^0 (^
and t^k (^
         o ) = r    o ) - r
                ^k (^         o ) , k = 1, . . . , 3.
                          ^0 (^


                                                      22
(high   ^ s ) and the treatment effects shrink to zero when the June share is below around
0.35. Third, the effect of the combined treatment is between the effects of the individual
treatments for when the AG is relatively well aligned (low      ^ ), implying that the two ef-
fects counteract each other. At higher levels of misalignment, the effect of the combined
treatment converges to the effect of the autonomy treatment. Overall, the results are re-
markably consistent with the predictions of the model, and suggest that the average effects
of the treatments are more consistent with the average AG being relatively misaligned.
    Appendix table A.8 shows robustness of the results using a simple linear difference in
differences specification pigto =  + 3                      k               k
                                           k=1 k Treatmento + k Treatmento ×     ^ s + qigto +
g sigto + s Departmento × Districto + g + igto . Columns (1)­(4) show that the results
are similar when using each of the three alternative ways of controlling for item variety.
Columns (5)­(8) show that there is also some heterogeneity of the treatment effects by the
share of purchases (rather than approvals) taking place in June, but columns (9)­(12) show
that the heterogeneity is much stronger by the share of approvals taking place in June,
suggesting that the heterogeneity is driven by the AG and that the share of approvals in
June is a reasonable proxy for AG type.17
    Figure 7 shows the implied heterogeneity of the cost benefit calculation for the treat-
ments in districts with different levels of misalignment of the AG. The vertical axis mea-
sures for each district the total net savings by all districts with a less misaligned accoun-
                            -k (jd )                                 k
tant general: d:jd x 1+      k (jd ) od Expenditureod × Treatmento - cd where k (jd ) are
estimated treatment effects of treatment k when monitor misalignment is jd and cd is the
ex ante cost of performance pay bonuses to offices in district d (the number of offices in
the district at each pay grade times the expected prize for each office). The figure shows
large net savings from the incentives treatment, even at low levels of misalignment. By
contrast, net savings to the autonomy and combined treatments are negligible in districts
with low misalignment; they only accrue at high levels of monitor misalignment.
    To better understand how the misalignment of the monitor matters for prices, we ana-
lyze the effects of the treatments on the main power that the AG has in the status quo--to
delay and hold up approval of purchases. Figure 8 analyzes the impact on overall delays
(the time that elapses between a purchase and its approval by the AG). Panel A shows a
  17
    Consistent with our findings on the overall effects in section 5.3, we find no heterogeneity of the treat-
ment effects on the variety of items purchased or on the quantities demanded. Table A.9 shows the results of
estimating the linear difference in differences specification with the scalar or coarse measure of item variety
as outcomes, and shows no significant heterogeneity in the treatment effects. Table A.10 shows the results
of estimating an extended version of equation (4) by multivariate regression. Specifically, for each item,
                      3
we estimate egto = k=1 k Treatmentk                      k
                                          o + k Treatmento ×  ^ s + s + t + gto . We find no consistent evi-
dence that either the linear or interaction terms imply that the treatments affected the quantity demanded,
regardless of the misalignment of the AG.


                                                      23
series of seemingly unrelated distributional regressions of the probability of delay of at
least j days in year 2 normalized by the probability of a delay of at least j days in the con-
trol group in year 1 on treatment dummies, strata fixed effects s and good fixed effects
g :
                  1 delayigo  j                           3
                                               =+              k Treatmentk
                                                                          o + s + g + igo
            P (delay  j |Control, Year1)                 k=1

The panel also shows the CDF of delays in the control group in year 1 for reference. We
clearly see a decrease in very long delays in the autonomy treatment, and very little effect
in the other treatments. Panel B separates the effect of the autonomy treatment for more
(above median) and less (below median) aligned AGs, showing that the effect is driven
exclusively by offices facing a more misaligned monitor.
    Since vendors have to make deliveries before being paid, these delays are costly to
both the vendors and to the POs and one would naturally expect vendors to charge POs a
markup for the delays. When POs in the autonomy group can pay vendors immediately in
cash, the removal of these markups may contribute to the effect of the autonomy treatment
on prices. However, note that the removal of these markups cannot fully account for the
estimated treatment effect of autonomy. Even assuming that the petty cash allows POs to
completely avoid delays of six months would require that vendors charge interest of 242%
to account for the price savings, far above market interest rates.18
    Nevertheless, this effect on overall delays could be driven by general inefficiency of
the AG or by POs dragging their feet in submitting paperwork. We therefore focus on
delays that are more clearly suggestive of holdup: purchases that are approved right at
the end of the fiscal year. We analyze how the treatments change the probability that items
purchased in different months are approved in June (the last month of the fiscal year) by
estimating equations of the form

                                        3     Jun
  1 Approved in Juneigo =  +                        mk 1 {PurchaseMonthigo = m} × Treatmentk
                                                                                           o
                                       k=1 m=Jul
                                      Jun
                                 +           m 1 {PurchaseMonthigo = m} + g + igo
                                     m=Jul


Panel A shows the mk coefficients for the autonomy treatment and also the raw distri-
  18
    To see this, note that a PO with a budget B who faces an interest rate r and a delay of t years to
                                                                    -t
pay vendors can spend a pre-markup amount of S = B (1 + r) . If that PO has the same spending
but can make 100K worth of spending in cash, then their total spending would be B 1 - Autonomy =
                   t
(S - 100K ) (1 + r) + 100K . To account for a saving of Autonomy = 0.085 when the PO has the average
budget of 1 million Rupees and the delay is t = 0.5 years requires an annual interest rate of 242%.


                                                    24
bution of delivery dates of purchases approved in June in the autonomy treatment (in
orange) and control (in green) groups. It clearly shows that purchases at the beginning
of the year (in July and August in particular) are much less likely to have to wait right
until the end of the year to be approved, strongly suggesting that the holdup power of
the AG has been decreased. Panel B runs the regression separately for less aligned (below
median) and more aligned (above median) AGs, and shows that this reduction in holdup
for purchases made at the beginning of the year is exclusively driven by the less aligned
AGs. Overall, the results suggest that monitor misalignment is a key driver of the effects
of the experimental treatments, and that monitor misalignment affects prices through the
ability of the AG to hold up purchases.


6.2    Procurement Officer Alignment
Our conceptual framework in section 4 shows the importance of the relative misalignment
of the monitor for the impact of our experimental treatments. The model also suggests
that the impacts are likely to be heterogeneous by the degree of misalignment  of the
procurement officer. At baseline, we collected one potential proxy for the PO's type--the
lab-in-the-field measure of dishonesty studied in Fischbacher & Föllmi-Heusi (2013) and
Hanna & Wang (2017). However, as shown in appendix figure A.11, the POs' scores are
not predictive of prices at baseline, suggesting these scores are not successfully capturing
POs' types.19 Unsurprisingly, as table A.11 shows, the dice scores also do not predict
heterogeneity in the treatment effects.
    As a potential alternative proxy for the POs' types, we estimate PO fixed effects on
prices in year 1 and look for heterogeneity of the autonomy treatment effect by POs' es-
timated fixed effects (since the PO fixed effects are calcualted in year 1 when the incen-
tives treatment was already in place, we focus on the autonomy treatment).20 We follow
the analysis in section 6.1 and study treatment effect heterogeneity semi-parametrically
in figure 10, and with linear interactions in appendix table A.12. Neither show any sys-
tematic evidence of heterogeneity of the treatment effect by this proxy for the PO's type.
The estimates are imprecise though, so we cannot rule out the presence of heterogene-
ity. Moreover, the POs have very little discretion in our setting and so it is perhaps not
surprising that their alignment is a less important driver of performance than that of the
monitors, who hold significant power.
  19
     Despite there being significant variation across POs in their dice scores (as shown in panel A of figure
A.11)
  20
     Specifically, we estimate regressions of the form pigto = Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + µo + igto of log
unit prices pigto on controls, good-specific quantity controls g , stratum, good, and officer fixed effects, s ,
g and µo in data from year 1 and use the estimated µo s as our proxy for the POs' types.

                                                      25
7    Conclusion
Recent advances in the empirical analysis of organizations have improved our under-
standing of the relationship between principals and agents and how management prac-
tices such as performance pay and decentralization shape organizations' performance.
Most organizations, however, are more complex than the single-layer theoretical construct
we use to analyze them. Control over rules and incentives that regulate agents' behavior
resides with other agents at higher levels of the hierarchy rather than with the principal
herself, and these agents might also be prone to act in their own interest.
    Our experiment shows that the allocation of authority between agents at different lev-
els of the hierarchy shapes the performance of the organization, and that this depends on
the relative severity of misalignment of different agents. Similarly, the effect of providing
incentives on performance also depends on how authority is allocated between agents.
Hence, the two must be designed jointly to ensure compatibility. Shifting authority to
frontline agents reduces the prices the bureaucracy pays for its inputs by 9% on average,
and up to 15% when the monitor is more inefficient or corrupt. The mechanism through
which this happens is the reduction of long delays in monitor approvals. This increases
taxpayers' welfare at the expense of the monitors' and possibly also sellers' who were
charging higher prices for longer waits.
    The results raise several questions for future research. First, if rules are so costly
why do most bureaucracies use them? One possibility is that corruption "scandals" are
much more damaging to the organization than the, potentially much larger, sum of small
markups on a large volume of transactions. Our benchmarking exercise suggests that the
cost created by corruption scandals must exceed 10 million rupees for the stringent rules
to be a rational choice. Figure 11 provides evidence on whether such scandals, that is
extremely high prices, are common in our treatment groups. The figure reports quantile
treatment effect estimates. If autonomy made scandals more likely, we'd expect to see that
the 9% average reduction was masking large increases in prices at the high quantiles of
the price distribution. If anything, we see the opposite: the treatment effects of all three
treatments are negative at the higher quantiles.
    We have studied the effect of shifting authority in an organization while keeping the
selection of agents into the organization constant. It is well-known that different incen-
tives attract different types of workers (Dal Bó et al. , 2013; Ashraf et al. , 2019; Deserrano,
2019), for instance performance pay typically attracts workers with better skills who can
benefit from performance rewards (Lazear, 2000). In our case more autonomy might at-
tract officers who are more prone to exploit it to their personal advantage. At the same


                                              26
time, giving more autonomy to officers implies taking it away from the monitors and
therefore the treatment might attract monitors who are less likely to exploit their position
for private gains.
    The results have implications for the design and interpretation of field experiments
within organizations. It is very common for researchers to replace the principal while im-
plementing different policies, in order to achieve control. This is innocuous to the extent
that they have the same objectives if not the same skills. However it is not innocuous if
researchers effectively replace agents who have different incentives, rather than the prin-
cipal. This has implications for the scalability of the results and can explain why inter-
ventions which are very successful when implemented by researchers do not work when
implementation is delegated to managers or other agents.21




  21
    Examples include the "camera" experiment by Duflo et al. (2012) that was successfully implemented by
researchers but failed when implemented by the government, because staff who were supposed to enforce
punishments failed to do so (Banerjee et al. , 2008). Similarly, incentive contracts offered to teachers in Kenya
by an international NGO were effective whilst the same contracts failed when monitored by the government
(Bold et al. , 2018)


                                                       27
References
A SHRAF, N AVA , B ANDIERA , O RIANA , D AVENPORT, E DWARD , & L EE , S COTT S. 2019.
  Losing Prosociality in the Quest for Talent? Sorting, Selection, and Productivity in the Delivery
  of Public Services. Forthcoming, American Economic Review.

B AJARI , PATRICK , & TADELIS , S TEVEN. 2001. Incentives vs Transaction Cossts: A Theory
  of Procurement Contracts. RAND Journal of Economics, 32, 387­407.

B ANDIERA , O RIANA , P RAT, A NDREA , & VALLETTI , T OMMASO. 2009. Active and Passive
  Waste in Government Spending: Evidence from a Policy Experiment. American Economic
  Review, 99(4), 1278­1308.

B ANDIERA , O RIANA , B ARANKAY, I WAN , & R ASUL , I MRAN. 2011. Field Experiments with
  Firms. Journal of Economic Perspectivs, 25, 63­82.

B ANERJEE , A, H ANNA , R, & M ULLAINATHAN , S. 2012. Corruption. Chap. 27, pages 1109­
  1147 of: Handbook of Organizational Economics.

B ANERJEE , A BHIJIT V., D UFLO , E STHER , & G LENNERSTER , R ACHEL. 2008. Putting a
  Band-Aid on a Corpse: Incentives for Nurses in the Indian Public Health Care System.
  Journal of the European Economic Association, 6, 487­500.

B EST, M ICHAEL C ARLOS , H JORT, J ONAS , & S ZAKONYI , D AVID. 2019. Individuals and
   Organizations as Sources of State Effectiveness. Mimeo: Columbia University.

B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , L EMOS , R ENATA , S ADUN , R AFFAELA , & VAN R EENEN , J OHN.
   2015a. Does Management Matter in Schools? Economic Journal, 125, 647­674.

B LOOM , N ICHOLAS , P ROPPER , C AROL , S EILER , S TEPHAN , & VAN R EENEN , J OHN. 2015b.
   The Impact of Competition on Management Quality: Evidence from Public Hospitals.
   Review of Economic Studies, 82, 457­489.

B OLD , T ESSA , K IMENYI , M WANGI , M WABU , G ERMANO , N G ' ANG ' A , A LICE , & S ANDE -
  FUR , J USTIN . 2018. Experimental Evidence on Scaling up Education Reforms in Kenya.
  Journal of Public Economics, 168, 1­20.

B OLTON , PATRICK , & D EWATRIPONT, M ATHIAS. 2013. Authority in Organizations: A
  Survey. Chap. 9, pages 342­372 of: G IBBONS , R OBERT S., & R OBERTS , J OHN (eds), The
  Handbook of Organizational Economics. Princeton University Press.

C OASE , R ONALD. 1937. The Nature of the Firm. Economica, 4, 386­405.

                                                28
C OVIELLO , D ECIO , G UGLIELMO , A NDREA , & S PAGNOLO , G IANCARLO. 2018. The Effect
  of Discretion on Procurement Performance. Management Science, 64, 715­738.

D AL B Ó , E RNESTO , F INAN , F EDERICO , & R OSSI , M ARTIN A. 2013. Strengthening State
  Capabilities: The Role of Financial Incentives in the Call to Public Service. Quarterly
  Journal of Economics, 128, 1169­1218.

D ESERRANO , E RIKA. 2019. Financial Incentives as Signals: Experimental Evidence from
  the Recruitment of Village Promoters in Uganda. American Economic Journal: Applied
  Economics, 11, 277­317.

D UFLO , E STHER , H ANNA , R EMA , & RYAN , S TEPHEN P. 2012. Incentives Work: Getting
  Teachers to Come to School. American Economic Review, 102, 1241­1278.

D UFLO , E STHER , G REENSTONE , M ICHAEL , PANDE , R OHINI , & RYAN , N ICHOLAS. 2018.
  The Value of Discretion in the Enforcement of Regulation: Experimental Evidence and
  Structural Estimates from Environmental Inspections in India. Econometrica, 86, 2123­
  2160.

D UGGAN , M ARK , & S COTT M ORTON , F IONA M. 2006. The Distortionary Effects of Gov-
  ernment Procurement: Evidence from Medicaid Prescription Drug Purchasing. Quar-
  terly Journal of Economics, 121, 1­30.

F INAN , F RED , O LKEN , B EN , & PANDE , R OHINI. 2017. The Personnel Economics of the
   Deceloping State. Chap. 6, pages 467­514 of: B ANERJEE , A BHIJIT, & D UFLO , E STHER
   (eds), Handbook of Economic Field Experiments, vol. 2. Elsevier.

F ISCHBACHER , U RS , & F ÖLLMI -H EUSI , F RANZISKA. 2013. Lies in Disguise: an Experi-
   mental Study on Cheating. Journal of the European Economic Association, 11, 525­547.

G ERARDINO , M ARIA , L ITSCHIG , S TEPHAN , & P OMERANZ , D INA. 2017 (10). Can audits
  backfire? Evidence from public procurement in Chile. Mimeo: University of Zurich.

G IBBONS , R OBERT, & R OBERTS , J OHN. 2013. Economic Theories of Incentives in Organi-
  zations. Chap. 2, pages 100­158 of: G IBBONS , R OBERT, & R OBERTS , J OHN (eds), Handbook
  of Organizational Economics. Princeton University Press.

G URIEV, S ERGEI. 2004. Red tape and corruption. Journal of Development Economics, 73(2),
  489­504.

H ANNA , R EMA , & WANG , S HING -Y I. 2017. Dishonesty and Selection into Public Service:
  Evidence from India. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 9(3), 262­90.

                                            29
I MBENS , G UIDO W., & R UBIN , D ONALD B. 2015. Causal Inference for Statistics, Social, and
   Biomedical Sciences. Cambridge University Press.

K ELMAN , S TEVE. 1990. Procurement and Public Management: The Fear of Discretion and the
  Quality of Government Performance. AEI Press.

K HAN , A DNAN Q., K HWAJA , A SIM I., & O LKEN , B ENJAMIN A. 2016. Tax Farming Re-
  dux: Experimental Evidence on Performance Pay for Tax Collectors. Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, 131, 219­271.

L AFFONT, J EAN -J ACQUES , & T IROLE , J EAN. 1994. A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and
  Regulation. MIT Press.

L AZEAR , E DWARD. 2000. Performance Pay and Productivity. American Economic Review,
  95, 1346­1361.

L EAVER , C LARE. 2009. Bureaucratic Minimal Squawk Behavior: Theory and Evidence
   from Regulatory Agencies. American Economic Review, 99(05), 572­607.

L ICHAND , G UILHERME , & F ERNANDES , G USTAVO. 2019. The Dark Side of the Contract: Do
   Government Audits Reduce Corruption in the Presence of Displacement by Vendors? Tech.
   rept. Working Paper.

L IEBMAN , J EFFREY B., & M AHONEY, N EALE. 2017. Do Expiring Budgets Lead to Wasteful
   Year-End Spending? Evidence from Federal Procurement. American Economic Review,
   107, 3510­3549.

N ATIONAL A UDIT O FFICE. 2006. Assessing the value for money of OGCbuying.solutions.
  https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2006/12/0607103.pdf.

OECD. 2009. OECD Principles for Integrity in Public Procurement. Tech. rept. Organisation
 for Economic Co-operation and Development.

P UNJAB P ROCUREMENT R EGULATORY A UTHORITY. 2014. Punjab Procurement Rules
  No.ADMN(PPRA) 10­2/2013.
  https://ppra.punjab.gov.pk/system/files/Final%20Notified%20PPR-2014%20%
  28ammended%20upto%2006.01.2016%29.pdf.

R ASUL , I MRAN , & R OGGER , D ANIEL. 2018. Management of Bureaucrats and Public Ser-
  vice Delivery: Evidence from the Nigerian Civil Service. Economic Journal, 128, 413­446.



                                             30
R ASUL , I MRAN , R OGGER , D ANIEL , & W ILLIAMS , M ARTIN J. 2019. Management and Bu-
  reaucratic Effectiveness: Evidence from the Ghanaian Civil Service. Mimeo: University Col-
  lege London.

R OBINSON , P ETER. 1988. Root-N-Consistent Semiparametric Regression. Econometrica,
  56, 931­954.

R UBIN , D ONALD B. 1980. Discussion of "Randomization Analysis of Experimental Data
  in the Fisher Randomization Test" by Basu. The Journal of the American Statistical Associ-
  ation, 75, 591­593.

S HI , L AN. 2008. The limit of oversight in policing: Evidence from the 2001 Cincinnati riot.
   Journal of Public Economics, 93(07), 99­113.

S HLEIFER , A NDREI , & V ISHNY, R OBERT W. 1993. Corruption. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
   nomics, 108, 599­617.

S IMON , H ERBERT. 1951. A Formal Theory of the Employment Relationship. Econometrica,
   19, 293­305.

S ZUCS , F ERENC. 2017. Discretion and Corruption in Public Procurement. Mimeo: Stockholm
   University.

YANG , D EAN. 2008. Can Enforcement Backfire? Crime Displacement in the Context of
 Customs Reform in the Philippines. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(1), 1­14.

Y OUNG , A LWYN. 2019. Channelling Fisher: Randomization Tests and the Statistical In-
  significance of Seemingly Significant Experimental Results. Quarterly Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 134, 557­598.




                                             31
                                                                                                                                          sha1_base64="igUh/kYJz9Q/APXTVLmtpiipgW4=">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</latexit>
                                                                                                                                          <latexit
                                                                         PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PO




                                                                       request
                                                                       receives
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                request
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                receives




                                            PO surveys
                                           vendors and
                                           orders goods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PO surveys
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          vendors and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          orders goods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figures & Tables




                       budget
                       regular
                       PO uses
                                                           PO uses
                                                          petty cash
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PO submits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           paperwork they
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          believe is required




                         in checklist




32
                         PO submits
                       paperwork listed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              paperwork
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AG examines




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AG asks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               for more
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              paperwork




                          paperwork
                          AG checks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AG accepts




                       against checklist
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Panel A: Status Quo Procurement Process




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           paperwork and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          approves payment
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     F IGURE 1: P ROCUREMENT P ROCESS S UMMARY




      items missing
      from checklist
                                                                                  Panel B: Procurement Process Under Autonomy Treatment




     AG asks for any
                                                          vendors
                                                          PO pays
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            vendors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PO pays




                          AG accepts
                        paperwork and
                       approves payment
                               F IGURE 2: S UMMARY S TATISTICS


                                                                Observations Expenditure (Rs.) Offices

          Printer Paper                                               2,455       14,002,840    489

               Register                                               2,116        9,567,176    459

                  Toner                                               1,005        5,186,907    255

     Sign Board/Banner                                                  822        4,896,765    270

             Light Bulb                                                 662        4,253,412    286

          Photocopying                                                1,173        3,459,602    248

                   Coal                                                 506        3,282,865    280

                    Pen                                               2,103        2,840,057    454

            Newspaper                                                 3,836        2,832,383    399

          Floor Cleaner                                                 589        2,738,136    235

                    Pipe                                                406        2,728,514    210

                 Broom                                                  655        2,201,011    274

                   Soap                                                 660        1,946,169    273

              Ice Block                                                 429        1,653,095    219

             File Cover                                                 327         954,161     184

                   Lock                                                 386         938,951     191

              Envelope                                                  834         925,219     276

                  Towel                                                 209         584,031     157

             Calculator                                                 289         446,954     201

                 Stapler                                                335         445,942     230

                 Duster                                                 244         428,761     168

                  Wiper                                                 261         427,569     173

                Staples                                                 308         143,918     191

            Stamp Pad                                                   332         142,028     216

                  Pencil                                                241          97,378     141


                               -5 -2.5     0    2.5       5   7.5 10

                                           p25-p75               p10-p90                       Median

                                           Mean                  log Unit Price                Quality




Notes: The figure displays summary statistics for the purchases of the goods in our cleaned purchase sam-
ple. The figure summarizes the log unit prices paid for the goods, the number of purchases of each good,
and the total expenditure on the good (in Rupees) in the sample.



                                                     33
F IGURE 3: M ODEL P REDICTIONS             OF   H ETEROGENEITY        OF   T REATMENT E FFECTS         BY
M ONITOR T YPE

dp/p




                                                                                               
                                                                                               Incentive




                                                                                                Autonomy

                                                                                                Both

Notes: The figure shows the predictions our model in section 4 makes about how the treatment effects of
our experiment will vary with the degree of misalignment of the monitor ( ) as described in propositions 1
and 2.




                                                   34
     F IGURE 4: T HE T IMING OF D ELIVERIES AND E XPENDITURES IS U NAFFECTED

                                                                 Panel A: Timing of Deliveries is Unaffected
                                                                 .1                         Autonomy Incentives Both  All     .2
                Treatment Effect on pr(Delivery This Month)                    2 p-value:     0.434     0.737 0.368 0.340
                                                              .075                                                            .175




                                                                                                                                     Control Group Delivery Distribution
                                                               .05                                                            .15

                                                              .025                                                            .125

                                                                 0                                                            .1

                                                              -.025                                                           .075

                                                               -.05                                                           .05

                                                                                                                 Autonomy
                                                              -.075                                                           .025
                                                                                                                 Incentives
                                                                                                                 Both
                                                                -.1                                                           0
                                                                      2015m7      2015m10       2016m1      2016m4     2016m7
                                                                                                Month


                                                                Panel B: Timing of Expenditures is Unaffected
                                                                 .1                         Autonomy Incentives Both  All     .2
                                                                               2 p-value:     0.416     0.809 0.410 0.392
                Treatment Effect on log Expenditure Share




                                                                                                                                     Control Group log Expenditure Distribution
                                                              .075                                                            .175

                                                               .05                                                            .15

                                                              .025                                                            .125

                                                                 0                                                            .1

                                                              -.025                                                           .075

                                                               -.05                                                           .05

                                                                                                                 Autonomy
                                                              -.075                                                           .025
                                                                                                                 Incentives
                                                                                                                 Both
                                                                -.1                                                           0
                                                                      2015m7      2015m10       2016m1      2016m4     2016m7
                                                                                                Month


Notes: The figure shows estimates of treatment effects on the timing of deliveries and expenditure. The
estimates are from seemingly unrelated regressions of the form
              1 {Monthi = m} =  + A Autonomyi + I Incentivesi + B Bothi + g + s + i
where g are good fixed effects, s are randomization strata fixed effects, and i are residuals clustered by
office. The figures show the 95% confidence intervals of the estimated A , I and B with p-values of 2
tests of the hypothesis that each treatment's effect is 0 in all months, and the hypothesis that all treatments
have no effect in all months.                          35
                                                F IGURE 5: C OST B ENEFIT A NALYSIS


               30
               25
               20


                            150 Hospital Beds




                                                                                                   95% CI:
                                                   10 Schools
    Savings (Rs. Million)
                      15




                                                                                                   637% RoR

                                                                                   95% CI:
                                                                                   510% RoR
             10




                                                                                                   Point Est:
                                                                                                   261% RoR
     5




                                                                                   Point Est:
                                                                                   45% RoR
               0
               -5




                                                                 Gross Savings

                                                                      Cost: 2.65   Net Savings
               -10




                                                                Autonomy Incentives             Both

Notes: The figure shows a cost benefit analysis of the experiment. For each treatment, the vertical in-
tervals denote total savings due to the experiment in millions of Rupees. Savings are calculated as
 -k                                 k
1+k      o Expenditureo × Treatmento where k are the estimated treatment effects in table 2 and Expenditureo
is the total spending by office o on generic goods (standard errors are calculated by the delta method). The
solid lines denote savings net of the cost of the incentives treatment, while dashed lines are gross savings.
For the incentives and combined treatments, the figure also shows the implied rates of return on the perfor-
mance pay bonus payments. For comparison, the figure also shows the cost of operating 150 hospital beds,
and the cost of operating 10 schools.
                                                                      36
   F IGURE 6: H ETEROGENEITY OF T REATMENT E FFECTS BY M ONITOR A LIGNMENT
                    .1
                    .05
           -.15 -.1 -.05 0
             Treatment Effect
                    -.2
                    -.25
                    -.3




                                .1           .2                 .3             .4          .5          .6
                                                                     AG June Share

Notes: The figure shows heterogeneity of the three treatment effects by the degree of misalignment of the
district's accountant general. Accountants general are classified according to the degree to which purchase
approvals are bunched at the end of the fiscal year in June 2015 (year 1 of the project). The figure shows
semi-parametric estimates of the treatment effects using the method in Robinson (1988) to estimate linear
effects of the fulll set of controls and flexible non-parametric heterogeneous treatment effects by accountant
general:
                                                         3
                                     pigto = Xigto  +         fk (AGJuneShareo ) × Treatmentk
                                                                                            o + igto
                                                        k=1
where Xigto includes the scalar item variety measure, good specific controls for purchase size, stratum FEs,
and good fixed effects, and fk (·) are nonparametric treatment effect functions.




                                                                       37
                                                      F IGURE 7: C OST B ENEFIT O F E XPERIMENT BY AG T YPE
                                     10
   Cumulative Net Savings (Rs Million)
      2.5         5   0   7.5




                                          .1                 .2              .3          .4          .5              .6
                                                                               AG June Share

                                                                  Autonomy             Incentives             Both


Notes: The figure shows the cost benefit of the experiments in districts with different levels of moni-
tor alignment. The horizontal axis measures our proxy for the misalignment of a district's accountant
general: the share of transactions approved in the last month of the fiscal year in the control group in
year 1. Districts with a low AG June Share (low jd ) have more aligned monitors. The vertical axis
measures the cumulative net savings by all districts with an accountant general who is less misaligned:
                                          -k (jd )
  d:jd x                    Expenditureod × Treatmentk
                                          1+k (jd )      o - cd where k (jd ) are estimated treatment effects
                                                        od
of treatment k when monitor misalignment is jd and cd is the ex ante cost of performance pay bonuses to
offices in district d (the number of offices in the district at each pay grade times the expected prize for each
office). The figure shows large net savings for the incentives group at low levels of misalignment while net
savings to the autonomy and both treatments only accrue at high levels of monitor misalignment.




                                                                                 38
                     F IGURE 8: T REATMENT E FFECTS ON A PPROVAL D ELAYS

                                                                    Panel A: Overall Treatment Effects
                                                        .5                                                                        1


                   Treatment Effect on 1 - F(Delay)
                                                      .25                                                                         .8




                                                                                                                                       Control Group F(Delay)
                                                        0                                                                         .6



                                                      -.25                                                                        .4



                                                       -.5                                                                        .2



                                                      -.75                                                                        0
                                                               0     30      60     90     120      150    180       210    240
                                                                                   Delay Duration (days)

                                                                           Autonomy         Incentives        Both


                                                                   Panel B: Autonomy Effect by AG Type
                                                        .5
                   Treatment Effect on 1 - F(Delay)




                                                      .25



                                                        0



                                                      -.25



                                                       -.5



                                                      -.75
                                                              0       30      60      90      120      150       180       210        240
                                                                                      Delay Duration (days)

                                                                              More Aligned AG         Less Aligned AG


Notes: The figure shows the effects of the experiments on the delay between a purchased item's delivery
and the approval of the purchase by the Accountant General (AG). Panel A shows a series of seemingly
unrelated distributional regressions of the probability of delay of at least j days in year 2 normalized by the
probability of a delay of at least j days in the control group in year 1 on treatment dummies, strata fixed
effects s and good fixed effects g :

                                                             1 delayigo  j                      3
                                                                                      =+            k Treatmentk
                                                                                                               o + s + g + igo
                             P (delay  j |Control, Year1)
                                                                                             k=1

the panel also shows the CDF of delays in the control group in year 1 for reference. Panel B extends this
regression to separately estimate treatment effects for more (above median) and less (below median) aligned
AGs.                                                  39
F IGURE 9: E FFECTS                                          OF    A UTONOMY T REATMENT               ON   H OLD U P      AT THE                                  E ND   OF THE
F ISCAL Y EAR

                Panel A: Overall Effect of Autonomy Treatment on Holdup
                                                                                                                             1
                                                              .4
                  Treatment Effect on Pr(Approved in June)
                                                              .3
                                                                                                                             .8
                                                              .2




                                                                                                                                  Delivery Date Distributions
                                                              .1
                                                                                                                             .6
                                                              0

                                                             -.1                                                             .4

                                                             -.2

                                                             -.3                                                             .2

                                                             -.4
                                                                                                                             0
                                                                   2015m7       2015m10      2016m1      2016m4         2016m7
                                                                                             Month


                                                                   Panel B: Autonomy Effect by AG Type

                                                              .4
                  Treatment Effect on Pr(Approved in June)




                                                              .3

                                                              .2

                                                              .1

                                                              0

                                                             -.1

                                                             -.2

                                                             -.3

                                                             -.4

                                                               2015m7           2015m10        2016m1        2016m4          2016m7
                                                                                                Month

                                                                                  More Aligned AG     Less Aligned AG


Notes: The figure shows the effects of the autonomy treatment on holdup by the AG at the end of the fiscal
year. We focus on how the treatments change the probability that items purchased in different months are
approved in June (the last month of the fiscal year).
                                                                     3   Jun                                                                                    Jun
1 Approved in Juneigo = +                                                       mk 1 {PurchaseMonthigo = m}×Treatmentk
                                                                                                                     o+                                               m 1 {PurchaseMonthigo = m}
                                                                    k=1 m=Jul                                                              m=Jul

Panel A shows the mk coefficients for the autonomy treatment and also the raw distribution of delivery
dates of purchases approved in June in the autonomy treatment (in orange) and control (in green) groups.
Panel B runs the regression separately for less aligned (below median) and more aligned (above median)
AGs.                                                 40
F IGURE 10: H ETEROGENEITY                   OF   T REATMENT E FFECTS             BY   P ROCUREMENT O FFICER
A LIGNMENT
                   .4
                   .2
           Treatment Effect
                   0
                   -.2
                   -.4




                              -.5                      0                         .5                1
                                                             PO Year 1 FE

Notes: The figure shows heterogeneity of the autonomy treatment's effect by the degree of misalignment of
the procurement officer. Procurement officers are classified by their estimated fixed effects in a regression
of log unit prices pigto on controls Xigto , good-specific quantity controls g , stratum, good, and officer fixed
effects, s , g and µo in data from year 1: pigto = Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + µo + igto . The figure shows
semi-parametric estimates of the treatment effects using the method in Robinson (1988) to estimate linear
effects of the fulll set of controls and flexible non-parametric heterogeneous treatment effects by accountant
general:
                                                        3
                                    pigto = Xigto  +             µo ) × Treatmentk
                                                             fk (^               o + igto
                                                       k=1
where Xigto includes the scalar item variety measure, good specific controls for purchase size, stratum FEs,
and good fixed effects, and fk (·) are nonparametric treatment effect functions. Since the incentives treat-
ment was already in place in year 1 (when the PO fixed effects are estimated) we focus only on heterogeneity
of the autonomy treatment effect.




                                                               41
                                                                     F IGURE 11: Q UANTILE T REATMENT E FFECTS

                                                Panel A: Autonomy                                                                   Panel B: Incentives
                     .05




                                                                                                         .05
                     .025




                                                                                                         .025
                     0




                                                                                                         0
            -.075 -.05 -.025




                                                                                                -.075 -.05 -.025
             Treatment Effect




                                                                                                 Treatment Effect
                     -.1




                                                                                                         -.1
                     -.15 -.125




                                                                                                         -.15 -.125
42




                                  0   10   20    30   40      50      60   70   80   90   100                         0   10   20    30   40      50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                           Percentile                                                                          Percentile


                                                Panel C: Combined
                     .05
                     .025
                     0
            -.075 -.05 -.025
             Treatment Effect
                     -.1
                     -.15 -.125




                                  0   10   20    30   40      50      60   70   80   90   100
                                                           Percentile


     Notes: The figure shows quantile treatment effects of the three treatments on prices paid. We use the specification used in table 2, controling for the
     scalar measure of item variety. We estimate treatment effects from the 5th to the 95th percentile, in increments of 5.
                         TABLE 1: B ALANCE A CROSS T REATMENT A RMS

                                     Control        Regression Coefficients           Joint Test
                                     mean/sd    Incentives   Autonomy       Both       All = 0

Office Characteristics
                                        1.01     -0.007        0.033        0.012        2.360
   Number of Public Bodies            {0.086}    (0.007)      (0.024)      (0.013)     [0.071]
                                                 [0.346]      [0.211]      [0.460]      [0.264]
                                        1.26      0.069         0.222       0.186       2.427
   Number of Accounting Entities      {0.635}    (0.086)      (0.100)     (0.087)      [0.065]
                                                 [0.407]      [0.028]     [0.038]      [0.076]
                                        0.39     -0.022       -0.009       -0.011       0.287
   Share of June Approvals            {0.205}    (0.024)      (0.024)      (0.024)     [0.835]
                                                 [0.363]      [0.693]      [0.649]     [0.828]
   District (2 p-val)                            [ 0.856]     [ 0.972]     [ 0.897]    [ 0.351]
   Department (2 p-val)                          [ 0.168]     [ 0.958]     [ 0.858]    [ 0.639]
Year-1 Budget Shares
                                        0.80      0.024       -0.004        0.009       0.594
   Operating Expenses                 {0.223}    (0.024)      (0.026)      (0.025)     [0.619]
                                                 [0.328]      [0.875]      [0.708]     [0.611]
                                        0.03     -0.005       -0.004       -0.008       0.142
   Physical Assets                    {0.115}    (0.012)      (0.013)      (0.013)     [0.935]
                                                 [0.664]      [0.769]      [0.546]     [0.944]
                                        0.05      0.005       -0.001       -0.003       0.394
   Repairs & Maintenance              {0.098}    (0.010)      (0.010)      (0.010)     [0.757]
                                                 [0.625]      [0.904]      [0.784]     [0.783]
                                        0.53      0.021       -0.001       -0.038       0.895
   POPS Universe                      {0.327}    (0.037)      (0.038)      (0.039)     [0.444]
                                                 [0.579]      [0.971]      [0.352]     [0.467]
                                        0.15      0.027        0.025       -0.002       1.547
   Analysis Sample                    {0.173}    (0.020)      (0.021)      (0.018)     [0.201]
                                                                         Continued on next page



                                           43
                                 Table 1 ­ Continued from previous page
                                           Control            Regression Coefficients            Joint Test
                                           mean/sd      Incentives     Autonomy        Both       All = 0

                                                          [0.194]         [0.229]      [0.886]    [0.197]
Year-2 Budget Shares
                                              0.78        -0.008           0.003        0.026      0.712
  Operating Expenses                        {0.240}       (0.027)         (0.028)      (0.027)    [0.545]
                                                          [0.761]         [0.911]      [0.354]    [0.585]
                                              0.04         0.001          -0.019       -0.013      1.302
  Physical Assets                           {0.131}       (0.015)         (0.013)      (0.014)    [0.273]
                                                          [0.971]         [0.140]      [0.368]    [0.302]
                                              0.05         0.001           0.000       -0.011       2.162
  Repairs & Maintenance                     {0.097}       (0.010)         (0.010)      (0.009)    [0.091]
                                                          [0.901]         [0.988]      [0.222]     [0.112]
                                              0.53         0.012          -0.001       -0.022      0.337
  POPS Universe                             {0.311}       (0.036)         (0.036)      (0.037)    [0.799]
                                                          [0.716]         [0.973]      [0.529]    [0.790]
                                              0.16         0.011           0.007       -0.018      1.029
  Analysis Sample                           {0.196}       (0.023)         (0.022)      (0.020)    [0.379]
                                                          [0.649]         [0.725]      [0.388]    [0.375]

Number of Offices                             136           150             148         153

  Notes: The table shows balance of a range of covariates across the treatment arms.




                                                  44
                                    TABLE 2: T REATMENT E FFECTS ON P RICES PAID AND G OOD VARIETY

                                                                    Variety                                   Unit Price
                                                          (1)          (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)        (6)         (7)        (8)
                    Autonomy                            0.016        0.010     -0.000    -0.085      -0.086    -0.080       -0.082   -0.085
                                                       (0.030)      (0.023)    (0.009)   (0.038)    (0.032)    (0.031)     (0.034)   (0.038)
                                                       [0.646]      [0.705]    [0.859]   [0.046]    [0.018]    [0.023]     [0.030]   [0.051]
                    Incentives                          0.006        0.025      0.005    -0.016      -0.026    -0.022       -0.020   -0.017
                                                       (0.030)      (0.023)    (0.009)   (0.038)    (0.030)    (0.033)     (0.034)   (0.038)
                                                       [0.846]      [0.325]    [0.449]   [0.723]    [0.476]    [0.571]     [0.625]   [0.690]
                    Both                                0.037        0.059      0.006    -0.070      -0.083    -0.072       -0.086   -0.070
                                                       (0.030)      (0.023)    (0.009)   (0.041)    (0.032)    (0.033)     (0.039)   (0.041)
                                                       [0.265]      [0.021]    [0.498]   [0.130]    [0.025]    [0.053]     [0.043]   [0.115]

                    Item Variety Control               Scalar       Coarse       ML      None      Attribs     Scalar      Coarse      ML




45
                    p(All = 0)                          0.660        0.080      0.809     0.168     0.054       0.093       0.087     0.178
                    p(Autonomy = Incentives)           0.749         0.537     0.494     0.146      0.077      0.119        0.119    0.138
                    p(Autonomy = Both)                 0.461         0.031     0.573     0.741      0.927      0.807        0.932    0.761
                    p(Incentives = Both)               0.302         0.144     0.957     0.262      0.133      0.227        0.136    0.238
                    Observations                       11,771       11,771     11,771    11,771    11,771      11,771      11,771    11,771
     Notes: The table shows the overall treatment effects of the three treatments. The table shows estimates of equation (2):
                                                             3
                                               yigto =  +         k Treatmentk
                                                                             o + Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + igto
                                                            k=1

     where yigto is the outcome of interest in purchase i of good g at time t by office o. In columns 1­3 it is the scalar (column 1), coarse (column 2) or
     machine learning (column 3) measure of good variety, while in columns 4­8 it is the log unit price. Treatmentk   o indicates the three treatment groups;
     qigto is the quantity purchased to capture good-specific bulk discounts; s and g are stratum and good fixed effects, respectively; and Xigto are
     purchase-specific controls. We weight regressions by expenditure shares in the control group so that treatment effects can be interpreted as effects on
     expenditure, and the residual term igto is clustered at the cost center level. Below each coefficient we report standard errors clustered by cost center
     in parentheses, and p-values from randomization inference tests of the hypothesis that the treatment has no effect on any office in square brackets.
                 TABLE 3: T REATMENT E FFECTS ON D EMAND FOR G OODS

                                                  Treatment Effect                 Joint Test
                        Item
                                            Autonomy Incentives    Both             All = 0
                                                 14.2          103.1        32.6     0.05
                        Toner
                                             (290.62)        (294.41)   (292.44)    [0.985]
                                                 -6.3          -39.1       -12.3     1.32
                        Ice Block
                                              (21.16)         (21.43)    (21.29)    [0.266]
                                                -13.3             4.8      -15.1     1.25
                        Towel
                                              (12.53)         (12.70)    (12.61)    [0.291]
                                               -324.0            11.0      368.4     0.28
                        Soap/Detergent
                                             (785.13)        (795.36)   (790.04)    [0.843]
                                                -14.2            18.0      -16.8     3.91
                        Duster
                                              (11.59)         (11.74)    (11.66)    [0.008]
                                                 -1.3          22.0         -7.4     4.08
                        Wiper
                                               (9.10)          (9.22)     (9.16)    [0.007]
                                                  6.1            10.4      -17.1     0.75
                        Lock
                                              (20.10)         (20.36)    (20.23)    [0.519]
                                                 54.8            75.8       19.3     0.78
                        Pen
                                              (54.41)         (55.12)    (54.76)    [0.503]
                                                 14.7            -4.8       -7.6     1.66
                        Envelope
                                              (11.18)         (11.32)    (11.25)    [0.172]
                                                157.1          254.9      -140.4     1.79
                        Printer Paper
                                             (187.33)        (189.77)   (188.50)    [0.147]
                                               -212.7           -62.3      68.2      0.24
                        Register
                                             (357.08)        (361.74)   (359.32)    [0.870]
                                                -11.8            -8.9     -13.2      1.09
                        Stapler
                                               (7.91)          (8.01)     (7.96)    [0.353]
                                                 -1.4             0.7        1.3     0.34
                        Staples
                                               (2.87)          (2.91)     (2.89)    [0.800]
                                                 -9.8           -11.5      -12.9     1.03
                        Calculator
                                               (8.01)          (8.11)     (8.06)    [0.378]
                                                 27.7           -29.4       10.4     1.83
                        File Cover
                                              (25.39)         (25.72)    (25.55)    [0.139]
                                                 5.7             5.6        -1.4     1.58
                        Stamp Pad
                                               (4.25)          (4.30)     (4.28)    [0.193]
                                                 22.5            55.6       69.8     0.79
                        Photocopying
                                              (50.18)         (50.84)    (50.50)    [0.501]
                                                 45.1          84.9         32.8     1.08
                        Broom
                                              (47.26)         (47.87)    (47.55)    [0.355]
                                                -26.5            63.8      67.4      1.33
                        Coal
                                              (58.50)         (59.26)    (58.87)    [0.263]
                                                 20.9             0.4        2.4     0.19
                        Newspaper
                                              (33.64)         (34.08)    (33.86)    [0.905]
                                                 41.6         90.5          16.1     2.79
                        Pipe
                                              (33.42)         (33.85)    (33.63)    [0.039]
                                                 66.6           -38.7       -2.6     0.45
                        Light Bulb
                                              (94.17)         (95.40)    (94.76)    [0.715]
                                                 6.4             -0.1       -2.8     1.69
                        Pencil
                                               (4.36)          (4.42)     (4.39)    [0.167]
                                                -18.3            -3.0      14.7      0.20
                        Floor Cleaner
                                              (43.58)         (44.15)    (43.86)    [0.893]
                                                123.4            24.1       32.4     0.22
                        Sign Board/Banner
                                             (166.19)        (168.35)   (167.23)    [0.883]
                                              0.83            1.23       0.65        1.08
                        Joint F-Test
                                             [0.704]         [0.198]    [0.911]     [0.297]

Notes: The table shows the overall treatment effects of the three treatments on the demand for different
goods.
                                                        46
Web Appendix (Not For Publication)
A                                         Supplementary Figures and Tables

  F IGURE A.1: P RICES PAID VARY W ILDLY. E VEN                                                                                                                                        FOR THE                S AME VARIETY OF I TEM

                                                           Panel A: Pen Prices                                                                                                                   Panel B: Paper Prices




                                                                                                                                                             2.25
                      400




                                                                                                                                                             2
                                   200




                                                                                                                                          Standardized Price of Paper (Rs.)
                                                                                                                                                                1.5 1.75
   Standardized Price of Pen (Rs.)




                                          High performer: Pays Rs 3.50                                                                                                                 High performer: Pays Rs 0.70
                           100




                                          for pen worth Rs 25                                                                                                                          for paper worth Rs 1.25                    Poor performer: Pays Rs 1.80
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  for paper worth Rs 1.25
                     50




                                                                                                                                                      1.25
             25




                                                                                                                                              1
     10               5




                                                                                                      Poor performer: Pays Rs 115
                                                                                                      for pen worth Rs 25
                                                                                                                                                             0.75
                      3




                                                    3         5          10           25       50       100        200        400                                                       0.75                   1           1.25       1.5      1.75              2      2.25
                                                                           Price Paid Per Pen (Rs.)                                                                                                        Price Paid Per Sheet of Paper (Rs.)


                                                        Panel C: Register Prices                                                                                                                 Panel D: Toner Prices                        Poor performer: Pays Rs 11000
                      1,100




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              for toner worth Rs 3500
                                                                                                                                                                                        High performer: Pays Rs 1550
                                                                                                                                                                                        for toner worth Rs 3500
                                                                                                                                                                  5,000 10,000
   Standardized Price of Register (Rs.)
                                  500




                                                                                                                                          Standardized Price of Toner (Rs.)




                                           High performer: Pays Rs 60
                                           for register worth Rs 150
                     200




                                                                                                                                             1,000 2,000
           100




                                                                                                       Poor performer: Pays Rs 700
   50




                                                                                                      for register worth Rs 150
                                                                                                                                                             500
                                                                                                                                                             300
                      25




                                          25             50              100         200              500            1,100                                                       300         500             1,000        2,000               5,000          10,000
                                                                         Price Paid Per Register (Rs.)                                                                                                          Price Paid Per Toner (Rs.)



Notes: The figure shows the distribution of unit prices and standardized prices for four of the homogeneous
items in our data. Each circle in the figues is a purchase. The horizontal axes display the actual price paid,
while the vertical axes display the standardized prices using the scalar item variety measure described in
section 5.1. Intuitively, this measure is our prediction of how much the item would have cost on average
if it had been purchased in the control group, a standardized measure of the item's variety. The orange
circles highlight a set of purchases with the same standardized value, illustrating the striking heterogeneity
in prices even for the same item.




                                                                                                                                     47
  F IGURE A.2: H OW P OOR P ROCUREMENT P ERFORMANCE C AN D AMAGE C AREERS


        Please Rate How Damaging Each of the Following Could Be For Your Career Prospects
                                                                      Control Group


                    Other procurement-related issues that
                                could damage my career



                  If the vendor we select is not adequate ­
                          either unreliable, or provides poor
                                   quality after sales service


            If the quality of the goods we buy is not good -
                        i.e. not durable or not fit for purpose




                       If the price we procure at is too high




              If documentation is not proper and complete



                                                                  0        .2             .4            .6          .8           1
                                                                                                Share


                                                                                Very Damaging                Somewhat Damaging

                                                                                Not Damaging




Notes: The figure shows responses among the control group in the endline survey to a question asking
them about whether various types of poor performance in procurement could damage their careers. Each
bar shows the share of respondents picking that option.




                                                                          48
        F IGURE A.3: C ONTROL G ROUP R EASONS FOR L OW VALUE FOR M ONEY


                    Potential Reasons Why POs Don't Achieve Good Value for Money?
                            Budgets are released late
                                 so POs cannot plan
                      POs do not have enough petty
                     cash to make purchases quickly
             AG rules are not clear. Approval requires
                  inside connections or speed money
                               Not enough training on
                             procurement procedures
                       Offices cannot roll their budget
                           over into the following year
                               Vendors charge higher
                          prices for delayed payment
                              Few vendors are willing
                          to wait for delayed payment
                       POs are worried that changing
                        vendors might raise red flags
                            POs have nothing to gain
                        by improving value for money

                                                 Other


                                                          0        5   10         15   20   25
                                                                        % of Points


Notes: The figure shows responses among the control group in the endline survey to a question asking them
about the reasons they felt that value for money was not being achieved in public procurement. Respondents
were asked to allocate 100 points among the 10 options in proportion to how important they thought each
option was. Each bar shows the mean number of points allocated to that option.




                                                              49
                       F IGURE A.4: B UDGET R ELEASE T IMING U NAFFECTED

                                                            Panel A: Share of Budget Released Over Time




                                        1
                         Share of Budget So Far This Year
                          .2       .4       .6        .8




                                                                                               Treatment Year
                                        0




                                                            13/7   14/1     14/7    15/1   15/7      16/1    16/7      17/1    17/7   18/1     18/7

                                                                         Control           Autonomy                   Incentives             Both


                                                            Panel B: Difference in Differences Estimates
                                                             Autonomy DD: 0.010 (0.0118)
                          .15




                                                             Incentives DD: 0.014 (0.0117)
                                                                   Both DD: 0.006 (0.0117)
                          .1
                          .05
                          0
                          -.05
                          -.1




                                                            Jul    Aug    Sep      Oct   Nov   Dec     Jan      Feb     Mar    Apr    May     Jun

                                                                                    Autonomy         Incentives         Both


Notes: The figure shows that the timing of budget releases to the offices in the study was unaffected. A
third component of the autonomy treatment attmpted to improve the frequency and regularity of budget
releases, but it was not possible to implement this. Panel A shows how the average share of offices' annual
budget evolves over each year in each treatment group. The treatment year (July 2015­June 2016) does
not look visibly different from the other years, and any slight differences from other years appear to have
affected all four groups in the same way. Panel B shows estimates of the km coefficients from a differences
in differences estimation of
             3   Jun
    sot =               km Treatmentk
                                    o × 1 {Month of year = m} × 1 {Fiscal Year 2015­16} + t + o + ot
            k=1 m=Jul

where sot is the share of office o's annual budget that has been released to it by month t, t are month fixed
effects, o are office fixed effects and ot are residuals. Overlaid on the figure are estimates of difference in
difference coefficients of the average effect in the 2015­16 fiscal year in each treatment group.

                                                                                                  50
                           F IGURE A.5: L OCATION            OF   S AMPLE O FFICES




                                                                                          TreatmentGroups
                                                                                               Incentives
                                                                                              Autonomy
                                                                                              Both
                                                                                              Control




Notes: The figure shows the location of the offices in the study. The offices are located in 26 of the 36 districts
in Punjab. Green dots denote control offices, orange dots the autonomy group, blue dots the performance
pay group, and purple dots the combined treatment.




                                                        51
F IGURE A.6: S AMPLE O FFICES ARE A S MALL S HARE                   OF THE    O FFICES O VERSEEN        BY
U SERS AT THE A CCOUNTANT G ENERAL' S O FFICE
                       15
                       10
           Frequency
                       5
                       0




                            0    .2             .4           .6           .8                   1
                                Share of Treated CostCenters per AG Username

Notes:Each transaction approved by the accountant general's office is associated with a particular officer's
username. The figure shows the share of cost centers associated with each username that are in the treated
groups of our experiment. The figure shows that for the vast majority of users at the accountant general's
office, fewer than 20% of their offices are treated.




                                                    52
F IGURE A.7: P RICE C HANGES IN THE C ONTROL G ROUP                            ARE NOT       L ARGER W HEN
M ORE O FFICES R ECEIVE THE A UTONOMY T REATMENT
                80




                                                                                                  .4
                                                                      DD = -0.10 (0.122)




                                                                                                  Control Group's Year-2 Price Increase
                                                                                                                                   .2
                60




                                                                                                                         0
            Frequency
                40




                                                                                                              -.2
                20




                                                                                                    -.4
                                                                                                  -.6
                0




                        0           .02               .04             .06                   .08
                                   Share of Offices Treated With Autonomy

Notes: The figure shows how prices change between year 1 (before the rollout of the autonomy treatment)
and year 2 (after the rollout) in offices in the control group as a function of the share of the offices monitored
by an accountant general that receive the autonomy treatment. For each accountant general's office, we run
                           scalar
the regression pigto = v  ^igto   + Y 2 Year2t + g + g qigto + igto , where v ^igto is the scalar measure of item
variety, in a sample of control group procurement offices supervised by an accountant general with a share
of offices in the autonomy group within 0.01 of the office in question. The figure presents these estimates
with their 95% confidence intervals in green. We also overlay on the picture the difference in differences
estimate of DD in the following regression
                    scalar
          pigto = v
                  ^igto    + Y 2 Year2t + DD Year2t × AutonomyShareo + g + g qigto + g t + igto
where AutonomyShareo is the share of procurement officers monitored by the same accountant general as
officer o who receive the autonomy treatment and the regression is run only amongst procurement officers
in the control group.




                                                       53
F IGURE A.8: B ALANCE OF THE D ISTRIBUTION OF ATTRITION R ATES A CROSS O FFICES

    Panel A. Year 1; POPS Reporting Rate                                                  Panel B. Year2; POPS Reporting Rate
   2.5




                                                                                        2.5
                                                  Control                                                                      Control
                                                  Autonomy. K-S P-val=0.800                                                    Autonomy. K-S P-val=0.905
                                                  Incentives. K-S P-val=0.813                                                  Incentives. K-S P-val=0.496
   2




                                                                                        2
                                                  Both. K-S P-val=0.270                                                        Both. K-S P-val=0.698
   1.5




                                                                                        1.5
   1




                                                                                        1
   .5




                                                                                        .5
   0




                                                                                        0
                114.5                  115                               115.5                15.5               16                                    16.5
                                PO Fixed Effect                                                              PO Fixed Effect


    Panel C. Year 1; Analysis Sample Rate                                                Panel D. Year2; Analysis Sample Rate
                                                                                        2.5
   2.5




                                                  Control                                                                      Control
                                                  Autonomy. K-S P-val=0.868                                                    Autonomy. K-S P-val=0.292
                                                  Incentives. K-S P-val=0.774                                                  Incentives. K-S P-val=0.811
                                                  Both. K-S P-val=0.899                                                        Both. K-S P-val=0.558
                                                                                        2
   2




                                                                                        1.5
   1.5




                                                                                        1
   1




                                                                                        .5
   .5
   0




                                                                                        0




         -2.8           -2.6   -2.4           -2.2            -2            -1.8              7.2    7.4   7.6           7.8              8            8.2
                                 PO Fixed Effect                                                             PO Fixed Effect



Notes: The figure shows the distribution of procurement office fixed effects o in regressions of the form
                                                           sbco = Xbco  + c + o + bco
where sbco is the share of a transaction (bill) b by office c in an accounting code o that is reported in POPS
(panels A and B) or that is represented in our anlysis sample (panels C and D); Xbco are quadratic time and
bill amount controls, c are accounting code fixed effect, o are procurement office fixed effects, and bco is
an error term. Panels A and C use bills from year 1 of the experiment, while panels B and D analyze year 2.
The panels show kernel density estimates of the distributions of the procurement office fixed effects in the
3 treatment groups and the control group. The panels also show exact P-values form Kolmogorov-Smirnov
tests of the equality of each treatment group's distribution and the control group's.




                                                                                   54
       F IGURE A.9: D ECOMPOSING A UTONOMY E FFECTS ON A PPROVAL D ELAYS

               Panel A: Delay Between Delivery and Document Submission
                                                                                                                                     1



                    Treatment Effect on 1 - F(Delay)                                                                                 .8
                                                         .5




                                                                                                                                          Control Group F(Delay)
                                                       .25                                                                           .6


                                                         0
                                                                                                                                     .4

                                                       -.25

                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                        -.5


                                                       -.75                                                                          0
                                                               0            30     60      90     120    150    180     210    240
                                                                         Delay Between Delivery and Document Submission (days)


               Panel B: Delay Between Document Submission and Approval
                                                              .025                                                                   1


                                                                    0
                    Treatment Effect on 1 - F(Delay)




                                                                                                                                     .8



                                                                                                                                          Control Group F(Delay)
                                                              -.025

                                                                                                                                     .6
                                                               -.05


                                                              -.075
                                                                                                                                     .4

                                                                   -.1
                                                                                                                                     .2
                                                              -.125


                                                               -.15                                                                  0
                                                                          0    10   20   30   40   50   60    70   80    90 100
                                                                           Delay Between Document Submission and Approval (days)


Notes: The figure decomposes the effects of the autonomy treatment on the delay between a purchased
item's delivery and the approval of the purchase by the Accountant General (AG) into the delay between
the item's delivery and the submission of the documents for approval (Panel A) and the delay between the
document's submission and their approval by the AG (Panel B). The estimates come from a series of seem-
ingly unrelated distributional regressions of the probability of delay of at least j days in year 2 normalized
by the probability of a delay of at least j days in the control group in year 1 on treatment dummies, strata
fixed effects s and good fixed effects g :

                                                         1 delayigo  j                               3
                                                                                            =+           k Treatmentk
                                                                                                                    o + s + g + igo
                   P (delay  j |Control, Year1)
                                                                                                   k=1

the panel also shows the CDF of delays in the control group in year 1 for reference.
                                                                                                55
                                F IGURE A.10: VARIATION IN J UNE A PPROVAL R ATES

                                                  Panel A: High and Low Approval Rate Districts

                                                           .6
                                                  Share of Purchases
                                                   .2      0     .4




                                                               2014m7        2014m10        2015m1        2015m4         2015m7
                                                                                             Month

                                                                                Low June Share         High June Share


                                   Panel B: Sources of Variation in June Approval Rates
                                 1




                                                                                                                           45o line
                                             .8
                  Share of Approvals in June
                         .4       .6
                                 .2
                                 0




                                                  0                     .2            .4             .6             .8            1
                                                                                  Share of Purchases in June


Notes: The figure shows the variation in our proxy for AG type, the share of approvals done in June.
Panel A compares the approval rates in districts with high (above median) and low (below median) shares
of transactions approved in June. Panel B shows the variation across districts' AG offices in the share of
transactions made in June (the last month of the fiscal year) and the share of transactions approved in June
(our proxy for the misalignment of the AG). Both aggregates are calculated in the control group in year 1.




                                                                                           56
F IGURE A.11: D ICE S CORES                                          AS A      P ROXY      FOR     PO T YPE    DO NOT         P REDICT Y EAR 1
P RICES

                                                              Panel A: Distribution of Dice Scores


                      .04
                      .03
                      .02
                      .01
                      0




                                                        125              150             175           200              225
                                                                                     Dice Score

                                                               Theoretical Density            Data             Kernel Density


                                                  Panel B: Dice Scores do not Predict Year 1 Prices
                                   .1       .05
                     Average Residual Price
                      -.05       0 -.1




                                                  125                  150               175             200                  225
                                                                                      Dice Score


Notes: The figure shows that the dice scores in the lab in the field measure of dishonesty studied in Fis-
chbacher & Föllmi-Heusi (2013) and Hanna & Wang (2017) are a poor proxy for PO type in our setting. The
dice scores come from a game in which subjects privately roll a die 42 times and report each roll. In each
roll they are free to report the number either on the top or the bottom of the die. Subjects play against each
other and those achieving the highest scores win prizes. The dashed line in panel A shows the theoretical
distribution of the total scores if a fair die is rolled 42 times. The histogram and the solid line (kernel density)
show the totals achieved by our subjects. Panel B shows a semi-parametric regression of log unit prices in
year 1 in the control group and the autonomy group on controls and the dice scores, showing that the dice
scores do not predict prices in year 1. Together, the findings in panel A and B suggest that while there is
significant variation in the dice scores in our sample, it is not predictive of procurement performance and
hence is a poor proxy for PO type in our setting.
                                                                                      57
         TABLE A.1: U NIVERSE OF G ENERIC G OODS A CCOUNTING C ODES

Code      Category                    Description

                          Panel A: A03 Operating Expenses

A03004                                Furnace Oil - Non Operational
          Other
A03070                                Others

A03170    Fees                        Others

A03204                                Electronic Communication
A03205                                Courier And Pilot Service
          Communication
A03206                                Photography Charges
A03270                                Others

A03304                                Hot And Cold Weather
A03305    Utilities                   POL For Generator
A03370                                Others

A03401                                Charges
A03405                                Rent Other Than Building
A03408    Occupancy Costs             Rent Of Machine & Equipment
A03410                                Security
A03470                                Others

A03501                                Machinery And Equipment
A03502                                Buildings
A03503                                Motor Vehicles
          Operating Leases
A03504                                Computers
A03506                                Medical Machinery And Technical Equipment
A03570                                Others

A03901                                Stationery
A03902                                Printing And Publication
A03904                                Hire Of Vehicles
A03905                                Newspapers Periodicals And Books
A03907                                Advertising & Publicity
A03919                                Payments To Others For Service Rendered
A03921                                Unforeseen Exp. For Disaster Preparedness

          General                                             Continued on next page


                                        58
                      Table A.1 ­ Continued from previous page
Code     Category                     Description

A03927                                Purchase Of Drug And Medicines
A03933                                Service Charges
A03940                                Unforeseen Expenditure
A03942                                Cost Of Other Stores
A03955                                Computer Stationary
A03970                                Others
A03971                                Cost Of State Trading Medicines
A03972                                Expenditure On Diet For Patient
A03978                                Free Text Books

                           Panel B: A09 Physical Assets

A09105                               Transport
A09107                               Furniture And Fixtures
         Purchase of Physical Assets
A09108                               Livestock
A09170                               Others

A09204   Computer Accessories         License Fee For Software

A09302                                Fertilizer
A09303   Commodity Purchases          Coal
A09370                                Others

A09401                                Medical Stores
A09402                                Newsprint
A09403                                Tractors
A09404                                Medical And Laboratory Equipment
A09405                                Workshop Equipment
A09406                                Storage And Carrying Receptacles
A09407                                Specific Consumables
A09408   Other Stores and Stock       Generic Consumables
A09409                                Medical Stocks
A09410                                Life Saving Medical Supplies
A09411                                General Utility Chemicals
A09412                                Specific Utility Chemicals
A09413                                Drapery Fabrics Clothing And Allied Materials
                                                                 Continued on next page

                                        59
                      Table A.1 ­ Continued from previous page
Code     Category                     Description

A09414                                Insecticides
A09470                                Others

A09501                                Transport
A09502   Transport                    Diplomatic Cars
A09503                                Others

A09601                                Plant And Machinery
A09602                                Cold Storage Equipment
         Plant & Machinery
A09603                                Signalling System
A09604                                Railways Rolling Stock

A09701                                Furniture And Fixtures
         Furniture & Fixtures
A09702                                Unkempt Furnishings

A09801                                Livestock
A09802                                Purchase Of Other Assets - Others
         Livestock
A09803                                Meters & Services Cables
A09899                                Others

                      Panel C: A13 Repairs and Maintenance

A13101                                Machinery And Equipment
         Machinery & Equipment
A13199                                Others

A13201   Furniture & Fixture          Furniture And Fixture

A13370   Buildings & Structure        Others

A13470   Irrigation                   Others

A13570   Embankment & Drainage        Others

A13701                                Hardware
A13702   Computer Equipment           Software
A13703                                I.T. Equipment

A13920   Telecommunication            Others




                                        60
                  TABLE A.2: P ROJECT T IMELINE

Year 1: July 2014 ­ June 2015
  06/14      Cost Centers allocated to treatment arms
  07­08/14   Trainings on POPS and treatment brochures
  08­09/14   Follow-up trainings on POPS
  02/15      Performance Evaluation Committee midline meeting
  05­06/15   AG checklist rolled out
Year 2: July 2015 ­ June 2016
  07­10/15   Refresher trainings on treatments and POPS
  10/15      Higher cash balance rolled out
  04/16      Performance Evaluation Committee midline meeting
  06/16      Experiment ends
Post-Experiment
  08-09/16   Endline survey part 1 & Missing data collection
  02/17      Performance Evaluation Committee endline meeting
  02­03/17   Endline survey part 2




                                61
                                       TABLE A.3: D IFFERENCE IN D IFFERENCES T REATMENT E FFECTS

                                                                 Variety                                 Unit Price
                                                       (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)        (6)          (7)      (8)
                       Autonomy × Year 2              -0.009      0.015     -0.013    -0.128    -0.130    -0.122       -0.132   -0.127
                                                     (0.023)     (0.029)   (0.012)   (0.047)   (0.043)    (0.043)     (0.045)   (0.047)
                                                     [0.720]     [0.564]   [0.283]   [0.010]   [0.003]    [0.007]     [0.004]   [0.003]
                       Both × Year 2                  0.019       0.049     0.006     -0.098    -0.117     -0.112      -0.102   -0.099
                                                     (0.027)     (0.033)   (0.012)   (0.050)   (0.042)    (0.043)     (0.045)   (0.049)
                                                     [0.505]     [0.131]   [0.608]   [0.045]   [0.005]    [0.016]     [0.025]   [0.045]

                       Item Type Control             Scalar      Coarse      ML      None      Attribs    Scalar      Coarse      ML
                       p(All = 0)                     0.736       0.478     0.408     0.053     0.008      0.021       0.031     0.048




62
                       p(Autonomy = Both)             0.238       0.270     0.097    0.542      0.741     0.831        0.535    0.578
                       Observations                  21,183      21,183    21,182    21,183    21,183     21,183      21,183    21,182
     Notes: The table shows difference in differences estimates of the treatment effect of the introduction of the autonomy treatment in year 2 of the
     experiment. The estimates in columns 1­3 are of regressions of the form
                                                      3
                                        yigto =  +         k Treatmentk
                                                                      o × Year2t + Xigto  + g qigto + g + t + o + igto
                                                     k=1

     where yigto is the outcome of interest. In columns 1­3 it is the scalar (column 1), coarse (column 2) or machine learning (column 3) measure of
     good variety, while in columns 4­8 it is the log unit price. Treatmentko indicates the three treatment groups (though we only report coefficients for
     the autonomy and both treatments since the incentives treatment was already in place in year 1); Year2t indicates purchases in year 2; Xigto are
     purchase-level controls; qigto is the quantity purchased; g , t and o are good-, year- and office- fixed effects, respectively; and igto are residuals
     clustered by office. Column 5 controls for the full vector of item attributes, column 6 for the scalar item variety measure, column 7 for the coarse
     item variety measure, and column 8 uses the machine learning measure of item variety. Below each coefficient we report standard errors clustered
     by office in parentheses and the p-values from randomization inference on the hypothesis that the treatment effect is zero for all offices.
                                                TABLE A.4: D YNAMIC T REATMENT E FFECTS ON P RICES PAID

                                                    Variety                                                                                   Unit Price
                               (1)      (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)      (13)      (14)      (15)      (16)      (17)      (18)
      Autonomy               -0.028 -0.034 -0.037            -0.034    -0.056    -0.053   -0.148    -0.155    -0.159     -0.149    -0.139    -0.150   -0.121    -0.127    -0.129    -0.145    -0.143    -0.151
                             (0.042) (0.043) (0.044)        (0.041)   (0.037)   (0.039)   (0.057)   (0.053)   (0.055)   (0.050)   (0.049)   (0.051)   (0.048)   (0.046)   (0.048)   (0.049)   (0.045)   (0.047)
                             [0.783] [0.662] [0.700]        [0.545]   [0.308]   [0.395]   [0.130]   [0.075]   [0.108]   [0.048]   [0.042]   [0.048]   [0.049]   [0.020]   [0.035]   [0.062]   [0.033]   [0.046]
      Incentives             -0.052 -0.036 -0.051            -0.023    -0.023    -0.031   -0.078    -0.078    -0.088     -0.038    -0.037    -0.039   -0.013    -0.038    -0.027    -0.050    -0.052    -0.055
                             (0.046) (0.043) (0.045)        (0.037)   (0.035)   (0.038)   (0.073)   (0.052)   (0.064)   (0.055)   (0.042)   (0.049)   (0.077)   (0.051)   (0.064)   (0.064)   (0.047)   (0.056)
                             [0.622] [0.706] [0.641]        [0.596]   [0.612]   [0.539]   [0.510]   [0.500]   [0.534]   [0.622]   [0.591]   [0.640]   [0.860]   [0.500]   [0.684]   [0.611]   [0.579]   [0.635]
      Both                   -0.063 -0.033 -0.054            0.075     0.069     0.073    -0.170    -0.164    -0.178     -0.129    -0.140    -0.142   -0.080    -0.079    -0.080    -0.184    -0.176    -0.190
                             (0.041) (0.046) (0.044)        (0.045)   (0.043)   (0.047)   (0.057)   (0.053)   (0.055)   (0.043)   (0.044)   (0.044)   (0.051)   (0.049)   (0.051)   (0.056)   (0.053)   (0.054)
                             [0.436] [0.730] [0.594]        [0.296]   [0.351]   [0.375]   [0.083]   [0.067]   [0.063]   [0.046]   [0.021]   [0.030]   [0.171]   [0.158]   [0.183]   [0.039]   [0.025]   [0.030]
      Autonomy × Time         0.078              0.024       0.078               -0.034    0.113               0.045     0.113               0.102     0.072               0.022     0.113               0.079
                             (0.055)            (0.086)     (0.056)             (0.090)   (0.070)             (0.128)   (0.059)             (0.095)   (0.061)             (0.100)   (0.061)             (0.114)
                             [0.654]            [0.856]     [0.423]             [0.699]   [0.513]             [0.740]   [0.317]             [0.362]   [0.333]             [0.833]   [0.414]             [0.520]
      Incentives × Time       0.105              0.113       0.086               0.054     0.112               0.071     0.024               0.018    -0.015              -0.078     0.054               0.029
                             (0.057)            (0.089)     (0.050)             (0.072)   (0.103)             (0.165)   (0.075)             (0.128)   (0.111)             (0.177)   (0.089)             (0.150)
                             [0.523]            [0.349]     [0.207]             [0.434]   [0.639]             [0.664]   [0.844]             [0.905]   [0.897]             [0.716]   [0.777]             [0.853]
      Both × Times            0.179              0.217       -0.029              -0.042    0.180               0.142     0.084               0.026     0.016               0.014     0.176               0.147
                             (0.056)            (0.104)     (0.070)             (0.077)   (0.078)             (0.145)   (0.057)             (0.118)   (0.075)             (0.124)   (0.077)             (0.145)
                             [0.096]            [0.093]     [0.795]             [0.588]   [0.377]             [0.417]   [0.493]             [0.836]   [0.842]             [0.917]   [0.289]             [0.401]
      Autonomy × Order                  0.095   0.075                  0.124     0.154               0.131   0.093                 0.102     0.014               0.088   0.069                 0.115     0.047
                                       (0.062) (0.097)                (0.056)   (0.095)             (0.073) (0.138)               (0.066)   (0.106)             (0.066) (0.111)               (0.064)   (0.122)




63
                                       [0.497] [0.412]                [0.179]   [0.135]             [0.613] [0.615]               [0.467]   [0.905]             [0.342] [0.593]               [0.513]   [0.741]
      Incentives × Order                0.079   -0.012                 0.092     0.048               0.118   0.061                 0.022     0.008               0.030   0.092                 0.059     0.036
                                       (0.055) (0.087)                (0.048)   (0.072)             (0.070) (0.131)               (0.056)   (0.109)             (0.069) (0.134)               (0.060)   (0.121)
                                       [0.619] [0.874]                [0.203]   [0.578]             [0.696] [0.742]               [0.927]   [0.942]             [0.747] [0.611]               [0.848]   [0.803]
      Both × Order                      0.128 -0.056                   -0.019    0.016               0.173   0.053                 0.105     0.083               0.014   0.002                 0.165     0.041
                                       (0.066) (0.118)                (0.067)   (0.062)             (0.071) (0.143)               (0.061)   (0.129)             (0.073) (0.124)               (0.070)   (0.142)
                                       [0.439] [0.626]                [0.924]   [0.853]             [0.386] [0.738]               [0.422]   [0.566]             [0.885] [0.987]               [0.237]   [0.766]
      Item Variety Control   Scalar    Scalar   Scalar      Coarse Coarse       Coarse    None      None      None      Attribs   Attribs   Attribs   Scalar    Scalar    Scalar    Coarse    Coarse    Coarse
      p(All = 0)              0.463     0.833    0.687       0.292  0.160        0.321     0.499     0.501     0.703     0.275     0.251     0.500     0.340     0.276     0.560     0.268     0.210     0.430
      Observations           11,771    11,771   11,771      11,771 11,771       11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771    11,771

     Notes: The table shows estimates of dynamic treatment effects on prices paid and varieties purchased. The estimates are from regressions of the form
                                                        3
                                                                                       k
                                       yigto =  +            k Treatmentk
                                                                        o + k Treatmento × Timeito + Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + igto
                                                    k=1

     where Treatmentk    o are dummies for office o being in treatment k ; Timeito is a measures of time, calendar time (scaled to be 0 at the beginning of
     the fiscal year and 1 at the end of the year) and/or the order of the purchase made by the office (scaled to be between 0 and 1); Xigto is a vector of
     controls; qigto is the quantity purchased, s and g are strata and good fixed effects, respectively, and igto are residuals clustered by office. Columns
     1­6 estimate dynamic treatment effects on the variety purchased using the scalar measure (columns 1­3) and coarse measure (columns 4­6) described
     in section 5.1. Columns 7­18 estimate dynamic treatment effects on log unit prices paid, not controlling for the variety purchased (columns 7­9), or
     controlling for the variety purchased using the full vector of good attributes (columns 10­12), the scalar variety measure (13­15), or the coarse variety
     measure (16-18).
         TABLE A.5: H ETEROGENEITY                 OF   T REATMENT E FFECTS BY S HARE OF B UDGET A LLOCATED TO G ENERIC G OODS

                                                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
              Autonomy                                   -0.035     -0.058   -0.044    -0.051    -0.045    -0.035    -0.039    -0.056    -0.033    -0.037    -0.034    -0.048
                                                         (0.080)   (0.064)   (0.064)   (0.068)   (0.071)   (0.049)   (0.051)   (0.057)   (0.079)   (0.055)   (0.058)   (0.064)
                                                         [0.654]   [0.459]   [0.500]   [0.440]   [0.519]   [0.561]   [0.470]   [0.320]   [0.681]   [0.597]   [0.578]   [0.478]
              Incentives                                 -0.004     0.009     0.011     0.029     0.007     0.015     0.018     0.029     0.002     0.015     0.017     0.033
                                                         (0.071)   (0.052)   (0.061)   (0.061)   (0.069)   (0.050)   (0.058)   (0.060)   (0.072)   (0.052)   (0.061)   (0.063)
                                                         [0.964]   [0.901]   [0.876]   [0.654]   [0.905]   [0.833]   [0.761]   [0.644]   [0.976]   [0.845]   [0.812]   [0.612]
              Both                                       -0.021     -0.033   -0.027    -0.024     0.002    -0.005    -0.002     0.006     0.000    -0.009    -0.004     0.004
                                                         (0.067)   (0.053)   (0.053)   (0.065)   (0.069)   (0.054)   (0.056)   (0.067)   (0.071)   (0.055)   (0.056)   (0.069)
                                                         [0.762]   [0.572]   [0.626]   [0.725]   [0.980]   [0.935]   [0.976]   [0.933]   [0.993]   [0.903]   [0.934]   [0.962]
              Autonomy × Generic Budget Share 14­15      -0.089     -0.057   -0.065     -0.055                                           -0.085     0.008    -0.035    -0.048
                                                         (0.113)   (0.089)   (0.093)   (0.098)                                           (0.166)   (0.149)   (0.149)   (0.151)
                                                         [0.405]   [0.577]   [0.477]   [0.540]                                           [0.625]   [0.960]   [0.838]   [0.747]
              Incentives × Generic Budget Share 14­15    -0.027     -0.077   -0.069     -0.098                                            0.067     -0.019    0.005    -0.045
                                                         (0.113)   (0.079)   (0.095)   (0.099)                                           (0.186)   (0.138)   (0.172)   (0.160)
                                                         [0.810]   [0.465]   [0.511]   [0.313]                                           [0.717]   [0.910]   [0.975]   [0.790]
              Both × Generic Budget Share 14­15          -0.089     -0.099   -0.083     -0.114                                            0.061     0.073     0.076     0.082
                                                         (0.102)   (0.080)   (0.082)   (0.100)                                           (0.161)   (0.130)   (0.158)   (0.152)
                                                         [0.348]   [0.324]   [0.322]   [0.243]                                           [0.764]   [0.698]   [0.707]   [0.664]
              Autonomy × Generic Budget Share 15­16                                              -0.072     -0.099   -0.075     -0.048   -0.008     -0.104   -0.050    -0.014
                                                                                                 (0.102)   (0.074)   (0.076)   (0.084)   (0.151)   (0.139)   (0.133)   (0.137)
                                                                                                 [0.448]   [0.288]   [0.354]   [0.567]   [0.963]   [0.517]   [0.730]   [0.921]




64
              Incentives × Generic Budget Share 15­16                                            -0.049     -0.089   -0.083     -0.099   -0.107     -0.070   -0.086    -0.061
                                                                                                 (0.110)   (0.074)   (0.090)   (0.097)   (0.182)   (0.129)   (0.164)   (0.157)
                                                                                                 [0.630]   [0.371]   [0.420]   [0.326]   [0.582]   [0.604]   [0.636]   [0.695]
              Both × Generic Budget Share 15­16                                                  -0.128     -0.149   -0.129     -0.167   -0.186     -0.215   -0.198    -0.244
                                                                                                 (0.105)   (0.083)   (0.085)   (0.103)   (0.168)   (0.138)   (0.167)   (0.158)
                                                                                                 [0.189]   [0.133]   [0.143]   [0.085]   [0.334]   [0.171]   [0.279]   [0.156]
              Item Variety Control                       None      Attribs   Scalar    Coarse    None      Attribs   Scalar    Coarse    None      Attribs   Scalar    Coarse
              p(All Interactions = 0)                     0.327     0.120     0.216     0.183     0.282     0.081     0.149     0.140     0.500     0.232     0.371     0.308
              Observations                               11,666    11,666    11,666    11,666    11,666    11,666    11,666    11,666    11,666    11,666    11,666    11,666

     Notes: The table shows estimates of heterogeneous treatment effects on prices paid and by the share of the office's budget that is allocated to generic
     goods. The estimates are from regressions of the form
                                              3
                                                                             k
                                yigto =  +         k Treatmentk
                                                              o + k Treatmento × BudgShareo + Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + igto
                                             k=1

     where  Treatmentk
                     o    are dummies for office o being in treatment k ; BudgShareo is the share of the office's budget allocated to generic goods (in
     either Fiscal Year 2014­15, the first year of the experiment, or Fiscal Year 2015­16, the second year of the experiment); Xigto is a vector of controls;
     qigto is the quantity purchased, s and g are strata and good fixed effects, respectively, and igto are residuals clustered by office. Columns 1­4
     estimate heterogeneity treatment effects by the office's budget share in Fiscal Year 2014­15, the first year of the experiment. Columns 5­8 estimate
     heterogeneity by the budget share in Fiscal Year 2015­16, the second year of the experiment. Columns 9­12 combine both years. The first column in
     each set does not control for item variety, the second uses all the items' attributes, the third uses the scalar variety measure, and the fourth uses the
     coarse variety measure.
                                               TABLE A.6: B ALANCE OF ATTRITION OF I TEMS

                                                                 All Generics                             Analysis Objects
                                                     (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)

     Incentives                                      0.006      0.003      -0.003     0.005     0.009     0.005      -0.002    0.006
                                                    (0.015)    (0.017)    (0.013)   (0.012)   (0.018)    (0.020)    (0.015)   (0.015)
     Autonomy                                        -0.011     -0.009     -0.009    -0.003    -0.010     0.000      -0.008    -0.001
                                                    (0.016)    (0.016)    (0.013)   (0.012)   (0.018)    (0.019)    (0.015)   (0.015)
     Both                                           -0.038      -0.013    -0.017     -0.001   -0.041      -0.013     -0.020    -0.002
                                                    (0.018)    (0.018)    (0.014)   (0.013)   (0.020)    (0.020)    (0.016)   (0.017)
     Assets: Fertilizer                              0.000      0.000      0.000      0.000
                                                       (.)        (.)        (.)        (.)
     Assets: General Utility Chemicals               -0.061    -0.108      0.019     -0.014
65




                                                    (0.053)    (0.053)    (0.022)   (0.019)
     Assets: Insecticides                            0.111    -0.174     -0.019      -0.011
                                                    (0.067)    (0.049)    (0.007)   (0.006)
     Assets: Lab Equipment                         -0.263     -0.422     0.069       0.066
                                                    (0.055)    (0.046)    (0.026)   (0.029)
     Assets: Other Commodity                         0.073      -0.053     -0.019   -0.020     0.000      0.000      0.000     0.000
                                                    (0.093)    (0.068)    (0.012)   (0.009)      (.)        (.)        (.)       (.)
     Assets: Other Stocks and Stores                 -0.068     -0.188     0.044      0.009
                                                    (0.138)    (0.150)    (0.036)   (0.015)
     Assets: Purchase of Furniture & Fixture         -0.108   -0.248      0.047     0.104       -0.167     -0.132   0.081     0.168
                                                    (0.067)    (0.066)    (0.019)   (0.021)    (0.114)    (0.097)   (0.020)   (0.031)
     Assets: Purchase of Plant & Machinery         -0.273     -0.420     0.079        0.039   -0.301     -0.341     0.122     0.078
                                                 (0.071)     (0.079)   (0.021)    (0.025)   (0.111)    (0.094)     (0.022)   (0.027)
     Assets: Purchase of Transport             -0.288      -0.442        0.032   0.087
                                                 (0.061)     (0.051)   (0.029)    (0.020)
     Assets: Specific Utility Chemicals           -0.055   -0.282        0.008    0.037      -0.120     -0.199      0.031    0.077
                                                 (0.084)     (0.073)   (0.010)    (0.012)   (0.123)     (0.092)    (0.017)   (0.024)
     OpEx: Advertising                           -0.124    -0.314      0.217     0.238       -0.203    -0.266      0.232     0.254
                                                 (0.058)     (0.046)   (0.023)    (0.023)   (0.105)     (0.073)    (0.026)   (0.025)
     OpEx: Courier                             -0.455      -0.735       -0.055   -0.139
                                                 (0.090)     (0.062)   (0.049)    (0.042)
     OpEx: Electricity                           0.138      -0.135     0.495     0.437       0.055      -0.090     0.506     0.450
                                                 (0.061)     (0.046)   (0.027)    (0.025)   (0.105)    (0.073)     (0.027)   (0.025)
     OpEx: Elextronic Communication            -0.382      -0.678       -0.000    -0.088
66




                                                 (0.092)     (0.101)   (0.037)    (0.039)
     OpEx: Medicines                           -0.196      -0.422      0.134     0.119
                                                 (0.055)     (0.045)   (0.014)    (0.015)
     OpEx: Newspapers                            0.147     -0.156      0.289     0.309        0.070       -0.107   0.301     0.324
                                                 (0.064)     (0.046)   (0.022)    (0.024)    (0.107)     (0.073)   (0.022)   (0.024)
     OpEx: Other                                  0.009    -0.256      0.197     0.177        -0.065    -0.209     0.214     0.194
                                                 (0.055)     (0.043)   (0.015)    (0.016)    (0.105)     (0.072)   (0.018)   (0.018)
     OpEx: Other Stores                         -0.148     -0.366      0.070     0.058       -0.212    -0.310      0.093     0.080
                                                 (0.055)     (0.043)   (0.015)    (0.013)    (0.104)     (0.072)   (0.016)   (0.015)
     OpEx: Other Stores: Computer/Stationery      0.090     -0.167     0.367     0.371        0.014       -0.118   0.385     0.388
                                                 (0.070)     (0.061)   (0.050)    (0.048)    (0.112)     (0.084)   (0.049)   (0.047)
     OpEx: Other Utilities                     -0.245      -0.420       0.071      0.137    -0.339         0.123   0.066     0.590
                                                 (0.058)     (0.103)   (0.033)    (0.082)    (0.104)     (0.110)   (0.025)   (0.133)
     OpEx: Payments for Services      -0.298      -0.574      0.058       -0.009
                                        (0.054)     (0.043)   (0.015)    (0.015)
     OpEx: Printing                      -0.044   -0.270      0.173      0.125      -0.120    -0.219     0.190     0.143
                                        (0.054)     (0.045)   (0.016)    (0.019)   (0.104)     (0.073)   (0.019)   (0.020)
     OpEx: Rent not on Building       -0.437      -0.604        0.003      0.020
                                        (0.064)     (0.069)   (0.021)    (0.024)
     OpEx: Rent of Machine            -0.443      -0.625       -0.007      0.023
                                        (0.065)     (0.069)   (0.021)    (0.023)
     OpEx: Stationery                    0.076     -0.138     0.352      0.372       0.002     -0.091    0.369     0.389
                                        (0.056)     (0.042)   (0.018)    (0.015)   (0.104)    (0.072)    (0.019)   (0.020)
     Repairs: Computer Hardware         -0.155    -0.304      0.107      0.116      -0.237    -0.249     0.124     0.136
                                        (0.079)     (0.086)   (0.041)    (0.045)   (0.121)    (0.100)    (0.041)   (0.045)
67




     Repairs: Computer Software       -0.328      -0.538       0.042      -0.019
                                        (0.058)     (0.088)   (0.021)    (0.017)
     Repairs: Furniture & Fixtures    -0.380      -0.651       -0.006   -0.077     -0.459     -0.606      0.009    -0.063
                                        (0.055)     (0.043)   (0.015)    (0.015)    (0.103)    (0.072)   (0.015)    (0.016)
     Repairs: IT Equipment               -0.220      -0.053    0.085     0.199       -0.290     0.018     0.103     0.230
                                        (0.123)     (0.167)   (0.066)    (0.040)    (0.153)    (0.170)   (0.068)    (0.040)
     Repairs: Machinery & Equipment   -0.321      -0.569       0.020      -0.026   -0.399     -0.521     0.035       -0.009
                                        (0.055)     (0.044)   (0.016)    (0.015)    (0.104)    (0.072)   (0.016)    (0.016)
     Repairs: Other Building           -0.142     -0.485      0.150       0.058
                                        (0.053)     (0.052)   (0.012)    (0.026)
     Date                                -0.007   -0.001       0.004    -0.000      -0.005    -0.001      0.006    -0.000
                                        (0.006)     (0.000)   (0.006)    (0.000)   (0.007)     (0.000)   (0.007)    (0.000)
     Date2                               0.000     0.000       -0.000    0.000       0.000     0.000      -0.000    0.000
                                    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
     log Amount                    -0.121     -0.132     -0.108     -0.144     -0.082     -0.095     -0.101     -0.128
                                    (0.028)    (0.020)    (0.023)    (0.024)    (0.027)    (0.032)    (0.025)    (0.031)
     log(Amount)2                  0.004       0.005     0.004       0.005       0.002      0.002     0.004      0.004
                                    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.002)
     Assets: Generic Consumables              -0.400                 0.131
                                               (0.051)               (0.019)
     Constant                       69.447    13.868     -41.798    6.610       47.408    15.965      -60.546   7.598
                                   (61.980)    (1.333)   (63.492)    (0.944)   (69.733)    (1.531)   (66.118)   (1.075)

     Observations                   23,423     22,498     23,423     22,498    17,361      16,553     17,361     16,553
     R2                              0.33       0.33       0.28       0.32      0.25        0.24       0.24       0.27
     Year                           Year 1     Year 2     Year 1     Year 2    Year 1      Year 2     Year 1     Year 2
68




     Reporting Share                POPS       POPS      Analysis   Analysis   POPS        POPS      Analysis   Analysis
TABLE A.7: R OBUSTNESS OF P RICE E FFECTS                   TO   I NCLUDING POPS O BSERVATIONS
W ITH I NSUFFICIENT ATTRIBUTES

                                                    (1)          (2)      (3)        (4)
                                                    DiD          DiD     Year 2     Year 2
               Autonomy                                                  -0.063     -0.050
                                                                         (0.044)   (0.031)
                                                                         [0.209]   [0.165]
               Incentives                                                -0.000     0.004
                                                                         (0.042)   (0.029)
                                                                         [0.993]   [0.909]
               Both                                                      -0.036     -0.047
                                                                         (0.042)   (0.031)
                                                                         [0.466]   [0.193]
               Autonomy × Year 2                   -0.078     -0.071
                                                  (0.050)    (0.040)
                                                  [0.102]    [0.046]
               Both × Year 2                       -0.082     -0.084
                                                  (0.051)    (0.041)
                                                  [0.075]    [0.028]
               Year 2                             -0.001      0.019
                                                  (0.042)    (0.032)

               Item Variety Control                None      Attribs     None      Attribs
               p(All = 0)                          0.095      0.038      0.545      0.262
               p(Autonomy = Incentives)                                  0.212      0.112
               p(Autonomy = Both)                  0.101         0.747   0.605      0.921
               p(Incentives = Both)                                      0.441      0.133
               Observations                        25,254     25,254     12,933    12,933
Notes: The table shows estimates of the treatment effects of the experiments on log unit prices. The sample
used extends our main analysis sample to also include observations from POPS that were dropped because
they contained insufficient detail on the attributes of the items being purchased. Column 1 presents results
from running our difference in difference specification to estimate the impacts of the autonomy and com-
bined treatments. These results are comparable to those in column 1 of table A.3. Column 2 presents results
from our baseline specification using only data from year 2 of the experiment. These results are comparable
to those in column 3 of table 2.




                                                    69
                          TABLE A.8: H ETEROGENEITY               OF     T REATMENT E FFECTS ON P RICES BY M ONITOR T YPE

                                                         (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)           (8)       (9)      (10)      (11)      (12)
       Autonomy                                         0.038     -0.026    0.007     0.034    -0.016     -0.029   -0.027        -0.010     0.042    -0.019     0.011     0.038
                                                       (0.103)   (0.083)   (0.083)   (0.092)   (0.066)   (0.059)   (0.056)       (0.061)   (0.102)   (0.083)   (0.083)   (0.092)
                                                       [0.747]   [0.805]   [0.949]   [0.763]   [0.818]   [0.633]   [0.652]       [0.878]   [0.707]   [0.855]   [0.917]   [0.715]
       Incentives                                      -0.077     -0.083   -0.115     -0.053   -0.008     -0.061   -0.064        -0.016    -0.064    -0.083    -0.112    -0.045
                                                       (0.102)   (0.080)   (0.086)   (0.090)   (0.071)   (0.058)   (0.063)       (0.065)   (0.102)   (0.080)   (0.085)   (0.089)
                                                       [0.506]   [0.370]   [0.248]   [0.620]   [0.935]   [0.340]   [0.348]       [0.838]   [0.572]   [0.380]   [0.257]   [0.661]
       Both                                             0.116     -0.014    0.064     0.073     0.014     -0.052   -0.020        -0.022     0.112    -0.015     0.060     0.067
                                                       (0.101)   (0.084)   (0.084)   (0.098)   (0.079)   (0.068)   (0.067)       (0.076)   (0.103)   (0.086)   (0.085)   (0.097)
                                                       [0.356]   [0.907]   [0.546]   [0.541]   [0.869]   [0.498]   [0.799]       [0.786]   [0.376]   [0.900]   [0.554]   [0.576]
       Autonomy × June Approval Share                  -0.412     -0.224   -0.302     -0.382                                               -0.316     -0.056   -0.210     -0.261
                                                       (0.264)   (0.210)   (0.216)   (0.231)                                               (0.339)   (0.269)   (0.275)   (0.297)
                                                       [0.183]   [0.382]   [0.230]   [0.170]                                               [0.431]   [0.885]   [0.521]   [0.476]
       Incentives × June Approval Share                 0.122     0.115     0.224     0.046                                                 0.339     0.132     0.287     0.186
                                                       (0.256)   (0.208)   (0.225)   (0.228)                                               (0.320)   (0.272)   (0.307)   (0.296)
                                                       [0.693]   [0.666]   [0.390]   [0.873]                                               [0.403]   [0.726]   [0.441]   [0.617]
       Both × June Approval Share                      -0.494     -0.191   -0.364     -0.421                                               -0.432     -0.165   -0.349     -0.393
                                                       (0.272)   (0.225)   (0.228)   (0.258)                                               (0.317)   (0.273)   (0.269)   (0.313)
                                                       [0.115]   [0.509]   [0.161]   [0.186]                                               [0.292]   [0.644]   [0.298]   [0.321]




70
       Autonomy × June Purchase Share                                                          -0.497     -0.429   -0.390         -0.498   -0.217     -0.380   -0.205     -0.269
                                                                                               (0.347)   (0.294)   (0.283)       (0.308)   (0.446)   (0.373)   (0.358)   (0.396)
                                                                                               [0.180]   [0.173]   [0.203]       [0.123]   [0.640]   [0.367]   [0.640]   [0.546]
       Incentives × June Purchase Share                                                        -0.160     0.078     0.134         -0.129   -0.488     -0.050   -0.144     -0.314
                                                                                               (0.334)   (0.290)   (0.284)       (0.304)   (0.416)   (0.376)   (0.391)   (0.396)
                                                                                               [0.652]   [0.805]   [0.676]       [0.692]   [0.277]   [0.891]   [0.723]   [0.489]
       Both × June Purchase Share                                                              -0.427     -0.181   -0.271         -0.318   -0.108     -0.059   -0.016     -0.026
                                                                                               (0.401)   (0.350)   (0.332)       (0.368)   (0.474)   (0.426)   (0.401)   (0.459)
                                                                                               [0.355]   [0.627]   [0.473]       [0.446]   [0.842]   [0.890]   [0.983]   [0.958]
       Item Variety Control                            None      Attribs   Scalar    Coarse    None      Attribs   Scalar        Coarse    None      Attribs   Scalar    Coarse
       p(All Interactions = 0)                         0.066      0.083    0.040      0.059    0.277      0.034    0.046          0.134    0.215      0.134    0.094      0.188
       p(Approval Interaction Autonomy = Incentives)   0.111      0.155    0.069      0.137                                                 0.174     0.571     0.209     0.284
       p(Purchase Interaction Autonomy = Incentives)                                            0.286     0.038     0.068         0.172     0.534     0.361     0.904     0.899
       Observations                                    10,957    10,957    10,957    10,957    10,957    10,957    10,957        10,957    10,957    10,957    10,957    10,957

     Notes: The table shows heterogeneity of treatment effects by the degree of misalignment of the district's accountant general. We estimate treatment
                                                                                                                             3                    k
     effect heterogeneity by interacting our proxy for AG type       ^ s with treatment dummies pigto =  + k=1 k Treatmentk        o + k Treatmento × ^s +
     Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + igto . Columns (1)­(4) use our preferred proxy for AG type: the degree to which purchase approvals are bunched at
     the end of the fiscal year in June 2015 (year 1 of the project). Columns (5)­(8) use the share of purchases occurring in the June; and columns (9)­(12)
     combines the two.
TABLE A.9: H ETEROGENEITY            OF   T REATMENT E FFECTS        ON    I TEM VARIETY     BY   M ONI -
TOR T YPE

                                                                   (1)        (2)
                      Incentives                                  0.030      -0.019
                                                                (0.037)     (0.044)
                      Autonomy                                    0.025      -0.023
                                                                (0.042)     (0.052)
                      Both                                        0.059     0.099**
                                                                (0.037)     (0.047)
                      Incentives × District June Share           -0.056      0.129
                                                                (0.083)     (0.102)
                      Autonomy × District June Share             -0.085      0.097
                                                                (0.096)     (0.128)
                      Both × District June Share                -0.145*      -0.094
                                                                (0.080)     (0.103)
                      Item Type Measure                         Scalar      Coarse
                      Observations                              11666       11666

    Notes: The table shows heterogeneity of the treatment effects on the variety of the items purchased by
the degree of misalignment of the district's accountant general. We interact our proxy for the AG type  ^s
                                                                   3
with treatment dummies in the following specification: vigto = +   k=1    k Treatmentk              k
                                                                                     o + k Treatmento × ^s +
Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + igto .




                                                   71
      TABLE A.10: H ETEROGENEITY OF E FFECTS ON D EMAND BY M ONITOR T YPE
                                       Linear Term                       AG June Share Interaction         Linear    Interactions
       Item
                           Autonomy      Incentives     Both          Autonomy Incentives       Both       All = 0      All = 0
                              241.1         633.4        -931.9           -607.1     -1408.8    2552.5      2.24        2.67
       Toner
                            (636.54)      (640.13)     (629.52)        (1506.86)   (1495.52)   (1471.08)   [0.081]     [0.046]
                               -10.7         -69.1        -17.7            11.7        78.8        13.8     0.87        0.21
       Ice Block
                             (46.36)       (46.62)      (45.85)         (109.75)    (108.92)    (107.14)   [0.456]     [0.886]
                               -25.4          -3.0         -2.5            32.4        21.0       -33.2     0.37        0.40
       Towel
                             (27.47)       (27.62)      (27.16)          (65.02)     (64.53)     (63.47)   [0.771]     [0.753]
                                -9.6         -83.3        143.9           -840.7      240.4       587.5     0.01        0.04
       Soap/Detergent
                           (1720.57)     (1730.25)    (1701.57)        (4073.03)   (4042.38)   (3976.30)   [0.999]     [0.987]
                               -32.3          22.1       -47.1              48.0       -10.8       80.1     3.10        1.04
       Duster
                             (25.39)       (25.53)      (25.11)          (60.11)     (59.66)     (58.68)   [0.026]     [0.375]
                                22.8        39.8          -17.0            -64.1       -47.1       25.3     3.18        1.54
       Wiper
                             (19.94)       (20.05)      (19.72)          (47.21)     (46.85)     (46.09)   [0.023]     [0.201]
                                66.0        -78.0         -14.2           -160.7     231.6         -9.9     3.61        4.88
       Lock
                             (44.00)       (44.25)      (43.52)         (104.17)    (103.39)    (101.70)   [0.013]     [0.002]
                                79.6        111.3         -14.9            -66.2       -94.1       90.5     0.53        0.17
       Pen
                            (119.24)      (119.91)     (117.93)         (282.28)    (280.16)    (275.58)   [0.663]     [0.915]
                              43.0            -9.6      -50.8              -76.0        11.5     113.7      5.04        3.69
       Envelope
                             (24.48)       (24.62)      (24.21)          (57.95)     (57.51)     (56.57)   [0.002]     [0.011]
                              510.9         -604.3       -639.1           -953.5    2247.6       1298.8     3.59        4.27
       Printer Paper
                            (410.18)      (412.49)     (405.65)         (971.01)    (963.70)    (947.95)   [0.013]     [0.005]
                               -54.5         -90.5       -264.1           -424.0       67.9       875.1     0.04        0.18
       Register
                            (782.50)      (786.91)     (773.87)        (1852.39)   (1838.45)   (1808.40)   [0.988]     [0.913]
                                22.1           2.6          9.9          -90.3         -30.5      -61.1     0.66        1.82
       Stapler
                             (17.33)       (17.43)      (17.14)          (41.02)     (40.71)     (40.05)   [0.578]     [0.141]
                                 6.5          -4.6          1.4            -21.2       13.8        -0.6     1.08        1.89
       Staples
                              (6.28)        (6.32)       (6.21)          (14.87)     (14.76)     (14.52)   [0.357]     [0.129]
                                11.2          -5.6         -4.0            -55.8       -15.7      -23.9     0.37        0.64
       Calculator
                             (17.55)       (17.65)      (17.35)          (41.54)     (41.23)     (40.55)   [0.773]     [0.590]
                                34.7          38.9         -0.3            -18.4      -179.9       29.2     0.30        1.03
       File Cover
                             (55.64)       (55.95)      (55.02)         (131.71)    (130.72)    (128.58)   [0.828]     [0.377]
                                 7.4           8.5       -16.4              -4.6        -7.7      39.5      3.11        2.08
       Stamp Pad
                              (9.31)        (9.36)       (9.20)          (22.03)     (21.87)     (21.51)   [0.025]     [0.101]
                            -231.8            15.8         73.6         677.9          108.6       -7.7     3.02        3.13
       Photocopying
                            (109.90)      (110.52)     (108.69)         (260.17)    (258.21)    (253.99)   [0.029]     [0.025]
                                57.3          98.3        -70.2            -33.2       -36.5      272.0     1.02        0.76
       Broom
                            (103.54)      (104.13)     (102.40)         (245.12)    (243.27)    (239.29)   [0.384]     [0.515]
                               -16.2          65.7         45.0            -27.5        -5.3       59.2     0.18        0.03
       Coal
                            (128.20)      (128.92)     (126.78)         (303.48)    (301.19)    (296.27)   [0.912]     [0.993]
                                47.8          35.7         23.3            -71.2       -93.2      -55.0     0.15        0.11
       Newspaper
                             (73.73)       (74.14)      (72.92)         (174.54)    (173.22)    (170.39)   [0.928]     [0.957]
                             165.9         155.8            1.5          -331.2       -173.8       38.1     3.20        1.92
       Pipe
                             (73.21)       (73.62)      (72.40)         (173.30)    (172.00)    (169.19)   [0.022]     [0.124]
                              159.6         -307.4      -381.4            -252.5       700.8     994.7      3.09        2.94
       Light Bulb
                            (206.25)      (207.41)     (203.97)         (488.25)    (484.58)    (476.65)   [0.026]     [0.032]
                                -1.0          -8.7         -4.7            19.6        22.8         5.2     0.34        0.48
       Pencil
                              (9.55)        (9.61)       (9.45)          (22.61)     (22.44)     (22.08)   [0.796]     [0.700]
                               -34.4         -62.7       -102.5            41.8       156.0       308.9     0.42        0.78
       Floor Cleaner
                             (95.50)       (96.04)      (94.44)         (226.07)    (224.37)    (220.70)   [0.737]     [0.505]
                              411.8           -4.7       -231.2           -771.2       68.4       691.8     1.10        0.98
       Sign Board/Banner
                            (364.12)      (366.17)     (360.10)         (861.98)    (855.49)    (841.50)   [0.350]     [0.402]
                             0.99          1.06         0.78             1.05        0.95        0.91       1.37        1.32
       Joint F-Test
                            [0.473]       [0.380]      [0.773]          [0.397]     [0.538]     [0.599]    [0.019]     [0.032]

Notes: The table shows the results of estimating an extended version of equation (4) by multivariate regres-
                                                                  3
sion. Specifically, for each item, we estimate egto = k=1 k Treatmentk                 k
                                                                      o + k Treatmento ×   ^ s +s +t +gto
on data aggregated up to the office × month × good level. To aggregate the data, we weight each purchase
by our scalar measure of item type, which can be interpreted as the price we predict the item would cost
had it been bought in the control group in year 1. For each purchase, demand is eigto = exp (qigto + higto ),
where qigto is the log number of units purchased in purchase i, and higto is the scalar item type measure,
and we sum over all purchases of good g in month t by office o to create egto .
                                                                  72
TABLE A.11: H ETEROGENEITY            OF   T REATMENT E FFECTS       BY   P ROCUREMENT O FFICER
D ICE S CORE

                                               (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
              Autonomy                       0.2791      0.4386     0.3442      0.4123
                                            (0.2820)    (0.2396)   (0.2317)    (0.2589)
                                             [0.396]     [0.134]    [0.213]     [0.180]
              Incentives                    -0.0413      0.2079     0.0963      0.1967
                                            (0.3089)    (0.2457)   (0.2574)    (0.2774)
                                             [0.915]     [0.505]    [0.770]     [0.579]
              Both                          -0.0431      0.2665     0.1409      0.1225
                                            (0.4106)    (0.3199)   (0.3319)    (0.3965)
                                             [0.915]     [0.504]    [0.717]     [0.797]
              Autonomy × Dice Score         -0.0023     -0.0033    -0.0026     -0.0030
                                            (0.0017)    (0.0015)   (0.0014)    (0.0016)
                                             [0.249]     [0.071]    [0.122]     [0.112]
              Incentives × Dice Score        0.0001     -0.0015    -0.0007     -0.0013
                                            (0.0019)    (0.0015)   (0.0016)    (0.0017)
                                             [0.954]     [0.426]    [0.698]     [0.541]
              Both × Dice Score             -0.0003     -0.0022    -0.0013     -0.0013
                                            (0.0025)    (0.0019)   (0.0020)    (0.0024)
                                             [0.918]     [0.336]    [0.579]     [0.648]
              Item Variety Control           None       Attribs     Scalar     Coarse
              p(All Interactions = 0)         0.167      0.056       0.156      0.132
              Observations                   10,283     10,283      10,283     10,283
Notes: The table shows heterogeneity of treatment effects by the degree of misalignment of the procure-
ment officer, as measured by their score in the dice game measure of dishonesty studied in Fischbacher
& Föllmi-Heusi (2013) and Hanna & Wang (2017) and summarized in appendix figure A.11. We esti-
mate treatment effect heterogeneity by interacting our proxy for PO type µ ^o with treatment dummies
pigto =  +  Autonomyo +  Autonomyo × µ     ^o + Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + igto .




                                                  73
TABLE A.12: H ETEROGENEITY OF A UTONOMY T REATMENT E FFECT BY P ROCUREMENT
O FFICER T YPE

                                                     (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)
                  Autonomy                         -0.076      -0.105     -0.080      -0.086
                                                   (0.037)    (0.032)     (0.029)    (0.033)
                                                   [0.087]    [0.003]     [0.014]    [0.025]
                  Autonomy × Year 1 FE             -0.340      -0.050     -0.170      -0.242
                                                   (0.114)    (0.141)     (0.106)    (0.129)
                                                   [0.028]    [0.762]     [0.192]    [0.128]
                  Item Variety Control             None       Attribs     Scalar     Coarse
                  p(All Interactions = 0)          0.018       0.016      0.022       0.025
                  Observations                     5,315       5,315      5,315       5,315
Notes: The table shows heterogeneity of treatment effects by the degree of misalignment of the procurement
officer. Procurement officers are classified by their estimated fixed effects in a regression of log unit prices
pigto on controls Xigto , good-specific quantity controls g , stratum, good, and officer fixed effects, s , g and
µo in data from year 1: pigto = Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + µo + igto . Since the PO fixed effects are estimated in
year 1, when the incentive treatment was already in place, we restrict attention to the autonomy treatment.
We estimate treatment effect heterogeneity by interacting our proxy for PO type µ   ^o with treatment dummies
pigto =  +  Autonomyo +  Autonomyo × µ        ^o + Xigto  + g qigto + s + g + igto .




                                                       74
B    Construction of Item Variety Controls
This appendix describes the methods we used to construct the item variety controls used
throughout the empirical analysis. The idea behind the methods is to use data from the
experiment's control group to construct measures in both treatment and control groups
that allow us to hold constant all the features of the good that can affect its price in the
control group. This poses two challenges. First, the set of attributes of each good may
be large. Of these, only a subset is relevant for prices, and we want to avoid overfitting
the data from the control group, so we want to reduce the dimensionality of the controls
we use. Second, when using the control group data to construct measures of item variety
in the treatment groups, the attributes used as inputs to these measures may not have
common support. There may be attributes that occur in the treatment groups that never
appear in the data from the control group. Our measures will predict how attributes that
occur in the control group affect prices, but will not know how to deal with an attribute
that only ever occurs in the treatment groups.
    Our first three measures address these issues through manual grouping of attributes
and using hedonic regressions to reduce the dimensionality of the measures. We begin by
manually grouping attributes to ensure common support and avoid overfitting. Most of
the attributes we use are categorical and so we group values. For values that occur less
than three times in the control group or only in the treatment group, we either group them
together with similar values (using contextual knowledge and extensive googling to find
similar values) or if similar values are not available, set them to missing. Observations
with all attributes missing after this cleaning are dropped. Ensuring that each group ap-
pears at least three times avoids overfitting, and ensuring that the groups are observed in
both the control and treatment groups ensures common support. These groups then form
the Xigto controls used in the hedonic regressions (1). Table B.13 illustrates the procedure.
The first columns show the attributes in the raw data and the number of categories (for
categorical variables) or the mean and standard deviation (for numerical variables) for
each one. The second set of columns shows the same statistics for the data used for the
hedonic regressions and the main analysis.
    Our fourth, machine learning, measure develops a variant of a random forest algo-
rithm to allow for non-linearities and interactions between attributes that the hedonic
regression 1 rules out and also to perform the grouping of attributes' values in a data-
driven way. For this we do much lighter cleaning of the data only harmonizing spellings.
This can be seen in the third group of columns in table B.13, where the attributes tend to
have a far greater number of categories. We then train a random forest algorithm for each


                                             75
item, averaging 500 trees to form predicted prices. The algorithm is trained only on the
control group's data, so as in the case of the scalar and coarse measures of item variety,
the predicted prices should be interpreted as a prediction of the price of the purchase had
it been conducted by a PO in the control group.
    After training each tree in the control group, the algorithm places each observation
in the treatment groups into its corresponding leaf. It first places all treatment group
observations that only have attributes that are sufficient to place it into a unique leaf in
the tree. Then, for observations that have an attribute that prevents it from being placed
into a leaf, the algorithm selects all leaves the observation could be placed into given
the attributes that can be used, and then for each attribute that cannot be used, replaces
that attribute with the category in the same treatment group with the closest average, but
that does appear in the control group. Once every observation is placed into a leaf, the
average price amongst control group observations in the leaf is then that tree's predicted
price. Averaging the 500 trees gives us our machine learning measure of item variety.




                                            76
                                           TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                      Raw Data                     Regression Data             Machine Learning Data
     Item        Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                    mean (s.d.) /                   mean (s.d.) /
                                                                  # missing                       # missing                        # missing
                                               #categories                      #categories                     #categories

                 Brand                        21 categories         272         8 categories        187        19 categories         156
                 Grade                        26 categories         279        13 categories        175        25 categories         159
                 Type                          8 categories         156         5 categories         54         5 categories          46
     Pencil      With Rubber?                  2 categories         281         2 categories        177         2 categories         164

                 Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      10.81 (14.91)                   10.51 (14.42)                   9.80 (11.31)
                 # Purchasing PBs                           311                             275                              253
                 # Observations                             612                             476                              475
77




                 Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      0.01 (0.02)                     0.01 (0.01)                     0.01 (0.01)
     Ice Block   # Purchasing PBs                           321                             304                              304
                 # Observations                             680                             638                              638

                 Brand                        13 categories         388         4 categories        173        12 categories         152
                 Country of Origin             3 categories         331         2 categories         98         2 categories          98
                 Handle Length                 8 categories         381         5 categories        141         5 categories         141
                 Handle Material               5 categories         304         4 categories         77         4 categories          77
     Wiper
                 Wiper Material                7 categories         314         3 categories         88         3 categories          87

                 Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      271.42 (125.82)                 264.13 (115.92)                 264.13 (115.92)
                 # Purchasing PBs                           401                             296                              296
                 # Observations                             753                             484                              484
                                                                                                                    Continued on next page
                                            TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                       Raw Data                     Regression Data             Machine Learning Data
     Item         Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                    mean (s.d.) /                   mean (s.d.) /
                                                                   # missing                       # missing                       # missing
                                                #categories                      #categories                     #categories

                  Brand & Model                 7 categories         150        12 categories         49        22 categories         44
                  Number of Digits              6 categories         205         4 categories                    4 categories
                  Type                          5 categories         185         4 categories         76         4 categories         77
     Calculator
                  Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      271.42 (125.82)                 796.24 (350.34)                 795.93 (350.05)
                  # Purchasing PBs                           401                             326                             326
                  # Observations                             616                             486                             487

                  Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      0.08 (0.26)                     0.06 (0.02)                     0.06 (0.02)
78




     Coal         # Purchasing PBs                           384                             362                             362
                  # Observations                             685                             650                             650

                  Brand                        19 categories          69         8 categories         59        19 categories         36
                  Size                         27 categories          60         6 categories         26         5 categories         26
     Staples
                  Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      0.14 (0.43)                     0.11 (0.20)                     0.11 (0.20)
                  # Purchasing PBs                           334                             288                             288
                  # Observations                             551                             465                             465
                                                                                                                     Continued on next page
                                           TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                      Raw Data                   Regression Data           Machine Learning Data
     Item        Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                  mean (s.d.) /                 mean (s.d.) /
                                                                # missing                     # missing                     # missing
                                               #categories                    #categories                   #categories

                 Brand & Model                18 categories       508         4 categories      270         9 categories       231
                 Country of Origin             5 categories       384         2 categories      117         2 categories       119
                 Digital?                      2 categories       526         2 categories      245         2 categories       247
                 Fitting Charges?              2 categories       514         2 categories      235         2 categories       237
                 Size                         27 categories        60         6 categories       26         5 categories        26
     Lock
                 Material                      8 categories       512         4 categories      233         4 categories       235
                 Type                         20 categories       440         7 categories      166        13 categories       160
79




                 Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      315.94 (340.11)               282.89 (235.49)               282.56 (235.21)
                 # Purchasing PBs                        404                            318                           319
                 # Observations                          965                            652                           654

                 Brand                        19 categories       262        10 categories       77        18 categories        64
                 Color                         8 categories       281         5 categories       86         6 categories        86
                 Size                         22 categories       317         8 categories      125         8 categories       125
     Stamp Pad   With Ink?                     3 categories       266         2 categories       81         2 categories        81

                 Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      85.92 (50.40)                 82.72 (44.05)                 82.98 (43.92)
                 # Purchasing PBs                        430                            352                           352
                 # Observations                          771                            545                           543
                                                                                                                Continued on next page
                                               TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                          Raw Data                      Regression Data             Machine Learning Data
     Item            Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /                   mean (s.d.) /
                                                                       # missing                       # missing                       # missing
                                                   #categories                       #categories                     #categories

                     Material                      9 categories          261         6 categories         37         7 categories         37
                     Size                         52 categories          437        17 categories        195        18 categories        193
                     Type                          9 categories          343         4 categories        116         4 categories        116
     Duster          With Handle?                  2 categories          435         2 categories        196         2 categories        196

                     Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      66.31 (76.83)                    65.13 (71.31)                   65.13 (71.31)
                     # Purchasing PBs                           386                              290                             290
                     # Observations                             722                              456                             456
80




                     Acid Cleaner                  7 categories          376         4 categories        242         4 categories        235
                     Brand                        38 categories          348        16 categories        258        30 categories        216
                     Environmentally Friendly      2 categories          286         2 categories        168         2 categories        169
                     Make                          6 categories          307         4 categories        180         6 categories        177
     Floor Cleaner   Scented                       2 categories          230         2 categories        116         2 categories        117
                     State                         8 categories          225         3 categories        103         3 categories        104

                     Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      0.27 (0.94)                      0.19 (0.30)                     0.19 (0.30)
                     # Purchasing PBs                           458                              377                             377
                     # Observations                             1162                             945                             946
                                                                                                                         Continued on next page
                                                     TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                                Raw Data                  Regression Data           Machine Learning Data
     Item                  Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                 mean (s.d.) /                 mean (s.d.) /
                                                                         # missing                     # missing                     # missing
                                                         #categories                   #categories                   #categories

                           Brand                        20 categories      399         5 categories      306        18 categories       286
                           With Clip                     2 categories      662         2 categories      258         2 categories       259
                           Country of Origin             6 categories      379         4 categories      265         3 categories       266
                           Cover Material               22 categories      244        11 categories      150        13 categories       151
                           Customized Printing           5 categories      328         4 categories      228         3 categories       229
     File Cover
                           File Type                    28 categories      138        14 categories       61        22 categories        58
                           Size                         27 categories      414         3 categories      290         3 categories       291
81




                           Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      53.11 (95.41)                47.62 (75.07)                 47.56 (75.02)
                           # Purchasing PBs                        391                           312                           313
                           # Observations                          775                           583                           584

                           Frame Type                    7 categories      667         3 categories      586         5 categories       586
                           Material                     11 categories      445         7 categories      391        10 categories       391
                           Number of Colors              6 categories      723          2.8 (1.23)       643          2.8 (1.23)        643
                           Number of Rings              12 categories      692          4.4 (4.05)       1055         4.4 (4.05)       1055
                           Print on Both Sides           3 categories      625         2 categories      550         2 categories       551
                           Area                         85 categories      732        44.2 (355.64)      644        44.2 (355.64)       644
     Sign Board / Banner
                           With Rope                     2 categories      598         2 categories      523         2 categories       523
                           With Stand                    2 categories      598         2 categories      519         2 categories       519
                           With Stick                    2 categories      590         2 categories      511         2 categories       511
                                                                                                                         Continued on next page
                                              TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                         Raw Data                        Regression Data             Machine Learning Data
     Item           Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /
                                                                      # missing                         # missing                         # missing
                                                  #categories                       #categories                       #categories

                    Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      1,262.06 (1,881.76)              1,170.37 (1,557.29)               1,170.37 (1,557.29)
                    # Purchasing PBs             442                              402                               402
                    # Observations               1391                             1256                              1256

                    Brand & Model                60 categories          584        15 categories          176        28 categories          149
                    Size                          9 categories          566         4 categories          123         4 categories          141
     Stapler
                    Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      587.33 (816.28)                  507.08 (621.07)                   504.22 (614.41)
                    # Purchasing PBs                           539                              364                               372
82




                    # Observations                             1024                             549                               567

                    Color                         2 categories          1119        2 categories          307         2 categories          307
                    Double-sided                  3 categories          1248        3 categories          395         3 categories          395
                    On Generator Power            3 categories          1175        3 categories          370         3 categories          370
                    Paper Quality                 9 categories          1693        3 categories          831         7 categories          831
     Photocopying   Size                         19 categories          1043        3 categories          221        12 categories          215
                    With Binding                  4 categories          1585        3 categories          725         3 categories          725

                    Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      3.33 (7.65)                      2.69 (2.76)                       2.69 (2.76)
                    # Purchasing PBs                           470                              401                               401
                    # Observations                             3185                             2249                              2249

                    Brand & Model                180 categories         1280       57 categories          581        31 categories          581
                    Refill or New                 7 categories          935         5 categories          241         5 categories          241
     Toner                                                                                                                 Continued on next page
                                          TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                     Raw Data                      Regression Data               Machine Learning Data
     Item       Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /
                                                                  # missing                         # missing                         # missing
                                              #categories                       #categories                       #categories

                Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      4,630.16 (4,257.79)              4,449.26 (3,873.94)               4,449.26 (3,873.94)
                # Purchasing PBs                            505                              449                               449
                # Observations                          3814                                 2980                              2980

                Material                     12 categories          789         7 categories          417        10 categories          417
                Printed                       5 categories          983         4 categories          583         4 categories          583
                Area                          5 categories          983         4 categories          583         4 categories          583
     Envelope   With Zip                      2 categories          1112        2 categories          726         2 categories          727
83




                Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      9.31 (32.16)                     6.40 (14.18)                      6.38 (14.16)
                # Purchasing PBs                            512                              427                               427
                # Observations                          1891                                 1433                              1438

                Antiseptic                    2 categories          690         2 categories          418         2 categories          420
                Brand                        36 categories          436        20 categories          209        30 categories          192
                State                         3 categories          419         3 categories          181         3 categories          183
                Type                         19 categories          544         9 categories          314        11 categories          318
                Bar Size                     67 categories           0         198.1 (137.86)          0         198.0 (137.75)          0
     Soap
                Bottle Size                  67 categories           0           0.9 (0.71)            0           0.9 (0.71)            0
                Packet Size                  67 categories           0        1072.1 (2461.58)         0        1072.0 (2459.27)         0
                                                                                                                      Continued on next page
                                            TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                       Raw Data                      Regression Data               Machine Learning Data
     Item         Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /
                                                                    # missing                         # missing                         # missing
                                                #categories                       #categories                       #categories

                  Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      3.73 (17.96)                     2.17 (11.14)                      2.17 (11.12)
                  # Purchasing PBs                            518                              446                               447
                  # Observations                          1476                                 1155                              1158

                  Brand                        53 categories          959        12 categories          434        31 categories          386
                  Type                         28 categories          772         9 categories          224        22 categories          209
                  Wattage                      47 categories          814        12 categories          232         35.4 (65.15)          252
                  With Fitting                  3 categories          1505        2 categories          862         2 categories          882
     Light Bulb
84




                  With Fixture                  3 categories          1463        2 categories          818         2 categories          838

                  Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      697.49 (1,142.68)                541.53 (747.52)                   563.52 (782.47)
                  # Purchasing PBs                            530                              446                               446
                  # Observations                          1818                                 1173                              1193

                  Brand                         8 categories          846         4 categories          380         8 categories          369
                  Handle Length                10 categories          815          3.1 (1.57)           878          3.1 (1.57)           878
                  Handle Material               4 categories          838         4 categories          351         4 categories          351
     Broom        Type                         23 categories          588        10 categories          139        15 categories          121

                  Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      79.90 (108.92)                   76.36 (102.71)                    76.36 (102.71)
                  # Purchasing PBs                            586                              455                               455
                  # Observations                          1702                                 1159                              1159

                  Name                         57 categories          2129       23 categories           0         29 categories           0
                                                                                                                        Continued on next page

     Newspaper
                                          TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                     Raw Data                       Regression Data              Machine Learning Data
     Item       Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /
                                                                  # missing                         # missing                         # missing
                                              #categories                       #categories                       #categories

                Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      14.74 (6.09)                     14.29 (3.72)                      14.29 (3.72)
                # Purchasing PBs             717                              617                               618
                Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      14.74 (6.09)                     14.29 (3.72)                      14.29 (3.72)
                # Purchasing PBs                            717                              617                               618
                # Observations                          9400                                 6647                              6683

                Binding                      15 categories          2917       13 categories          1633       10 categories          1635
                Brand                        54 categories          3209       19 categories          1979       49 categories          1920
85




                Colored Pages                 6 categories          2933        2 categories          1675        2 categories          1677
                Customized Printing           3 categories          3011        2 categories          1732        2 categories          1734
                Number of Pages              80 categories          2939       185.1 (169.65)         1641       185.1 (169.65)         1643
     Register   Page Size                    82 categories          2874       26 categories          1552       51 categories          1554
                Page Weight                  14 categories          4456       12 categories          2602       14 categories          2604
                Type                         114 categories         1776       28 categories          523        44 categories          525

                Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      14.74 (6.09)                     314.93 (239.41)                   314.84 (239.38)
                # Purchasing PBs                            717                              717                               718
                # Observations                          5176                                 3705                              3707
                                                                                                                      Continued on next page
                                               TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                          Raw Data                      Regression Data              Machine Learning Data
     Item            Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                     mean (s.d.) /                    mean (s.d.) /
                                                                       # missing                        # missing                        # missing
                                                   #categories                       #categories                      #categories

                     Brand                        33 categories          1127       14 categories         693        31 categories         638
                     Colored Pages                 3 categories          1014        2 categories         531         2 categories         532
                     Page Size                    21 categories          1123        7 categories         547        15 categories         547
     Printer Paper   Page Weight                  25 categories          898        13 categories         360         77.54 (5.99)         361

                     Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      1.30 (1.49)                      1.19 (0.28)                      1.19 (0.28)
                     # Purchasing PBs                           837                              746                              746
                     # Observations                             4570                             3842                             3843
86




                     Color                        15 categories          1579       11 categories         911         8 categories         912
                     Model                        59 categories          1560       29 categories         916        30 categories         887
                     Type                         15 categories          978         8 categories         349         9 categories         350
     Pen             Thickness                    23 categories          2188         1.1 (1.04)          1443         1.1 (1.04)          1444

                     Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      49.10 (126.38)                   40.26 (58.98)                    40.27 (58.98)
                     # Purchasing PBs                           814                              719                              719
                     # Observations                             4298                             3386                             3387

                     Size                         24 categories          517       1137.6 (446.45)        334       1137.6 (446.45)        334
                     Towel Material                3 categories          283         2 categories         109         2 categories         109
                     Type                          7 categories          198         4 categories          32         4 categories          32
     Towel
                                                                                                                          Continued on next page
                                       TABLE B.13: POPS D ATA C LEANING


                                                  Raw Data                     Regression Data                Machine Learning Data
     Item    Attributes                   mean (s.d.) /                    mean (s.d.) /                      mean (s.d.) /
                                                              # missing                          # missing                          # missing
                                           #categories                      #categories                        #categories

             Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      458.19 (225.20)                 469.73 (206.82)                    469.73 (206.82)
             # Purchasing PBs                           362                              273                                273
             # Observations                             617                              427                                427

             Diameter                     60 categories         365          2.0 (3.59)            207          1.9 (3.58)            207
             Manufacturer                 32 categories         414        10 categories           273        22 categories           243
             Material                      3 categories         283         5 categories            94        13 categories            81
             Size                         62 categories         441        15 categories           316       607.5 (1068.00)          316
     Pipe
87




             Type                         41 categories         326        39 categories           162        30 categories           162

             Unit Price. mean (s.d.)      2.30 (8.63)                     1.87 (6.26)                        1.87 (6.26)
             # Purchasing PBs                           372                              319                                319
             # Observations                             807                              609                                610

     TOTAL   # Observations                         49,461                              36,950                             37,039
