                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       PHYSICIAN HEALTH MANAGEMENT SKILLS AND PATIENT OUTCOMES

                                      Emilia Simeonova
                                         Niels Skipper
                                      Peter R. Thingholm

                                      Working Paper 26735
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26735


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




Simeonova and Skipper gratefully acknowledge support from the Danish Council for Independent
Research. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Emilia Simeonova, Niels Skipper, and Peter R. Thingholm. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Physician Health Management Skills and Patient Outcomes
Emilia Simeonova, Niels Skipper, and Peter R. Thingholm
NBER Working Paper No. 26735
February 2020
JEL No. I1,I12,J18,J24

                                          ABSTRACT

A host of different factors affect health and longevity, ranging from genetic endowments to
public policy. Physicians have a substantial influence on patients' health and health-related costs,
but we know little about the extent of this influence beyond clinical decisions such as adequate
diagnosis and treatment. This paper demonstrates that the health management styles of primary
care physicians significantly affect the health outcomes of their patients. Using data on the
population of statin users in Denmark and matching patients to their primary care physicians, we
show that the physician's ability to facilitate adherence with prescription medications has
significant positive effects on patient outcomes and health costs even after controlling for
observable and unobservable patient characteristics. Policy interventions aimed at improving this
aspect of physicians' health management styles have important implications for patient outcomes
and health care costs.

Emilia Simeonova                                 Peter R. Thingholm
JHU Carey School of Business                     Arhus University
100 International Drive                          Department of Economics and
Baltimore, MD 21202                              Business Economics
and NBER                                         pthingholm@econ.au.dk
emilia.simeonova@gmail.com

Niels Skipper
Department of Economics and Business
Aarhus University
Fuglesangs Allé 4
DK 8210 Aarhus V
Denmark
nskipper@econ.au.dk
Introduction



There are large, persistent differences in patient outcomes across physicians and health facilities (Epstein &
Nicholsen, 2009; Currie et al, 2016; Molitor, 2016). The root causes of these differences are not well
understood. Variations in clinical quality across physicians are unlikely to fully account for the gaps in
outcomes, and neither are disparities in patient backgrounds. A possible contributing factor is that the patients
of different physicians pursue different health behaviors. It is an open question whether these behaviors can
be affected by the health management style of the physician. Recent work suggests that this is likely the case.
Using Danish population registry data Koulayev et al (2017) demonstrate substantial differences in average
patient adherence with prescribed medication across different physicians. 1 Analyzing the results from a
randomized experiment Alsan and co-authors (2018) show that black men in Oakland are much more likely
to complete preventive screening tests and to communicate with their doctors when seen by a black (male)
physician, though they report no difference in patient perceptions of physicians' clinical abilities.


There are several reasons why it is important to better understand if physicians' health management styles can
affect patient health outcomes and health costs. First, insight into what features of the physician's style of
health management affect patient outcomes is crucial in the design of contracts between payers and providers.
As health care systems struggle to address growing health care costs, quality contracts are becoming
increasingly popular. Such a contract between the payer and the health care provider specifies that a portion
of the provider's financial compensation is dependent on adequate performance according to a set of health
quality metrics taken over the patient population. In outpatient and primary care settings, these quality metrics
usually include routine screening and vaccinations, as well as proper maintenance of chronic conditions and
avoidance of preventable (re-) hospitalizations. Practitioners have argued that despite attempts to adjust such
metrics to the patient mix, providers who disproportionately work with patients whose health behaviors are
harder to manage, are at a great disadvantage.


Second, we need to understand better how different dimensions of physician management skills relate to
patient outcomes. While it is widely recognized that multiple dimensions of firms' management matter for
firm output (Bloom & Reenen, 2007, 2010) and hospital performance (Bloom, Propper, Seiler and van Reenen,
2015), it has yet to be studied in the case of outpatient-based health care provision. It is particularly relevant
to investigate the role of patient health management skills in the primary care and outpatient settings, where



1 Simeonova (2013) shows that racial gaps in chronic heart failure survival rates persist even after individual physicians' unobserved
characteristics are controlled for, but there are no racial survival gaps if patients mostly adhere with their prescribed medication
regimen.

                                                                  2
patients have substantial control over what provider they see and the actions they take conditional on receiving
a clinical recommendation by the physician.


Third, a key question in the literature is whether cross-physician differences in patient outcomes are due to
physician management, or due to patient selection. For example, if a physician's practice happens to be
geographically located in an area where most people adhere with medication and engage in proper health
maintenance, the physician will likely score high on any patient health outcomes metrics. This is particularly
important because in some settings provider-specific quality metrics, or "report cards", have been made public.
These "report cards" are based on past patient outcomes for common conditions. On the one hand, this may
facilitate efficient patient allocation across providers and encourage better quality among physicians who lag
behind their peers. On the other, the literature on quality report cards suggests that patients who are able to
shop for providers, either because they are healthier or because they are better informed, would select out of
lower-quality providers after quality information becomes public (Cutler et al, 2004; Santos et al, 2017). If
patient selection and sorting account for some of the differences in observed provider quality, making quality
metrics public will likely result in any remaining "good" patients abandoning practices with suboptimal patient
mix.


We use Danish registry panel data on the population of statin users and their primary care physicians to
investigate how physician patient management styles impact patient health outcomes. We construct a measure
of physician health management style based on her patients' adherence with prescribed medication therapy 2.
This measure captures the physician's ability to inspire the patient to adhere to that therapy, perhaps by clearly
communicating its benefits and encouraging and responding appropriately to patient feedback about their
experience with the medication. We consider this metric a proxy measure of the physician management style
and show how it affects patient hospitalizations for cardio-vascular diseases and associated costs.


This paper makes several contributions to the existing literature. First, we show that the physician's ability to
facilitate patient adherence with prescribed therapy has sizeable effects on patient outcomes and health care
costs. Second, we show that the physician's health management skill maintains its strong explanatory power
even after we control for patient selection into practices and unobserved patient heterogeneity. Overall, the
estimates suggest that investing in improving physician health management skills would have substantial
positive effects on health outcomes and result in reductions in health cost for cardio-vascular diseases.



2
  Adherence measures the intensive side of following prescribed therapy, namely taking as much of the medication as prescribed
over a pre-determined period. If a patient stops taking statins altogether, she becomes non-persistent and is excluded from the
sample. Our measures and estimated effects are based on deviations from adequate therapy compliance conditional on maintaining
the patient on the therapy. Patients who completely discontinue the therapy likely experience different, potentially much more
severe, health consequences.
                                                              3
Third, we demonstrate that differences in established measures of clinical quality (based on Ambulatory Care
Sensitive Conditions) across primary care physicians correlate strongly with patient outcomes, but are in fact
due to patient selection. Denmark, along with many other European countries, does not have a public physician
(or hospital) quality reporting system, and so our findings are not affected by any actions that may be taken
by physicians to influence the type of patients selecting into their practice. We uncover differential sorting of
patients across physicians based on unobservable patient characteristics that positively correlate with health
outcomes. Because of the institutional setting, this sorting appears to be demand-driven. Incentive contracts
tied to such measures of clinical quality would likely introduce supply-side sources of selection in addition to
the demand-side selection we document here. Further, making these clinical quality metrics public would
exacerbate patient selection. To our knowledge, this is the first study to explicitly investigate whether
individual patient adherence with therapy affects health outcomes, conditional on controlling for physician
clinical quality, and observed and unobserved patient characteristics.


2. Background and institutional setting


A large body of work documents differences in clinical treatment styles across physicians (Grytten and
Sorensen, 2003; Epstein and Nicholson, 2009; Burke et al, 2010; Phelps and Mooney, 1993; Phelps, 1995).
The reasons behind the variation in clinical treatment choices across doctors are subject to an active debate in
health economics (e.g. Chandra et al, 2011), but the physician influence on health outcomes is not restricted
to the choice of clinical therapy. Notably, at least one study in economics and a number of studies in medical
sociology report that physicians' communication styles also affect patients' adherence decisions (Koulayev et
al, 2017; Cooper, 2009; Sleath, 2000; Haynes, 2002; and review by DiMatteo, 2004). This is important because
recent adjustments to physician compensation schemes have introduced quality metrics into the contracts in
some health care systems. Quality is generally assessed using patient health outcomes, such as avoidable (re-
) hospitalizations and good maintenance of chronic conditions such as diabetes and hypertension, as well as
more routine metrics such as vaccinations and recommended recurring checkups. In practice, what contributes
to good performance on these quality metrics is not well understood. The correct clinical diagnosis and choice
of treatment is obviously an important first step. Once this has been established, and especially in the
management of chronic diseases in an outpatient setting, the patient is an equally important partner in the
health care process. The physician's ability to respond to individualized patients' needs, such as medication
side effects, and to effectively communicate clinical decisions to the patient is a very likely additional and
important determinant of health outcomes.


We analyze the physician's ability to inspire and manage optimal patient health behavior, which we term the
physician's health management skill. We argue that in the case of preventive medicine, this dimension of the
physician's treatment style is relevant, and if maximizing population health is the goal, then pay-for-
                                                       4
performance schemes should also provide incentives along this dimension. Prior research has shown that
primary care providers vary significantly in the average adherence of their patients (Koulayev et al, 2017).
Though intuitive, the link between patient adherence and health care costs and outcomes is harder to identify.
An important source of bias is the association between unobserved patient health status and its progression,
and medication adherence. When individuals feel worse, or perceive their health as deteriorating, they are
more likely to follow doctor's orders. As recognized by Encinosa et al, (2010), among others, this biases the
estimated coefficients from simple regression models. Using an instrumental variables approach, studies find
large positive effects of adherence on health outcomes and cost reduction.


2.1 Institutional Setting
The Danish health care system can be divided into two main sectors: the primary health care sector and the
hospital sector. The primary health care service sector deals with treatment and care from primary care
physicians, specialists, physiotherapists, and dentists, among others. Furthermore, the primary sector also
includes preventive health schemes and preventive health care. The Hospital Sector deals with conditions that
are more complex and require more advanced treatment. Admission in non-acute cases requires a referral from
the primary sector.


Denmark has universal and tax-financed health insurance run by the government. All individuals residing in
Denmark are given a social security number. The social security number ensures free access and treatment at
primary care physicians and specialists, as well as free in-hospital stays. All services provided to an individual
are registered via the social security number and all expenses are picked up by the national health insurance.


Primary care physicians
The Danish public health insurance provides visits and services at the primary care physician (PCP) free of
charge. In Denmark, PCPs serve as gatekeepers to the rest of the health care system in the sense that they refer
to specialists and hospital admissions. There are approximately 3,500 PCPs in Denmark working from 2,200
different practices. In order to get reimbursed by the national insurance, the physician needs to acquire a
clinic-ID (ydernummer). The number of clinic licenses is controlled by the government, based on factors such
as the population density in different areas.
The PCPs are responsible for a large portion of the patient's medication therapy. The physician has no financial
incentives to choose specific medication brands. First-choice medication recommendations are issued by the
national health authorities, but practitioners can choose a different therapy if they consider it more appropriate.
Prescription drugs are sold at government licensed pharmacies only. All information about purchases is
registered in a database at the Danish Medicines Agency (DMA). It is important to note that an individual's
choice-set of PCPs is limited in Denmark. A patient can choose any PCP, as long as the PCP's practice is


                                                        5
located within 15km from the patient's home 3. The patient needs to be enlisted with a PCP in order to visit
him or her and changing to a different PCP costs a fee of 150 DKK 4, and can be done only if the new doctor
is open for patient intake. This restricts the possibility of changing PCP as well as the possibility for choosing
PCPs not in the individual's choice-set.


An institutional feature of great importance to this study is the fact that it is very difficult for physicians to
selectively turn away individual patients. When a clinic list has reached 1,600 patients (per physician) the
physician can apply to the local government to stop the intake of new patients 5. However, if working below
this capacity the physician has to take in patients who wish to be listed with her. According to the collective
agreement made between the government and the Danish primary care physicians, a physician can discontinue
the physician-patient relationship only if the patient acts violently or threatening, or in any other way
misbehaves during the clinical encounter.


Hospitals
There are 5 regions in Denmark in charge of operating a total of 54 hospitals. The funding is partly state grants
which are activity and demography-based, partly funded by the municipalities. Out-patient and in-patient care
is free of charge for the individual. There is a group of specialized privately operated hospitals, where patients
are covered by public insurance if waiting lists at public hospitals exceed two months.


3. Empirical strategy
The main goal of the paper is to highlight one of the mechanisms through which physicians impact the health
of their patients. To this end, we leverage the observed link between physicians and patients in the registry
data. To have a setting where we expect physician patient health management skills to be relevant, we focus
on the prevention of cardio-vascular disease-related hospitalizations. Cardio-vascular disease is the leading
cause of death and hospitalization in most developed economies. The PCP has a central role as a first-line
health care provider. Importantly, modern treatment has a pharmacological component that is both crucial in
the maintenance of these chronic conditions and also allows for the construction of measures of patient health
behavior outside of the physician's office.


Our empirical strategy is implemented in several steps. First, we calculate adherence rates for patients who
were prescribed lipid lowering drugs to reduce cholesterol levels. Next, we use information on all other
patients at a practice to estimate a time constant measure of health management skills, relying on logic similar
to the teacher value added literature (Chetty et al, 2014a). That is, we leverage the average behavior of patients


3
  5 km in some non-rural areas
4
  USD $1 is approximately DKK 6.
5
  If the physician is more than 60 years old he/she can apply to stop the intake of new patients at a lower threshold.
                                                                  6
with the same physician to measure an individual physician-specific component in individual patient
adherence. We refer to these systematic differences across physicians as physician health management skill.
In the absence of patient sorting across physicians, our estimated physician health management skill is a
consistent estimator of a physician's impact on patient health. The assumption that patients do not sort across
physicians is a strong one. We check its validity by assessing whether this particular dimension is sensitive to
inclusion of observed and unobserved patient heterogeneity. Ultimately, this strategy allows us to investigate
whether differences in health management skill across physicians matter for patient health, or whether the
relationship between a physician's skills in health management and patient health outcomes is driven by patient
composition and sorting.


Estimating health management skills
Previous research shows that there is persistent heterogeneity in medication adherence rates of patients across
physicians (e.g. Simeonova, 2013; Koulayev et al., 2017). We focus on adherence with the major cholesterol
lowering drug group, statins 6.


The effectiveness of lipid lowering drugs in reducing the risk of fatal and non-fatal events has been
documented in numerous clinical trials (see e.g. Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Group, 1994; Sacks et
al,1996; Shepherd et al, 1995). In some trials (Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Group, 1994) reductions in
mortality are found after approximately 1 year in the treatment group, but other studies find effects on non-
fatal outcomes of treatment after only a month (O'Driscoll el al, 1997) and Ratchford et al, 2011). Some of
the most widely prescribed statins are simvastatin (brand name Zocor), atorvastatin (brand name Lipitor) and
fluvastatin (brand name Lescol). Treatment with statins is chronic, and patients are typically instructed to take
one pill a day7, which makes it easier to measure adherence 8 with treatment using claims data.


We start out by constructing patient specific leave-one-out adherence rates. Using data on all individuals with
at least two statin prescription claims in Denmark we calculate the leave-one-out average adherence within
each physician



6
  There are two forms of cholesterol found in the blood 1) high-density lipoprotein (HDL) and 2) low-density-lipoprotein (LDL).
The first form is commonly denoted "the good cholesterol" as it transports the harmful cholesterol (LDL) out of arteries, and high
blood level concentrations of HDL is recommended. The latter form (LDL) ­ or "bad cholesterol" ­ is what potentially combine
with other fats to create blockage of arteries and veins.
 Atherosclerosis, thickening of artery walls, is partly due to high levels of cholesterol, and is broadly recognized as an important
and modifiable risk factor for CVD. Plaque causes the actual clogging, and is often a result of a cumulative build-up of lipids ­
small fatty particles penetrating the walls from the blood to arteries, with a speed conditional on the concentration of cholesterol in
one's blood.
Lipid lowering drugs reduce the buildup of plaque, thus effectively reducing the likelihood of clogging. However, lipid build-up is
irreversible, and once present in veins/arteries, and pharmacological treatment only prevents further buildup. Hence, for the
treatment to be effective, a continuous intake of medication is necessary, and pharmacological treatment is considered permanent.
7
  This is the case for 98% if the patients in our sample
8
  Adherence is calculated as proportion of days covered, aka the medication possession ratio. For details see next section.
                                                                  7
                                                        
                                          - =               (4)
                                                        - 1


- is the individual specific average adherence rate with physician j at time t not including the focal
(index) individual.  is the number of patients at physician j at time t with at least two statin claims. We

then residualize - by regressing it on patient and physician observables, as well as a patient fixed
                                                                        
effect to obtain the residual,  . Finally, the health management skill,  , is constructed by averaging 
over time within physician j:
                                                   
                                              1 1
                                             =         (5)
                                                 - 1
                                                  =1           




Validating our measure of health management skill
                               
It is important to notice that  only truly reflects physician health management skills if patients do not
select into physicians on the basis of the physician's ability to inspire adherence with statin medications in her
patients. Hence it is important for our analysis to verify that this derived metric is not reflecting patient
selection. Given the Danish institutional setting, the choice of primary care physician is up to each patient and
likely endogenous with some physician characteristics. As information about alternative physicians within the
patient's choice set is very limited, one might not be as worried about sorting into the "good" physicians, as
much as the sorting out of the "bad" physicians. Hence, we are interested in finding situations in which we
can identify separations of patients from physicians where the switching is less likely to be related to the health
status of the patient or the physician health management style we outlined above. We identify two different
types of patient-physician separations in an attempt to tease out the potential impact of patient composition
from the true underlying physician health management skill.
The two types of separations we identify are:


              i)      Separations due to clinic closures. These are patients who are forced to change physician,
                      because their physician goes out of business due to retirement or residential relocation.
              ii)     Separations due to patient residential relocation: Those that shift physician because they
                      relocate residentially and cannot stay affiliated with their primary care physician.




                                                        8
When physicians close their clinic, patients affiliated with the clinic are forcibly separated from their
physician, and are effectively spread out across other local physicians 9. We believe that this is the setting with
the least scope for sorting out of clinics due to bad physician quality. 10
Leveraging these pseudo exogenous separations we examine whether the changes in health management skills
that patients are subsequently exposed to lead to changes in adherence even in setting with limited scope for
physician selection.


Estimating the impact of health management skill on health outcomes


In an ideal research setting, we would be able to randomly assign patients to different physicians and estimate
the effects physician management style on patient outcomes. In the absence of such an experiment, we rely on
rich registry data and "natural experiments" in physician-patient matching precipitated by residential
relocations of patients and primary care clinic closures in Denmark.
To assess the impact of the health management style on patient health outcomes we estimate a model of risk
of cardio-vascular disease related hospitalization as a function of the physician management skill. We estimate
the model


                                                    
                                            = 0 + 1  ( ,) +  2 +  , (6)

The experiment we try to mimic is to see how similar individuals would react to different physicians. In
equation (6), 1 is identified from both between and within-patient variation in the quality indices. Hence the
coefficients reflect differences in quality dimensions across the entire population of patients and physicians,
however we are primarily interested in the estimates that are derived from within-individual variation in
exposure to physician management skills. The thought experiment is to assign the same patient to different
physicians and track the evolution of her health outcomes across those physicians. To do this, in some models
we estimate equation (6) but also control for time-invariant individual heterogeneity through the individual
fixed effect, 


                                                 
                                         = 0 + 1  (,) +  2 +  +  , (7)



The primary outcome variables of interest are hospitalization due to a cardio-vascular disease and health care
                                                                 
expenditures due to cardio-vascular disease hospitalizations. As  (,) is constant across time and within

physician, 1 in (7) is estimated off variation in physicians within the same patient across time. That is, we


9
  When a clinic closes, the patients are free to choose a physician from their choice set that is open for intake of new patients.
10
  We are not the first to use these types of separations. (Markussen et al, 2013) and (Godøy et al, 2018) uses separations due to
closures to assess the impact of physicians on sickness absence. (Finkelstein et al, 2016) and (Laird and Nielsen, 2016) uses
residential relocators to identify place and provider fixed effects.
                                                                  9
only identify the coefficient from individuals seeing different physicians over time, and we will use the
separations described previously as natural instruments of separations to assess the robustness of our results.
In addition to the challenge of sorting between patients and physicians, we need to include sufficient controls
for baseline CVD hospitalization risk, in order to allow for a physician value added interpretation. We achieve
this as our regressions include highly detailed patient characteristics as well as the past CVD and other
comorbidities that have been demonstrated to predict all cause and CVD mortality.


4. Data
We use the full population of adult individuals in Denmark who have at least two statin claims 11 between
January 1st 2004 and July 1st 2008. In addition to the prescription data we have data on hospitalization and the
primary diagnoses (by ICD-10) for hospitalizations, as well as health care expenditures. The prescriptions and
hospitalization data are augmented with detailed individual level economic and demographic information from
several different registries.


Our main sample is constructed by observing the initial individual purchases of lipid-lowering prescription
drugs. We then calculate the adherence as a proportion of days covered through a period of 6 months. The
outcome measures are the probability of cardio vascular disease-related hospitalizations and the associated
hospitalization expenditures within the subsequent 12 months.


This approach offers the possibility to evaluate the relationship between short-term fluctuations in adherence
and short-term health outcomes as well as strictly separating the periods in which adherence and
hospitalization outcomes are measured. This is important because adherence may respond to a hospital stay
either mechanically, through patients receiving new directions or new therapies during their in-patient stay, or
as a behavioral response to a negative update on their health status which triggers (temporarily) improved
adherence.




Figure 1: Sample construction linking adherence to outcomes over time.


Figure 1 explains the sample construction. For individual A we observe adherence for 6 months initiated at
the first pharmacy claim. We also observe whether the individual is hospitalized in the subsequent 12 months.
We measure adherence as Proportion of Days Covered 12. Starting from the day of initiation of treatment we

11
     The first claim is the initiation. We drop individuals, who never has more than one claim, to calculate adherence rates.
12
     Also sometimes referred to as a "Medication Possession Ratio"
                                                                   10
measure the fraction of days within a 6-months period the individual is covered with any statin. The individual
is allowed to keep excess medication for one period, and because we focus on adherence on the intensive
margin, we drop individuals when there is no claim in a period and no excess medication from previous
periods. Patients who completely discontinue treatment in this fashion are non-persistent, or could have
discontinued the therapy for reasons unknown. The fact that we focus on the intensive margin of adherence
has implications for the interpretation of the results. Namely, our estimates capture the effects differences in
patient adherence with statins on health outcomes, conditional on continued statin intake. The effects we find
are identified from marginal changes in the adherence rate, not from drastic changes in the therapy initiated
by the physician or the patient. We exclude 0.25 percent of the patient-observations because the individual
dies in a period and where we observe a statin claim or excess medication has been kept from a previous
period.


Table 1 displays the means and standard deviations of the main demographic and outcome variables in the full
sample and in the different subsamples. We separate out patients who changed physicians over the observation
period, and within that sample we identify two distinct subsamples: those who changed physician because they
re-located to a different residential address; and those who changed physician because the original clinic
closed. A priori one would have different expectations regarding the causes of these shifts, relative to the rest
of physician-patient separations. It is reasonable to expect that patients who initiate a separation without any
observable external event tend to switch based on personal preferences, individuals who relocate are forced
change physicians. The set of individuals affiliated with primary care clinics that close due to e.g. physician
retirement, long term sickness or geographic re-location of the physician 13, are also effectively forced to
initiate a switch. Thus, for these two sets of physician-patient separations, we can plausibly assume that the
change in physician is not the results of patient selection out of the care of the provider. About 17 percent of
the sample change physicians during the observation period for any reason. Less than half of those changes
are precipitated by a clinic closure or patient residential re-location.



Statin-users in Denmark are more likely to be male and married, on average in their early- to mid-60s, with
annual incomes roughly equivalent to forty thousand dollars. About 40% of them have completed only primary
education, 50% have finished vocational training or some college, and only about 6% have university
education. Only 5% of the sample are born outside of Denmark.



The prescriber ID we observe in the data pertains to the clinic and not the individual prescribing physician
within the clinic. However, in our sample 46% of primary care clinics have only one physician associated with


13
     The only other reason why a clinic might close is that a physician's license is revoked. Effectively this never happens.
                                                                   11
them, so that the clinic ID will uniquely identify the prescribing physician. In cases where the clinic is operated
by more than one physician, we interpret any measure of quality as representing an average treatment style of
the clinic. The analysis has been conducted separately for clinics with only one physician, and the results are
qualitatively and quantitatively similar, as can be seen from appendix table A1 and A2. Moving on, we will
use the words clinic and physician interchangeably.


Table 1: Descriptive statistics by subgroup measured at sample entry. Standard deviations in square brackets below the variable
mean.

                                                         All                                      Movers
                                                                         Residential relocation             Clinic closures
Variable                                                Mean                     Mean                            Mean
Age                                                     64.29                    62.64                           65.07
                                                       [11.32]                  [11.85]                         [10.58]
Income (in DKK 1,000)                                  192.19                   195.73                          186.41
                                                      [114.15]                 [118.93]                        [111.10]
Married                                                  0.63                     0.57                            0.64
                                                        [0.48]                   [0.49]                          [0.48]
Male                                                     0.51                     0.53                            0.51
                                                         [0.5]                    [0.5]                           [0.5]
Education                Primary School                  0.42                     0.39                            0.42
                                                        [0.49]                   [0.49]                          [0.11]
                         High school                     0.01                     0.02                            0.01
                                                        [0.12]                   [0.14]                          [0.48]
                         Vocational                      0.35                     0.35                            0.37
                                                        [0.48]                   [0.48]                          [0.48]
                         Tertiary Short                  0.15                     0.16                            0.14
                                                        [0.35]                   [0.37]                          [0.35]
                         Tertiary Long                   0.06                     0.08                            0.06
                                                        [0.24]                   [0.26]                          [0.23]
Foreign born                                             0.05                     0.07                            0.05
                                                        [0.21]                   [0.25]                          [0.21]
Charlson CI                                              0.80                     0.92                            0.85
                                                        [1.24]                   [1.33]                          [1.24]
 CVD Hospitalization                                     0.05                     0.07                            0.06
                                                        [0.22]                   [0.26]                          [0.23]
Hospital Expenditures (1000 DKK)                         4.05                     4.85                            5.03
                                                        [21.7]                   [23.6]                          [23.7]
Adherence                                                0.82                     0.82                            0.84
                                                        [0.23]                   [0.24]                          [0.23]
Individuals                                           510,159                   20,185                          17,538




For the patients who switch providers during the observation window, we assign the health management metric
of the new physician based on all years for all of her patients other than the index individual i. That is, in t=0
where we observe the new physician-patient match, we assign the time-constant health management skill of
the new physician. We have assigned the health management skill values of the original physician at t=-2,-1
and the value of the new physician on t=0,1,2.

Figure 2 shows the standardized distributions of physician health management skill. The standard deviation in
the non-standardized measure is 0.005


                                                                 12
Figure 2: Kernel density estimate of the standardized health management skill measure for the entire sample, as well
as the two subsamples experiencing relocations or practice closures. The kernel used is gaussian and the bandwidth is
0.001. The standard deviation in the entire population is 0.005. For the relocation and the practice closure samples the
standard deviation is 0.01 and 0.017 respectively.

6. Validating the metric of health management skill

In this section we seek to validate our measure of physician health management skills. To do this we establish
that individual adherence is affected by the physician health management skill, and is not the results of patient
sorting. In particular, we show that individual adherence with statins improves upon switching to a new
physician who has better health management skills, or decreases when the patient encounters a new physician
with worse health management skills. This finding is robust to controlling for individual-specific time-
invariant unobservable characteristics. We also show that physician health management exhibits mean
reversion upon changes, indicating that our findings are not a result of patient sorting.

To establish that individual adherence is affected by physician health management skills we estimate models
similar to eq. (6) and (7) with adherence as the outcome. These results are reported in Table 2. The first 2
columns in panel A report results based on the entire population. Column 1 shows how an increase in average
health management skill of one standard deviation increases individual adherence by about 1 percentage point,
and this effect is not sensitive to inclusion of individual characteristics in column 2.



                                                           13
Having shown that health management skill affects individual health behavior, we utilize the quasi- exogenous
patient-physician matches formed after patients relocate or physicians close their practice to verify the metric
of health management skill. These new matches are less likely to suffer from selection. We start off by showing
in an event-study type setting that the forced change of primary care physician leads to an immediate change
in health management style, to which adherence responds accordingly. We also show that health management
skill exhibits mean-reversion, in the sense that individuals who experienced lower levels of physician health
management pre-closure (pre-relocation) on average experience the largest increases in physician health
management skill post-closure (post-relocation). It is important for the validity of our estimates that certain
types of patients do not sort into specific types of physicians. If, for instance, high-adhering patients
systematically choose particular physicians, these physicians would seemingly have a high level of health
management skill. Hence, we would like to see that the physician health management skill exhibits mean
reversion properties in the event of exogenous physician switches, such that individuals who had high-type
physicians do not systematically switch to new high-type physicians.



Analyzing changes in health management skills in a standard event study framework is problematic. When
switching to a new physician in these types of settings the change is not guaranteed to be uniformly either
positive or negative, as a switch from high to low levels for some individuals might be offset by low to high
level switches for other individuals. Hence, the changes in health management skills might balance out on
average. To overcome this issue, we conduct separate analyses based on the level of health management skill
of the patient's pre-closure physician. 14



Figures 3 and 4 present the evolution in adherence for patients who re-locate and individuals experiencing a
clinic closure, respectively. The graphs depict the evolution in adherence for individuals who pre-separation
have providers with physician health management skill in the lowest quartile (Panel A), and physician health
management skill in the highest quartile (Panel B). 15 These graphs show that physician health management
has a substantial impact on patient adherence. 16 In Figure 3 panel A we see that individuals who prior to
relocating have a physician with health management skills in the lowest quartile, on average see an increase
in their adherence increases by 4.3 percentage points or 5.4% relative to the mean. On the contrary, figure 3


14
   We do this by analyzing changes in adherence when an individual separates from a provider from different quartiles of health
management skills. The quartiles are calculated within the respective samples. In the relocator sample the standard deviation of
the health management skill is .009, while it for the clinic closure sample it is 0.018
15
   Similar graphs for individuals with pre-physician health management in the 2nd and 3rd quartile are presented in the appendix.
16
   To measure the change in adherence, we estimate regression models of the form  =  +  +  for each quartile of the
health management skill of the patient's pre-closure physician. The results are available in appendix tables A1 (relocators) and A2
(practice closures). Similar regressions are estimated with the outcome being health management skill. These results are also
available in the appendix.

                                                               14
panel B shows that individuals in the highest quartile of physician health management pre-relocation, on
average experience a decrease in adherence of 2.8 percentage points or 3.3% relative to the mean.



Figure 4 shows that the same pattern exists for individuals who move to a new physician due to a clinic closure.
Panel A of Figure 4 shows that individuals who prior to closure have a physician in the lowest quartile of
health management skills, on average see an increase of 8.8 percentage points in adherence. This corresponds
to 11.1% relative to the mean of adherence. Similar to those who re-locate their geographic residence, patients
experiencing a closure of a PCP office that was in the highest quartile of physician health management skills
experience a reduction in adherence of 1.4 percentage points or 1.6% to the mean of adherence. Appendix
tables A1 and A2 also report the implied changes in health management skills. It is clear that coming from a
lower (higher) level of health management skill on average results in increases (decreases) in health
management skill post separation. In appendix figures A1 and A2, figures similar to figure 3 and 4 also
including the change in health management skill, show how the change in health management skill is sudden
and persistent 17



Figure 3: Residential re-locators

               Panel A: 1st Quartile pre-HMS                                       Panel B: 4th quartile pre-HMS




Notes: Physician health management skill and adherence for individuals relocating by quartile of pre-closure level of physician
health management skill. Individuals are measured relative to the last period where the old physician is encountered (t=-1)




17
   Note that in these figures there is a slight fluctuation in pre-closure health management skills due to patients entering and leaving
the sample when they stop using statins. In appendix figures A5 and A6 we present graphs that are constructed by restricting the
sample to those that have only one physician in the periods prior to the closure, and are in our sample for the 4 periods prior and 4
periods after (6 months each) experiencing the patient-physician separation. From these it is even more evident that the shift indeed
leads to an immediate change in physician health management skills.


                                                                  15
Figure 4: Physician health management skill and adherence for individuals experiencing a clinic closure.

              Panel A: 1st Quartile pre-HMS                                    Panel B: 4th quartile pre-HMS




Notes: Physician health management skill and adherence for individuals experiencing a clinic closure by quartile of pre-closure
level of physician health management skill. Individuals are measured relative to the last period where the old physician is
encountered (t=-1).




Having shown that changing provider lead changes in health management skills that implies changes in
adherence we leverage the pseudo exogenous changes in provider to validate the impact of health management
skill. Columns 3 and 4 in table 2 estimate models similar to columns 1 and 2 for the entire subpopulation of
residential re-locators. The specifications in Columns 5 and 6 repeat the exercise for the subgroup experiencing
a clinic closure. The impact of a 1 standard deviation increase in physician health management skill on
adherence is 0.8 percentage points and 0.7 percentage points in the group of residential re-locators and
individuals experiencing a clinic closure respectively. The estimates are not affected by the inclusion of
individual characteristics. In panel B we control for time-invariant individual unobserved heterogeneity
(individual fixed effects) and find very similar results.




                                                               16
Table 2: Individual-level adherence regressed on health management skills. Re-locators and individuals experiencing
a clinic closure are followed 2 periods before and 2 periods after.

                                                                Panel A
                             (1)                (2)             (3)           (4)           (5)            (6)
 Outcome                                                       Adherence

 HMS                      0.009***           0.009***        0.008***      0.008***      0.007***       0.007***
 (std)                    (0.0005)           (0.0005)        (0.0009)      (0.0009)      (0.0004)       (0.0004)

 Observations             2,675,429          2,675,429          84,406        84,406        79,933        79,933
 Mean Adherence              0.82               0.82              0.82          0.82         0.84          0.84
 R-squared                  0.020              0.027             0.025         0.036        0.045         0.051
 Time                        Yes                Yes               Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 Region                      Yes                Yes               Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
 Ind. Cov                     No                Yes                No           Yes           No           Yes
 Comorbidities                No                Yes                No           Yes           No           Yes
 Population            All observations   All observations Relocators Relocators Clinic Close          Clinic Close
                                                  Panel B ­ including patient fixed effects
                             (1)                 (2)               (3)           (4)          (5)          (6)
 Outcome                                                         Adherence

 HMS                       0.009***          0.009***         0.009***      0.009***     0.007***       0.007***
 (std)                    (0.000291)        (0.000296)       (0.000557)    (0.000564)   (0.000279)     (0.000279)

 Observations             2,675,429          2,675,429        84,406        84,406         79,933         79,933
 Mean Adherence              0.82               0.82            0.82          0.82          0.84           0.84
 R-squared                  0.428              0.428           0.481         0.481         0.468          0.468
 Time                        Yes                Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Region                      Yes                Yes             Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
 Ind. Cov                     No                Yes              No           Yes            No            Yes
 Comorbidities                No                Yes              No           Yes            No            Yes
 Population            All observations   All observations   Relocators    Relocators   Clinic Close   Clinic Close



To further support our finding that physician health management skill exhibits mean reversion, we analyze
how the change in health management skill is associated with the health management levels before the change.
While figure 2 and 3 illustrated how individuals in opposite quartiles of pre-shift health management levels
experienced opposite evolutions in health management skill, figure 5 illustrates the case for the entire
distribution of pre-shift health management skill. To construct this figure, we collapse the data to the periods
immediately before ( (-2 , -1)) and after (  (0,1, 2) ) and calculate the change in health management skill.
We then group the data into 20 equally sized bins based on pre-shift health management skill and calculate the
mean change in health management within each of these bins. We do this separately for separations due to
residential re-locators (panel A) and for individuals experiencing a clinic closure (panel B). Additionally, we
fit a line through the bins to estimate the relationship between pre-shift health management skills and the
change. We find that, based on re-locations, a 1 standard deviation higher pre-shift health management skill is
associated with a change in health management skill of 1.36 of a standard deviation. Similarly, for individuals


                                                             17
experiencing a clinic closure, a 1 standard deviation higher pre-shift health management skill is associated
with a change of 1.16 of a standard deviation



Figure 5: Mean reversion in physician health management skill

                   Panel A: Relocations                                           Panel B: Clinic closures




Notes: Mean reversion in physician health management skill. The figure plots the change in health management skill relative to
pre-shift health management skill. Pre-shift health management skill is group into 20 equally sized bin, within which the mean
change is calculated. The coefficient (highly significant at a 1% level) is the fitted line through these 20 points.




7. Results ­ health management skills and patient outcomes

In this section we estimate the impact of physician health management skills on patient health outcomes. After
presenting results from the entire population we conduct robustness analysis on the subgroups switching
physicians due to either residential relocation or clinic closure. Table 3 shows the results from empirical
models of hospitalization risk of CVD-related admissions, measured as a binary variable, as a function of
health management style. The health management style index is standardized with mean zero and unit standard
deviation, and coefficients should be interpreted as the impact of a one standard deviation increase in the skill
dimension on the outcome of interest. The time window for hospitalization is within one year after the end of
the 6-month period during which the adherence measure is calculated.

                In column 1 of panel A of Table 3 the regression includes only calendar year fixed effects and
geographic region fixed effects. Taking the results at face value, column 1 shows that a one standard deviation
increase in physician health management skill decreases the probability of a CVD-related hospitalization in
the subsequent year by 0.07 percent. Taken relative to the outcome mean of 5.7 percent this is a relative
reduction of 1.3 percent.

                                                               18
Controlling for individual level socio-demographic information in column 2 and health status (captured here
through the Charlson comorbidity index) only marginally reduces the estimate of the impact of health
management skills.


Panel B reports the same specifications as in panel A, but adding patient fixed effects, to control for time-
invariant individual level unobserved heterogeneity. The estimates of the associations between physician
health management skills and CVD-related hospitalizations are mostly unchanged after the inclusion of the
patient-level fixed effects.

The models in Table 4 are identical to those presented in Table 3, but the outcome is now the log of CVD-
related hospitalization expenditures in Danish crowns (DKK) incurred in the year after the end of the 6-month
period over which the health management skill measure was calculated. The pattern is the same as for the
hospitalization risk. Consistently across all specifications a one standard deviation increase in physician health
management skills is associated with a 0.24-0.3 percent decrease in CVD-related hospitalization expenditures
in the next year. In appendix tables A1 and A2 we re-do tables 3 and 4 respectively for single physician clinics
only. The results are similar.


Table 3: The association between physician health management skills and Cardio-Vascular-Disease-related
hospitalization risk. Linear probability regressions. Standard errors are clustered at clinic level.
                                                           (1)                         (2)           (3)


 Panel A (No Individual FE)
 Health Management Skill                              -0.0734***            -0.0703***            -0.0649***
 (x100)                                                 (0.0247)             (0.0242)              (0.023)


 Panel B (individual FE)


 Health Management Skill                              -0.0691***            -0.0732***            -0.0672***
 (x100)                                                 (0.0236)             (0.0234)              (0.0235)


 Observations                                          2,601,554            2,601,554             2,601,554
 Mean CVD hospitalization                                 0.05                 0.05                  0.05
 R-squared                                                28%                  28%                   29%
 Time                                                     Yes                  Yes                   Yes
 Region                                                   Yes                  Yes                   Yes
 Ind. Cov                                                 No                   Yes                   Yes
 Comorbidities                                            No                   No                    Yes
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                           19
Table 4: The association between physician health management skills and Cardio-Vascular-Disease-related
hospitalization expenditures. The outcome measure is the log of CVD-related hospitalization costs over a six-month
period. Linear regression models. Standard errors are clustered at clinic level.


                                                      (1)                  (2)                      (3)



 Panel A (No Individual FE)
 HMS                                              -0.298***             -0.286***               -0.264***
 (x100)                                             (0.101)              (0.0986)                (0.0939)


 Panel B (Individual FE)
 HMS                                              -0.267***             -0.281***               -0.257***
 (x100)                                            (0.0914)              (0.0913)                (0.0919)

 Observations                                     2,601,554             2,601,554               2,601,554
 Mean Hosp. Exp (1000DKK)                            4.05                  4.05                    4.05
 R-squared                                           0.28                  0.28                    0.29
 Time                                                Yes                   Yes                     Yes
 Region                                              Yes                   Yes                     Yes
 Ind. Cov                                             No                   Yes                     Yes
 Comorbidities                                        No                    No                     Yes
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                            20
Subgroup analysis ­ exogenous separations: residential re-locations and clinic closures
We now present a set of sensitivity analyses to assess whether the relationship between health management
skills and CVD outcomes are due to patient selection.

Again we focus on two particular groups of patients: patients who relocated their residence and thus had to
change physician, and patients whose original physician practice closed.

It is unlikely that patients would move residence because they want to switch physicians or that practices
would close because of the quality of the patient load. That is why estimates based on these two subsamples
are less likely to be affected by selective patient-physician matching. The sample size is reduced considerably
to approximately 10% of the original for two reasons: first, we discard those individuals who stay with the
same physician for the entire observation window, and secondly, we focus on the time period close around the
switches (results are similar if we include time periods further away from the switches; see appendix Tables
A5 and A6). We assign the old physician's health management skill to the months during which the patient is
visiting that physician; the new physician's skill for the months after the change.

The results are reported in Table 5. Panel A reports the estimates from the general pooled regressions and
Panel B presents the corresponding estimates from models including patient fixed effects.

For the two groups of switchers where the separation from the physician is plausibly due to non-health related
reasons we see comparable estimates to those of the full sample. Considering switches due to clinic closures
in columns 2 and 3, we find that the estimates are qualitatively the same as those for the entire sample (column
1). For those who switch physician due to residential relocation (column 2) the point estimate is numerically
larger at -0.114, however it is not statistically significantly different.




                                                         21
Table 5: Associations between physician health management skills and Cardio-Vascular-Disease hospitalization risk.
Linear probability regressions. The table only includes observations for t={-2,0-2} for individuals who are separated
from their physician before t=0. Standard errors are clustered at the origin clinic.
                                                   (1)                        (2)                    (3)
               Outcome                                                  CVD hospitalization
                                           Panel A: No Patient Fixed Effects
                HMS                           -0.0803***                -0.114**                -0.0885***
               (x100)                           (0.0267)                (0.0545)                  (0.0326)
             Observations                       340,486                  85,168                    80,401
              R-squared                          0.055                    0.059                     0.056



                                       Panel B: Including Patient Fixed Effects


                 HMS                          -0.0756***                   -0.105**              -0.0652**
                (x100)                          (0.0238)                   (0.0433)               (0.0328)

            Observations                       340,486                    85,168                  80,401
           Mean CVD hosp                          0.05                      0.07                    0.06
             R-squared                            0,34                     0,361                   0,343
              Year FE                             Yes                       Yes                     Yes
               Region                             Yes                       Yes                     Yes
              Ind. Cov                            Yes                       Yes                     Yes
            Comorbidities                         Yes                       Yes                     Yes
               Sample                         All Shifters               Residential          Clinic Closures
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


We report the results for the hospitalization expenditures in Table 6 panels A and B, and the results are
comparable to those of Table 4; for the sample of all movers we find that one standard deviation increase in
health management skills decreases CVD-related hospitalization expenditures for the physician's patients in
the next year by 0.275 percent.




                                                             22
Table 6: Associations between physician health management skills and Cardio-Vascular-Disease hospitalization
expenditures. The table only includes observations for t={-2,0-2} for individuals who are separated from their physician
before t=0. Linear regression models. Standard errors are clustered at clinic level.

                                                           (1)                       (2)                    (3)
 Outcome: Ln (CVD-related Hospital Expenditure)
  Panel A: No Patient Fixed Effects
 HMS                                                   -0.317***                  -0.421**               -0.355***
 (x100)                                                  (0.107)                   (0.196)                 (0.133)

 Observations                                           340,419                    85,115                 80,401
 R-squared                                               0.057                      0.062                  0.058


 Panel B: Including Patient Fixed Effects
 HMS                                                   -0.275***                  -0.359**               -0.255**
 (x100)                                                 (0.0919)                   (0.156)                (0.126)

 Observations                                          340,419                    85,115                  80,401
 Mean Hosp. Exp (1000DKK)                                 4.05                      4.85                   5.03
 R-squared                                               35%                        37%                    35%
 Year FEs                                                 Yes                       Yes                    Yes
 Region                                                   Yes                       Yes                    Yes
 Ind. Cov                                                 Yes                       Yes                    Yes
 Comorbidities                                            Yes                       Yes                    Yes
 Sample                                               All Shifters               Residential          Clinic closures
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




Health management skills and clinical quality

Having shown that there is a robust association between the health management skills of the physician and
patient health, we might worry that our measure of physician skills is merely reflecting the clinical quality of
the physician, or her ability to make an adequate diagnosis and prescribe the correct treatment. If clinical
quality is highly correlated with health management skills, and we are not controlling for it, then this could
lead to misleading interpretation of the estimates.
To explore this, we turn to the literature on clinical quality in primary care. Hospitalizations due to Ambulatory
Care Sensitive Conditions (ACSC) are widely accepted and frequently used metrics used to assess the quality
of primary health care (see e.g. Harrison et al, 2014; Oster et al, 2003, and Johnson et al, 2012). These are
hospitalizations that are avoidable in the sense that proper outpatient care would prevent them. In a US setting,
Oster and co-authors (2003) find that African Americans, patients covered by Medicaid, and uninsured patients


                                                           23
constitute a disproportionate share of emergency department visits that accrue to ACSCs 18. We identify the
subset of ACSCs that are related to urinary tract infections, bacterial pneumonia, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and dehydrations; see appendix table A8 for a complete list of ICD-10 codes. We
specifically leave out hospitalizations for conditions related to CVD to measure aspects of physician quality
that are not directly linked to our outcome of interest. As with the health management skill, we calculate leave-
one-out means of the included admissions on a patient-physician level, and combine the admissions into one
index. Next, we replicate the analysis from Table 5, with the inclusion of this new quality metric derived from
avoidable hospital admissions (ACSCs); see Table 7. Note that a higher ACSC (`better quality') is associated
with lower rates of CVD admissions. Strikingly, adding this quality metric to the regressions does not affect
the impact of the health management skill variable in any meaningful way. In our preferred specification in
column 3 using pooled data, we find that one standard deviation change in ACSC-based quality has similar
effects on CVD hospitalization as one standard deviation change in physician management skills. Further, we
notice that controlling for time-invariant unobserved patient characteristics drastically reduces the association
from the ACSC quality metric and CVD outcomes (the coefficient becomes close to zero and insignificant);
see panel B of Table 7. Similar to the results of table 5, adding individual fixed effects does not affect the
estimated coefficient of HMS in any meaningful way.


Table 8 reports results for health care expenditures, and the conclusion is similar. Notably, the correlations of
HMS and ACSC with health care costs are very similar in the pooled sample but the coefficient on the ACSC-
based quality metric is positive and very close to zero when we account for unobserved time-invariant patient
characteristics.




18
  Harrison et al. (2014) study the impact of a national primary care pay for performance scheme rolled out by the English
National Health Service. As part of the performance scheme, reductions in a subset of the ACSCs were incentivized on the
physician side, and the rates of these hospitalizations declined in comparison to non-incentivized ACSC hospitalizations.
                                                               24
Table 7: The association between physician health management skills, ACSC quality and CVD-related hospitalization
risk. Linear probability regressions. Standard errors are clustered at clinic level.

                                                      (1)                       (2)                (3)
 Outcome                                                                CVD hospitalization
 Panel A: No Patient Fixed Effects
 HMS (x100)                                       -0.0816***                -0.0767***         -0.0691***
                                                    (0.0250)                  (0.0244)           (0.0233)

 ACSC quality metric                              -0.135***                 -0.0916***         -0.0611***
               (x100)                              (0.0259)                  (0.0230)           (0.0203)

 Observations                                     2,686,216                 2,686,216          2,686,216
 R-squared                                          0.003                     0.012              0.049



 Panel B: Including Patient Fixed Effects


 HMS (x100)                                       -0.0724***                -0.0725***         -0.0669***
                                                    (0.0233)                  (0.0233)           (0.0234)

 ACSC quality metric                                0.0105                    0.0103             0.0043
               (x100)                              (0.0199)                  (0.0199)            (0.020)

 Observations                                      2,601,554                 2,601,554          2,601,554
 Mean CVD hosp                                       0.05                      0.07               0.06
 R-squared                                           0.408                    0.408              0.418
 Year FE                                              Yes                      Yes                Yes
 Region                                               Yes                      Yes                Yes
 Ind. Cov                                             No                       Yes                Yes
 Comorbidities                                        No                       No                 Yes
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                             25
Table 8: The association between physician health management skills, ACSC quality and CVD-related hospitalization
risk. Linear probability regressions. Standard errors are clustered at clinic level.

                                                      (1)                      (2)                 (3)
 Outcome                                                            CVD hospitalization costs
 Panel A: No Patient Fixed Effects
 HMS (x100)                                       -0.334***                -0.314***            -0.282***
                                                    (0.103)                  (0.100)             (0.0952)

 ACSC quality metric                              -0.579***                -0.396***            -0.270***
               (x100)                               (0.107)                 (0.0944)             (0.0826)

 Observations                                     2,685,804                2,685,804            2,685,804
 R-squared                                          0.003                    0.012                0.050



 Panel B: Including Patient Fixed Effects


 HMS (x100)                                       -0.278***                -0.279***            -0.256***
                                                   (0.0908)                 (0.0909)             (0.0917)

 ACSC quality metric                                0.0379                   0.0370              0.0147
               (x100)                              (0.0803)                 (0.0802)            (0.0813)

 Observations                                      2,601,554                2,601,554           2,601,554
 Mean Hosp. Exp (1000DKK)                            4.05                     4.85                5.03
 R-squared                                           0.420                   0.420                0.429
 Year FE                                              Yes                     Yes                  Yes
 Region                                               Yes                     Yes                  Yes
 Ind. Cov                                             No                      Yes                  Yes
 Comorbidities                                        No                      No                   Yes
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                             26
8. Health management skills and physician characteristics

We have established that the physician's health management skills affect patient health outcomes. Our setting
provides a unique opportunity to investigate whether health management skills are associated with observable
provider characteristics 19. Previous research has demonstrated that the gender of the treating physician is
correlated with patient outcomes: for example, investigating records on hospitalized Medicare beneficiaries
in the US, Tsugawa and co-authors (2017) showed that patients who were treated by a female physician had
significantly lower mortality and readmission rates. In another study on Canadian data, Wallis and co-authors
(2017) found that among 25 different surgical procedures, 30-day readmission rates were statistically
significantly lower when the surgeon was female (however the difference was small). As both are studies of
associations it is not fully understood what the underlying mechanism is, i.e. if the findings are driven by a
differential patient-mix (though some patient characteristics are controlled for). In a meta-analytic review
Roter and co-authors (2002) found that female primary care physicians engage in more patient-centered
communication and had visits of longer duration compared to their male colleagues. If this is the case, we
would expect female gender of the PCP to be positively correlated with our measure of health management
skills. To investigate this, we estimate the following physician-level regression of the standardized health
management skill metric on practice level characteristics:

                                               = 1  +  +  +  (8)
                                              

 is the estimated health management skill from (5),  are practice level characteristics,  are municipality

fixed effects, and  is an error term.  includes an indicator for whether there is at least one female in the
practice, whether there are any immigrant physicians in the practice and the mean age of physicians working
in the practice. 48.9% of the practices have a female physician employed, and 9.2% have a physician with an
immigrant background. The mean age of the physicians is 54.0 years, where the mean age in practices that do
not employ females is 56.3, and it is 51.5 in practices that do employ at least one female. The results from
estimating (8) are reported in table 9 below. All models include year and municipality dummies, and standard
errors are clustered at the municipality level.




19
  As we only have characteristics on the practice level, we show that our findings are robust to limiting the sample to single-
physician practices, where we know the specifics of the provider characteristics. In appendix table A6, we replicate our finding
using only single physician practices, where we know for a fact whether the patients see a female or male physician. Histograms
of the distribution of clinical and communication skills across providers are included in the appendix.
                                                               27
Table 9: Associations between practice health management skills and provider characteristics. Outcomes are
standardized with mean 0 and unit standard deviation. All models include time and municipality dummies. Standard
errors are clustered at the municipality level
                                    (1)                            (2)                          (3)
                                 Std. HMS                       Std. HMS                     Std. HMS

 Female                           0.156**                        0.162**                      0.0218
                                  (0.062)                        (0.064)                      (0.044)

 Immigrant                                                         -0.205                     -0.269*
                                                                  (0.124)                     (0.137)

 Age                                                                                         -0.030***
                                                                                               (0.010)

 Observations                    12,665                           12,655                      12,655
 R-squared                        0.010                            0.010                       0.016
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1



Our results reveal an interesting pattern. In model 1 we find that practices with female physicians have better
health management skills on average. Having a female in the practice is associated with approximately 16%
of a standard deviation higher HMS. The estimate is statistically significant and the positive relationship aligns
with the aforementioned literature on gender differences. Further controlling for physician immigrant status,
the correlation between health management skills and female gender remains positive and statistically
significant. However, when we also control for provider age, the association of having females in the practice
and the management skill drops to approximately 2% and is insignificant at conventional levels. The
coefficient on age is however highly significant, and implies that an increase in provider age of one year is
associated with a decrease in health management skills of 3% of a standard deviation. Perhaps unsurprisingly,
relatively younger practices are more likely to have female physicians, and younger practices are also more
likely to have high levels of health management skills, conditional on patient characteristics. The difference
in average health management skills between provider genders disappears when provider age is controlled for.

This is not only the case at the mean, as we can see in figure 6 below (see figure D3 in appendix D for single
physician practices only). Here we present local linear regressions of the standardized health management
skills on provider age. The relationship is presented for males and females separately. The negative
relationship is evident in both groups, and they are never statistically different from each other. These findings
are consistent with the fact that from 1977 to 2017, the female share of the Danish PCP workforce increased
from 10 to 50%. 20 That is, the female PCPs in our sample are systematically younger than male PCPs. Hence,
we feel confident concluding that in a setting that evaluates health management skills in primary care, where
the patient mix is sufficiently controlled for, there is no differential return to female doctors, after we include




20
     https://www.laeger.dk/sites/default/files/plo_faktaark_2017_oktober_2.pdf (in Danish)
                                                                 28
controls for the age of the physician. Further, we interpret our findings that more recent (and perhaps more
up-to-date) training of physicians is an important factor in physician health management skills.




              Figure 6 Local linear regressions of communication quality and age by provider gender.



9. Conclusions

The full extent of the contribution that physicians have to patient health, while intuitive, is not well understood.
As quality contracts become increasingly popular across various health care systems, it is important to
highlight what facets of individual physicians' health management styles have meaningful impact on health
outcomes and to what extent they vary across physicians. The physician's ability to correctly diagnose and
treat common conditions is one of the central tenets of quality contracts. But the link between these skills and
patient outcomes is at best tenuous. Critics have emphasized that unobserved patient-specific characteristics
are important and under-researched contributors to the variability of patient health outcomes conditional on
physician clinical skill.

This research uses the population of Danish statin users between 2004 and 2008 and shows that the physician's
health management skills, as proxied by that physician's average patient adherence with prescribed therapy,
remain predictive of health outcomes even after accounting for individual patient heterogeneity. Further,
investigating potential observable correlates of physician health management skills reveals that younger
                                                        29
physicians have on average more adherent patients. We find no substantial difference in health management
skills between male and female physicians after we control for physician age and the patient mix. Our research
demonstrates that interventions aiming at improving physicians' health management skills as they relate to
patient adherence with prescribed therapy will have positive impacts on patient health outcomes.




                                                     30
References:
Alsan, M., O. Garrick and G. C. Graziani (2018). "Does Diversity Matter for Health? Experimental
Evidence from Oakland." NBER WP 24787.

Bloom, N. and J. V. Reenen (2007). "Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and
Countries." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122(4): 1351-1408.

Bloom, N. and J. V. Reenen (2010). "Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms and Countries?"
Journal of Economic Perspectives 24(1): 203-224.

Bloom, N. Carol Propper, Stephan Seiler and John van Reenen (2015) "The Impact of Competition on
Management Quality: Evidence from Public Hospitals", Review of Economic Studies, January 2015, 1-33

Burke, M. A., G. M. Fournier and K. Prasad (2010). "Geographic variations in a model of physician
treatment choice with social interactions." Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization 73(3): 418-432.

Chandra, A., D. Cutler and Z. Song (2011). "Who Ordered That? The Economics of Treatment Choices in
Medical Care" Handbook of Health Economics Vol 2: 397-432.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman and J. E. Rockoff (2014). "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers I: Evaluating Bias
in Teacher Value-Added Estimates." American Economic Review 104(9): 2593-2632.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman and J. E. Rockoff (2014). "Measuring the impacts of teachers ii teacher value-
added and student outcomes in adulthood." American Economic Review 104(9): 2633-2679.

Cooper, L. A. (2009). "A 41-year-old African American man with poorly controlled hypertension: review of
patient and physician factors related to hypertension treatment adherence." Journal of American Medical
Association 301(12): 1260-1272.

Currie, J., W. B. MacLeod and J. Van Parys (2016). "Provider practice style and patient health outcomes:
The case of heart attacks." Journal of Health Economics 47(C): 64-80.

Cutler, D. M., R. S. Huckman and M. B. Landrum (2004). "The Role of Information in Medical Markets: An
Analysis of Publicly Reported Outcomes in Cardiac Surgery." American Economic Review 94(2): 342-346.

DiMatteo, R. (2004). "Variations in Patients' Adherence to Medical Recommendations: A Quantitative
Review of 50 Years of Research." Medical Care 42(3): 200-209.

Dranove, D., D. Kessler, M. McClellan and M. Satterthwaite (2002). "Is More Information Better? The
Effects of 'Report Cards' on Health Care Providers", National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. WP8697

Encinosa, W., D. Bernard and A. Dor (2010). "Does prescription drug adherence reduce hospitalizations
and costs? The case of diabetes." Advances in Health Economics and Health Services Research 22: 151-73.

Epstein, A. J. and S. Nicholson (2009). "The formation and evolution of physician treatment styles: An
application to cesarean sections." Journal of Health Economics 28(6): 1126-1140.

Finkelstein, A., M. Gentzkow and H. Williams (2016). "Sources of Geographic Variation in Health Care:
Evidence From Patient Migration." The Quarterly Journal of Economics 131(4): 1681-1726.

Fryar, C. D., R. Hirsch, M. S. Eberhard, S. S. Yoon and J. D. Wright (2010). "Hypertension, high serum
total cholesterol, and diabetes: racial and ethnic prevalence differences in U.S. adults, 1999-2006." NCHS
Data Brief.
                                                     31
Godøy, A. and H. Dale-Olsen (2018). "Spillovers from gatekeeping ­ Peer effects in absenteeism." Journal
of Public Economics 167: 190-204.

Grossman, M. (1972). "On the Concept of Health Capital and the Demand for Health." Journal of Political
Economy 80(2): 223-255.

Grytten, J. and R. Sorensen (2003). "Practice variation and physician-specific effects." Journal of Health
Economics 22(3): 403-418.

Harrison, M. J., M. Dusheiko, M. Sutton, H. Gravelle, T. Doran and M. Roland (2014). "Effect of a national
primary care pay for performance scheme on emergency hospital admissions for ambulatory care sensitive
conditions: controlled longitudinal study." BMJ 349 g6423.

Haynes, R. B., P. M. McDonald and A. X. Garg (2002). "Helping patients follow prescribed treatment."
Journal of American Medical Association 288(22): 2880-3.

Johnson, P. J., N. Ghildayal, A. C. Ward, B. Westgard, L. L. Boland and J. S. Hokanson (2012). "Disparities
in potentially avoidable emergency department (ED) care: ED visits for ambulatory care sensitive
conditions." Medical Care 50(12): 1020-8.

Kolstad, J. T. (2013). "Information and Quality When Motivation Is Intrinsic: Evidence from Surgeon
Report Cards." American Economic Review 103(7): 2875-2910.

Koulayev, S., E. Simeonova and N. Skipper (2017). "Can Physicians Affect Patient Adherence With
Medication?" Health Economics 26(6): 779-794.

Laird, J. and T. Nielsen (2016). "The Effects of Physician Prescribing Behaviors on Prescription Drug Use
and Labor Supply: Evidence from Movers in Denmark." Working paper

Markussen, S. and K. Røed (2017). "The market for paid sick leave." Journal of Health Economics 55(C):
244-261.

Markussen, S., K. Røed and O. Røgeberg (2013). "The Changing of the Guards: Can family doctors contain
worker absenteeism?" Journal of Health Economics 32(6): 1230-1239.

Molitor, D. (2016). "The Evolution of Physician Practice Styles: Evidence from Cardiologist Migration",
National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. WP22478.

O'Driscoll, G., Green D. , and T. R. R. (1997). "Simvastatin, an HMG-coenzyme A reductase inhibitor,
improves endothelial function within 1 month." Circulation 95(5): 1126-31.

Oster, A., Bindman (2003). "Emergency department visits for ambulatory care sensitive conditions: Insights
into preventable hospitalizations." Medical Care 41(2): 198-207.

Phelps, C. E. (1995). "Perspectives in health economics." Health Economics 4(5): 335-53.

Phelps, C. E. and C. Mooney (1993). "Competitive Approaches to Health Care Reform", Urban Institute
Press, Washington, D.C.

Ratchford, E. V., J. Gutierrez, Lorenzo D. McClendon M. S. Della-Morte D. DeRosa J. T. Elkind M. S. V.
Sacco R. L. and R. T. (2011). "Short-term effect of atorvastatin on carotid artery elasticity: a pilot study."
Stroke 42(12): 3460-4.

                                                       32
Roter DL, Hall JA, Aoki Y. (2002). "Physician Gender Effects in Medical Communication: A Meta-analytic
Review". JAMA. 2002;288(6):756­764. doi:10.1001/jama.288.6.756


Sacks, F. M., M. A. Pfeffer, L. A. Moye, J. L. Rouleau, J. D. Rutherford, T. G. Cole, L. Brown, J. W.
Warnica, J. M. O. Arnold, C.-C. Wun, B. R. Davis and E. Braunwald (1996). "Cholesterol and Recurrent
Event Trial Investigators. The effect of pravastatin on coronary events after myocardial infarction in
patients with average cholesterol levels." New England Journal of Medicine 335(14): 1001-9.

Santos, R., H. Gravelle and C. Propper (2017). "Does Quality Affect Patients' Choice of Doctor? Evidence
from England." The Economic Journal 127: 445-494.

Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study, S. (1996). "Randomised trial of cholesterol lowering in 4444
patients with coronary heart disease: the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S)." Lancet 334: 1383-
1389.

Shepherd, J., S. M. Cobbe, I. Ford, C. G. Isles, A. R. Lorimer, P. W. MacFarlane, J. H. McKillop and C. J.
Packard (1995). "Prevention of coronary heart disease with pravastatin in men with hypercholesterolemia.
West of Scotland Coronary Prevention Study Group." New England Journal of Medicine 333(20): 1301-7.

Simeonova, E. (2013). "Doctors, patients and the racial mortality gap." Journal of Health Economics 32(5):
895-908.

Sleath, B., B. Chewning, B. Svarstad and D. Roter (2000). "Patient expression of complaints and adherence
problems with medications during chronic disease medical visits." J Soc Admin Pharm 17(2): 71-80.

Tsugawa Y, Jena AB, Figueroa JF, Orav EJ, Blumenthal DM, Jha AK. (2017). "Comparison of Hospital
Mortality and Readmission Rates for Medicare Patients Treated by Male vs Female Physicians". JAMA
Intern Med.;177(2):206­213. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.7875

Wallis, CJD., Ravi, B., Coburn, N., Nam, R. K., Detsky, A., Satkunasivam, R. (2017) "Comparison of
postoperative outcomes among patients treated by male and female surgeons: a population based matched
cohort study", BMJ 2017;359:j4366

Weiss, A. J. and A. Elixhauser (2012). "Obesity related hospitalizations, 2004 vs. 2009." Statistical Brief
#137.




                                                      33
Appendix A: Additional tables and figures
Table A1: The change in adherence before and after residential relocations.

                                           (1)          (2)                   (3)      (4)
                                     Adherence      Adherence          Adherence    Adherence


 Post                                0.0428***        -0.0003          -0.0071**    -0.028***
                                         (0.003)      (0.003)            (0.003)     (0.003)


 Observations                             22,404      22,383             22,369      22,357
 R-squared                                0.007       0.000              0.000        0.003
 Outcome mean                              .796        .834               .841        .844


                                           (1)          (2)                   (3)      (4)
                                          HMS          HMS               HMS          HMS


 After                                   0.920***    0.090***           -0.035**    -0.492***
                                         (0.059)      (0.015)            (0.015)     (0.040)


 Observations                             22,404      22,383             22,369      22,357
 R-squared                                0.238       0.042              0.001        0.108
 Mean                                     -1.01        -0.11              0.11        .556
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                        34
Table A2: The change in adherence and HMS before and after experiencing a practice closure by HMS of origin
provider. Columns 1-4 reports the estimates by quartiles 1-4 respectively. The estimates are based on the two periods
before and the three periods following the separation.



                                      (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                   Adherence          Adherence          Adherence          Adherence

 Post                              0.0875***          0.0233***            -0.00208           -0.0136*
                                   (0.00893)          (0.00846)           (0.00761)          (0.00781)

 Observations                        24,152             24,182             23,846              24,009
 R-squared                            0.027              0.003              0.001               0.011
 Mean                                  .793               .858               .867                .865

                                       (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)
                                      HMS                HMS                HMS                HMS

 Post                               1.976***           0.449***           -0.138***          -1.141***
                                     (0.046)            (0.009)             (0.009)            (0.018)

 Observations                     24,152                24,182             23,846              24,009
 R-squared                         0.532                 0.608              0.069               0.576
 Mean                              -2.18                 -0.35              00.12                1.01
 Robust standard errors in parentheses
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                          35
Table A3: The association between physician quality and Cardio-Vascular-Disease-related hospitalization risk for
single physician clinics. Linear probability regressions. Standard errors are clustered at clinic level.

                                                    (1)                  (2)                         (3)
 Outcome                                                           CVD hospitalization
 Panel A (No Individual FE)
 HMS                                             -0.0534*                  -0.0434                -0.0492*
 (x100)                                          (0.0279)                 (0.0267)                (0.0277)

 Panel B (individual FE)

 HMS                                             -0.0628**               -0.0605**               -0.0622**
 (x100)                                           (0.0274)                (0.0267)                (0.0279)

 Observations                                  1,215,964              1,215,964                  1,215,964
 R-squared                                        0.30                   0.31                       0.31
 Time                                             Yes                    Yes                        Yes
 Region                                           Yes                    Yes                        Yes
 Ind. Cov                                          No                    Yes                        Yes
 Comorbidities                                     No                    Yes                        Yes
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                          36
Table A4: The association between physician quality and Cardio-Vascular-Disease-related expenditures risk for
single physician clinics. Linear regression models. Standard errors are clustered at clinic level.

                                            (1)                                  (2)                    (3)
 Outcome: Log CVD hospitalization Expenditure
 HMS                                    -0.231**                              -0.215*                -0.234**
 (x100)                                   (0.114)                             (0.113)                 (0.114)

 Panel B (individual FE)
 HMS                                               -0.265**                   -0.275**               -0.250**
 (x100)                                             (0.108)                  (0.00108)                (0.110)

 Observations                                1,215,710                1,215,710                      1,215,710
 R-squared                                      0.31                     0.31                           0.31
 Time                                           Yes                      Yes                            Yes
 Region                                         Yes                      Yes                            Yes
 Ind. Cov                                        No                      Yes                            Yes
 Comorbidities                                   No                       No                            Yes
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                            37
Table A5: Associations between health management skills and Cardio-Vascular-Disease hospitalization. The table
includes observations for all pre and post periods for individuals who are separated from their physician before t=0.
Standard errors are clustered at clinic level.

                                                                  (1)               (2)                  (3)
                  Outcome: CVD hospitalization
  Panel A: No Patient Fixed Effects
 HMS                                                         -0.069***           -0.089*             -0.070**
 (x100)                                                       (0.0253)           (0.052)              (0.034)

 Observations                                                   503,527          133,612              125,063
 R-squared                                                       0.054            0.056                0. 056

 Panel B: Including Patient Fixed Effects
 HMS                                                         -0.072***           0.12***             0.068***
 (x100)                                                        (0.023)           (0.040)              (0.032)

 Observations                                            503,527                133,612              125,063
 R-squared                                                00.40                  00.40                00.39
 Year FEs                                                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes
 Region                                                    Yes                    Yes                  Yes
 Ind. Cov                                                  Yes                    Yes                  Yes
 Comorbidities                                             Yes                    Yes                  Yes
 Sample                                                All Shifters            Residential        Clinic closures
 Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




Table A6: Associations between health management skills and Cardio-Vascular-Disease hospitalization expenditures.
The table includes observations for all pre and post periods for individuals who are separated from their physician before
t=0. Standard errors are clustered at clinic level.

                                                                        (1)               (2)                  (3)

                                                           38
                Outcome: Ln (Hospital Expenditure)
 Panel A: No Patient Fixed Effects
HMS                                                       -0.341***       -0.314*         -0.283**
(x100)                                                      (0.111)       (0.185)          (0.137)

Observations                                               503,527        133,612         125,063
R-squared                                                   0.057          0.062           0.058
Panel B: Including Patient Fixed Effects
HMS                                                       -0.282***      -0.428***        -0.29***
(x100)                                                      (0.098)        (0.15)          (0.124)

Observations                                                503,527       133,612         125,063
R-squared                                                      .35          .37              .35
Year FEs                                                      Yes           Yes             Yes
Region                                                        Yes           Yes             Yes
Ind. Cov                                                      Yes           Yes             Yes
Comorbidities                                                 Yes           Yes             Yes
Sample                                                    All Shifters   Residential   Clinic closures
Robust standard errors in parentheses, clustered on the clinic level
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                     39
Table A7: ICD 10 codes used to classify admissions as CVD-hospitalization. CVD hospitalization
expenditures are expenditures associated with these admission codes.
                                List of ICD-10 Codes used to classify Cardio-Vascular-Disease:
                                ICD-10                                      Description
Myocardial Infarction:
                                I22                              Subsequent myocardial infarction
                                I252                                 Old myocardial infarction
Congestive Heart Failure:
                                I099                              Other Reumatic Heart Disease
                                I220                      Subsequent myocardial infarction of anterior wall
                                 I230
                                I232       Haemopericardium as current complication following acute myocardial infarction
                                I255                                Ischaemic cardiomyopathy
                                I420                                  Dilated cardiomyopathy
                                I425                              Other restrictive cardiomyopathy
                                I426                                  Alcoholic cardiomyopathy
                                I427                  Cardiomyopathy due to drugs and other external agents
                                I428                                  Other cardiomyopathies
                                I429                                Cardiomyopathy, unspecified
                                I43                       Cardiomyopathy in diseases classified elsewhere
                                I50                                         Heart failure
Peripheral Vascular Diseases:
                                I732                             Other peripheral vascular diseases
                                 I738                       Other specified peripheral vascular diseases
                                 I739                         Peripheral vascular disease, unspecified
                                 I772                                    Rupture of artery
                                I790                    Aneurysm of aorta in diseases classified elsewhere
                                I792                   Peripheral angiopathy in diseases classified elsewhere
                                K552                                  Angiodysplasia of colon
                                K558                            Other vascular disorders of intestine
                                Z958                 Presence of other cardiac and vascular implants and grafts
                                Z959               Presence of cardiac and vascular implant and graft, unspecified
                                I70                                       Atherosclerosis
                                I72                               Other aneurysm and dissection
Diabetes:
                                E11                                   Type 2 diabetes mellitus
                                E12                            Malnutrition-related diabetes mellitus
                                E13                               Other specified diabetes mellitus




                                                                            40
Table A8: Associations between practice quality metrics and provider characteristics for single physician practices.
All models include time and regional dummies. Standard errors are clustered at the regional level

                              (1)                          (2)                         (3)
                           Std. HMS                     Std. HMS                    Std. HMS

Female                       0.160*                       0.172*                       0.007
                            (0.0824)                     (0.0844)                    (0.0629)
Immigrant                                               -0.350**                     -0.442**
                                                         (0.145)                      (0.161)
Age                                                                                 -0.046***
                                                                                      (0.014)

Observations               7,352                          7,352                        7,352
R-squared                  0.014                          0.015                        0.025
Robust standard errors in parentheses
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                         41
Figure A1:.Event graphs for relocators




 Panel A: 1st quartile pre-HMS                       Panel B: 2nd quartile pre-HMS




 Panel C: 3rd quartile pre-HMS                       Panel D: 4th quartile pre-HMS




Notes: Physician health management skill and adherence for individuals relocating by quartile of pre-closure level of physician
health management skill. Individuals are measured relative to the last period where the old physician is encountered (t=-1)




                                                               42
Figure A2:.Event graphs for clinics closing


 Panel A: 1st quartile pre-HMS                       Panel B: 2nd quartile pre-HMS




 Panel C: 3rd quartile pre-HMS                       Panel D: 4th quartile pre-HMS




Notes: Physician health management skill and adherence for individuals experiencing a clinic closure by quartile of pre-closure
level of physician health management skill. Individuals are measured relative to the last period where the old physician is
encountered (t=-1)




                                                               43
Figure A3:.Associations between changes in health management skills and changes in adherence for




relocators




                                                  44
Figure A4:.Associations between changes in health management skills and changes in adherence for
patients experiencing clinic closures




                                                  45
Figure A5:.Changes in physician health management skill for relocators




Notes: Changes in physician health management skill for relocators. The sample is restricted to those who
only have one physician prior to the relocation and those who are in the sample for all 9 periods of
observation (  [ -4; 4]) app. 20% of the complete sample of individual experiencing a residential
relocation.




                                                    46
Figure A6: Changes in physician health management skill for individuals experiencing a clinic closure




Notes: Changes in physician health management skill for individuals experiencing a clinic closure. The
sample is restricted to those who only have one physician prior to the relocation and those who are in the
sample for all 9 periods of observation (  [ -4; 4]) this constitutes X observations or X% of the complete
sample of individual experiencing a clinic closure.




                                                    47
Appendix C:


If there is a physician component in determining hospitalizations from Ambulatory Care Sensitive Conditions,
we can estimate the physician quality dimension from means of residualized individual level indicators for
admission with an ACSC. Our goal is to combine the available ACSCs into one time-constant physician
                                                                       
specific measure based on all individuals affiliated with a physician,  . We do this in several steps. First we
calculate leave one out measures for each individual i and type k of ACSC at time t as


                                               
                                                                    
                                               - (,) =                  .
                                                                    - 1
This denotes the fraction of patients with a ACSC of type k at physician j at time t excluding individual i.
Next, we combine the leave one out measure of the k different types of ACSCs into one metric. Let 
denote this index comprised of k categories of ACSCs using information on all patients affiliated with
physician j except individual i:
                                                          
                                                     
                                                 =   - (,)
                                                        =1

Where  is the correlation between CVD hospitalization and ACSC hospitalization. We choose to construct
the weights in this way because we are ultimately interested in estimating the effects of clinical quality on the
probability CVD-related hospitalizations. In this way, we have used information on all of the doctor's patients
other than individual i to construct the health index, such that it varies across individuals within physician.
To account for patient composition and calculate the time constant physician quality we first residualize the
patient level health index and then collapse the calculated residualized means across time on a physician level
using information of patients other than individual i affiliated with the same physician as individual i. Letting

 denote the estimate of the clinical quality of physician j, we start of by residualizing  :


                                               =  +  1 +  (1)


Where  contains time varying covariates of individual i ­ including dummies for comorbidities 21. . If there
exist systematic differences attributable to the physician, the error-term in (3) must have the following
structure:


                                                       = ( ,) + 



21
  The comorbidities are measured as an aggregated Charlson comorbidity index that varies across time. Details are presented in
the data section.
                                                              48
Where ( ,) denotes a physician fixed effect, and  is normal distributed with mean zero and constant
variance.
After obtaining the residuals from an estimation of equation (Q1) by OLS, we calculate leave-one-out means
on the physician-year level:


                                                      1
                                               =            
                                                       - 1
                                                                

where  is the number of patients affiliated with physician j at time t. Finally, letting  denote the number
                                                             
of periods we observe physician j, we collapse the estimated  to construct a time constant physician specific
measure of clinical quality.


                                                             
                                                   1 
                                                  =  
                                                   
                                                          =1

In this way we use information on all other patients across time, at your chosen physician to construct a time
                                      
constant measure of clinical quality,  .
The Interactive quality metric is constructed in a similar fashion. On the base of all statin users with at least 2
claims,  ,starting from the analogue to equation (Q1):
                                         =  +  2 +  (2)
Following similar steps, we estimate the interactive metric as
                                                   
                                         
                                           1 1
                                          =         
                                              - 1
                                                  =1            

Where  are residuals from a linear regression of Q2.




                                                        49
Appendix D




                                                                                              q
Figure D2 Local linear regressions of communication quality and age by provider gender. Only for single physician
                                                   practices.




                                                       50
