                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           IDENTITY VERIFICATION STANDARDS IN WELFARE PROGRAMS:
                     EXPERIMENTAL EVIDENCE FROM INDIA

                                       Karthik Muralidharan
                                           Paul Niehaus
                                        Sandip Sukhtankar

                                       Working Paper 26744
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26744


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2020




We thank Prashant Bharadwaj, Michael Callen, Gordon Dahl, Lucie Gadenne, Siddharth George, Roger
Gordon, Ashok Kotwal, Lee Lockwood, Aprajit Mahajan, Ted Miguel, and participants in various
seminars for comments and suggestions. This paper would not have been possible without the continuous
efforts and inputs of the J-PAL/UCSD project team including Avantika Prabhakar, Burak Eskici, Frances
Lu, Jianan Yang, Kartik Srivastava, Krutika Ravishankar, Mayank Sharma, Sabareesh Ramachandran,
Simoni Jain, Soala Ekine, Vaibhav Rathi, and Xinyi Liu. Finally, we thank the Bill and Melinda Gates
Foundation (especially Dan Radcliffe and Seth Garz) for the financial support that made this study
possible. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.

© 2020 by Karthik Muralidharan, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Identity Verification Standards in Welfare Programs: Experimental Evidence from India
Karthik Muralidharan, Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar
NBER Working Paper No. 26744
February 2020, Revised April 2020
JEL No. D73,H53,O30,Q18

                                               ABSTRACT

How should recipients of publicly-provided goods and services prove their identity in order to access
these benefits? The core design challenge is managing the tradeoff between Type-II errors of inclusion
(including corruption) against Type-I errors of exclusion whereby legitimate beneficiaries are denied
benefits. We use a large-scale experiment randomized across 15 million beneficiaries to evaluate the
effects of more stringent ID requirements based on biometric authentication on the delivery of India's
largest social protection program (subsidized food) in the state of Jharkhand. By itself, requiring biometric
authentication to transact did not reduce leakage, slightly increased transaction costs for the average
beneficiary, and reduced benefits received by the subset of beneficiaries who had not previously registered
an ID by 10.6%. An event study of subsequent reforms that made use of authenticated transaction
data to determine allocations to the program shows that these coincided with large reductions in leakage,
but also significant reductions in benefits received. Our results highlight that attempts to reduce corruption
in welfare programs by making ID requirements more stringent can also generate non-trivial costs
in terms of exclusion and inconvenience to genuine beneficiaries.


Karthik Muralidharan                                  Sandip Sukhtankar
Department of Economics, 0508                         Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego                   University of Virginia
9500 Gilman Drive                                     Charlottesville, VA 22904
La Jolla, CA 92093-0508                               srs8yk@virginia.edu
and NBER
kamurali@ucsd.edu

Paul Niehaus
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive #0508
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
pniehaus@ucsd.edu




A randomized controlled trials registry entry is available at https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/trials/1620
1       Introduction
How should recipients of publicly provided goods and services prove their identity in order
to access these benefits? From accessing welfare benefits to obtaining a driver's license to
casting a vote, how stringent ID requirements should be is a perennially controversial question
around the world. The core design issue is how to manage the tradeoff between Type-II errors
of inclusion whereby benefits are granted to non-eligible or non-existent recipients against
Type-I errors of exclusion whereby legitimate beneficiaries are denied benefits to which they
are legally entitled. While there is a large literature on how to target people to be put on
program beneficiary lists (Alatas et al., 2012; Niehaus et al., 2013; Alatas et al., 2016), there
is much less evidence on the distinct question of how citizens should prove their identity at
the point of receiving benefits.
   This question is particularly salient in developing countries. Historically, states have in-
vested in the ability to better identify their citizens as they develop (Scott, 1998). During the
past two decades in particular "the number of national identification and similar programs
has grown exponentially. . . to the point where almost all developing countries have at least
one such program" (Gelb and Metz, 2018). Around two-thirds of these use biometric tech-
nology, reflecting the view that this provides more reliable authentication than alternatives,
particularly in settings with low levels of literacy and numeracy.1
   A leading case is India, where the government has issued unique identification ("Aadhaar")
numbers linked to biometric records to over 1.24 billion people and is integrating Aadhaar-
based biometric authentication into a range of applications. The extent to which Aadhaar
should be mandated to receive welfare benefits has been controversial, contested all the way
to India's Supreme Court. Proponents argue that this is necessary to prevent fraud, while
critics argue that it denies people their legal entitlements and in doing so "undermines the
right to life" (Khera, 2017). In a September 2018 ruling, the Court allowed the government to
mandate Aadhaar for accessing social programs, making it all the more urgent to understand
how doing so affects errors of inclusion and exclusion.
   This paper reports results from the first (to our knowledge) experimental evaluation of
introducing Aadhaar as a requirement to collect welfare benefits. Specifically, we examine
how this introduction shifted the tradeoff between errors of inclusion and exclusion in the
Public Distribution System (PDS), India's largest welfare program, accounting for roughly
1% of GDP. The PDS is the primary policy instrument for providing food security to the
poor in India, which has the largest number of malnourished people in the world (FAO et al.,
    1
    National biometric ID systems have recently been rolled out in Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Senegal, Tan-
zania, and Uganda, amongst others. The World Bank has a dedicated initiative - ID4D - to help countries
"realize identification systems fit for the digital age." (https://id4d.worldbank.org/).


                                                  1
2019). In principle, PDS ration card holders are entitled to purchase fixed monthly quantities
of grain and other commodities at a highly-subsidized price from a government-run Fair Price
Shop (FPS). In practice, the resulting dual-price system creates strong incentives for corrupt
intermediaries to divert grains to the open market. The "leakage" of grains can happen both
on the extensive margin through the creation of "excess" ration cards for non-existent (or
unaware) beneficiaries to whom grain is allocated (and then pilfered), and on the intensive
margin through "under-provision" of grain to legitimate beneficiaries.2
   To evaluate the impact of introducing Aadhaar in the PDS, we worked with the govern-
ment of the state of Jharkhand to randomize the order in which biometric authentication
was introduced across 132 sub-districts in 10 districts in the state of Jharkhand. Our evalu-
ation sample is representative by design of 15.1 million individuals in 3.3 million beneficiary
households in 17 of Jharkhand's 24 districts, and representative on observables of the rest of
the state. Further, the integration of Aadhaar into the PDS was implemented by the Gov-
ernment of Jharkhand (GoJH) as part of a full-scale deployment that was being rolled out
across the country. Thus, our study design allows us to directly estimate the policy-relevant
parameters of interest.
   GoJH implemented this reform in two phases. In the first phase, electronic Point-of-Sale
(ePOS) machines were installed in FPSs in treated areas while beneficiaries were required
to obtain an Aadhaar number for at least one member of their household, link (or "seed")
it to their PDS account, and then authenticate their identity by scanning the fingerprints
of a seeded household member each time they transacted at a ration shop. This process
of Aadhaar-based biometric authentication (ABBA) in turn generated a digital record of
transactions for which beneficiaries had "signed" biometrically. The control group continued
with the default of authentication based on presenting a paper ration card to collect benefits,
and record-keeping on paper. ABBA by itself did not change the amounts disbursed by the
government. However, it could have discouraged PDS dealers from diverting grains to the
extent they anticipated being held responsible in the future for any grain not accounted for
by an authenticated transaction.3
   In the second phase ("reconciliation"), GoJH began adjusting downwards the amounts of
grain it disbursed to each FPS to reflect the amounts they should still have in stock accord-
ing to the electronic records of previously authenticated transactions from ePOS machines
   2
     The most recent nation-wide estimates find that 42% of grain was diverted as of 2011-12 (Dreze and
Khera, 2015). However, prior work has not (to the best of our knowledge) decomposed PDS leakage into the
extensive and intensive margin channels.
   3
     Dealers may have anticipated that they would be held responsible for diverted grain once reconciliation
began (as explained below), or through less formal audits and investigations. In either case they would have
an incentive to induce beneficiaries to "sign" biometrically for transactions, potentially giving beneficiaries
additional leverage to obtain grain relative to the status quo.


                                                      2
(see details in Section 2.2). This contrasted with the status quo approach, which was to
send each FPS the full amount of grain needed to satisfy the entitlements of all beneficiaries
assigned to it. Reconciliation should therefore (weakly) reduce disbursals, with the key em-
pirical question being the incidence of these reductions on beneficiaries and on leakage. GoJH
launched reconciliation simultaneously in control and treatment areas, two (eleven) months
after deploying ePOS devices in control (treatment) areas. We therefore present experimen-
tal estimates of the impact of requiring ABBA to collect benefits, and non-experimental
estimates of the impact of reconciliation using a pre-specified event study framework (and
also using as a placebo other PDS commodities not subject to reconciliation).
   GoJH implemented ABBA quickly and thoroughly, and largely complied with the experi-
mental design. Six months after treatment onset, 95% of beneficiary households in treated
areas had at least one member with an Aadhaar number seeded to the PDS account, and 91%
reported that transactions at their FPS were being authenticated, while only 6% of control
households reported the same. The ITT estimates presented below can thus be reasonably
interpreted as those of the reform.
   Our main outcomes of interest are the value of goods disbursed by the government, value
received by beneficiaries, and the difference between these (i.e. leakage). We measure these
using comprehensive administrative data on disbursals of commodities to all ration shops
matched to original survey data on commodity receipts and transaction costs collected in four
rounds (one baseline and three follow-up rounds) from a panel of 3,840 PDS beneficiaries.
The first follow-up was used to study the effects of ABBA, and the remaining to study
reconciliation. At the time of the first follow-up, we estimate that the average leakage rate
in the control group was Rs. 116 per ration card per month, or 20% of value disbursed,
indicating that this remains a problem. On the other hand, we successfully located 97% of
the beneficiaries we sampled, implying that at most 3% of accounts were fictitious and that
leakage was taking place primarily through the intensive margin of under-provision rather
than the extensive margin of fake beneficiaries.
   We find that the impacts of ABBA by itself (without reconciliation) were small on average
and, where significantly different from zero, negative for beneficiaries. As expected, ABBA
by itself did not decrease (and if anything slightly increased) government spending. It did
not substantially change the mean value received by beneficiaries or mean leakage. We also
find no meaningful changes in measures of the quality of goods received, of their market
prices, or of beneficiaries' food security. Beneficiaries, however, did incur 17% higher flow
transaction costs to collect their benefits (a Rs. 7 increase on a base of Rs. 41), due in part
to a doubling in the number of unsuccessful trips made to collect benefits.
   While average benefits received may not have decreased, distributional effects are par-


                                              3
ticularly important for evaluating more stringent ID requirements, as the most plausible
downside is that they may exclude a vulnerable minority unable to meet the new standards.
We find using survey data that treatment increased the probability that a real (i.e. not
fictitious) beneficiary received no commodities at all in any given month by 2.4 percentage
points (p < 0.1), implying that nearly 300,000 people lost access to benefits due to ABBA.
Focusing on the 23% of households who did not have at least one member's Aadhaar number
seeded to their PDS account at baseline, we find that exclusion errors increased significantly:
the mean value of rice and wheat received fell by Rs. 49, or 10.6%, and the probability of
receiving none of these commodities increased by 10 percentage points (a 50% increase on
a base of 20%). This pattern of incidence is regressive, as unseeded households tend to be
poorer and less educated than their seeded peers. Overall, these results are consistent with
the critique that ABBA per se caused at least some "pain without gain" (Dreze et al., 2017).
   A potential counterargument, however, is that authenticating transactions was a necessary
first step towards reconciliation, which should reduce disbursals and (potentially) leakage.
Indeed, the data suggest that reconciliation initially had a substantial impact. Focusing
first on the control group, we find a 19% (Rs. 92 per ration card) reduction in the value
of reconciled commodities disbursed by GoJH in July (the first month of reconciliation).
Of the drop, we estimate that 22% represents a reduction in value received by beneficiaries
(based on household-survey data). Thus, of the total reduction in disbursals, 78% represents
a genuine reduction in leakage.
   In treatment areas, effects of reconciliation were more pronounced, and the tradeoff be-
tween errors of exclusion and inclusion somewhat less advantageous. Disbursements in July
fell by 37% (Rs. 182 per ration card), significantly more than in control areas. Of this 34%
represented a drop in value received by beneficiaries and 66% a reduction in leakage. On
the extensive margin, we estimate that an additional 1.6 million people did not receive PDS
benefits in July. The larger effect in treated areas reflects the fact that dealers in these areas
had been implementing ABBA for roughly nine months longer, and thus government records
based on ABBA indicated that they should be holding more accumulated stock (even though
in practice much of this had likely been diverted). Consistent with this pattern, dealers in
treated areas reported a 72% lower expected future bribe price for FPS licenses, suggesting
that they expected a substantial fall in the potential for extracting rents.4
   A longer-run analogue to reconciliation is to delete unseeded ration cards entirely. We
find that the rate of card deletions increased after the onset of ABBA and reconciliation.
   4
    The combination of reductions in leakage for dealers, and reduction in benefits for users made reconcili-
ation very unpopular, and GoJH had to relax and then entirely pause reconciliation after four months in the
face of complaints from both dealers and beneficiaries before reintroducing it the following year. We discuss
details and present estimates of impact over the entire 4-month period of reconciliation in Section 5.


                                                     4
Unseeded ration cards were much more likely than seeded ones to be deleted (36% vs 2%).
In our survey sample, deleted cards included both non-existent ("ghost") households (12%
of deletions) as well as real ones (88%). While these figures are purely descriptive and do not
necessarily imply the exclusion of truly "deserving" beneficiaries, they do highlight another
margin along which cutting leakage likely came at the cost of some additional exclusion.
   Overall, biometric authentication in Jharkhand's PDS was not a free lunch: depending on
how it was used, it either did not reduce leakage or did so at the cost of increased exclusion
error. Considering (conservatively) the case of reconciliation in the control group, a planner
would need to value marginal fiscal savings at at least 22% of the value placed on transfers to
marginal households in order to prefer such a policy to the status quo.5 In the conclusion, we
discuss several practical ways to reduce the likelihood of exclusion errors while still achieving
leakage reductions.
   As with most impact evaluations, one limitation of our study is that we can evaluate
ABBA and reconciliation only as implemented in this specific setting and point in time.
Both measures of ABBA implementation and our estimated treatment effects appear stable
during the window 6-8 months after rollout we measure, suggesting we capture a (relatively)
steady state. Still, exclusion errors and transaction costs may attenuate in the longer run as
Aadhaar-seeding becomes more widespread and connectivity improves. Similarly, reconcilia-
tion may not generate as much "pass through" of the pain of reduced stocks from dealers to
beneficiaries in a longer-run steady state. Yet, while the longer-term effects may be differ-
ent from what we report (especially if governments respond to our findings), the costs and
benefits even of the transition phase of major reforms to social programs are an important
consideration for policy, and our findings provide insight into these.
   Our most important contribution is to provide the first experimental evidence on the trade-
off between Type I and Type II errors from introducing stricter ID requirements for receiving
welfare benefits. Further, we do so in the context of the largest welfare program (PDS) in the
country with the largest biometric ID system in the world (India). Our results are directly
relevant to policy discussions regarding the use of more stringent ID requirements to access
public services in India and other countries.6 More broadly, they add to the evidence base
on how transaction costs affect the incidence of welfare benefits (e.g. Currie (2004) and more
recently Alatas et al. (2016)). As predicted by Kleven and Kopczuk (2011), they illustrate
   5
     In this specific case, the benefits of reduced disbursal may have been even lower as the savings were only
notional, yielding an increased stock of grain in public warehouses as opposed to reduced spending. Over
time, fiscal savings may be possible by reducing the amount of grain procured, but no such policy change
has yet been announced (in part because procurement policy also aims to support farmers).
   6
     They also provide a counterpoint, for example, to recent panel-data evidence that voter ID requirements
have had surprisingly little effect on voter participation in the United States (Cantoni and Pons, 2019).



                                                      5
how the complexity of the process of obtaining benefits can affect their incidence; here,
"complexity" does not appear to have been an effective screening device as the households
excluded generally appear less well off on socioeconomic measures.
   Second, our results illustrate the potential "shadow costs" of controlling corruption. It
is an old idea that systems designed to control corruption may not only incur direct costs,
such as hiring auditors, but also worsen decision-making on other margins ­ for example, by
slowing it down, precluding the use of "soft information," or deflecting attention from other
important matters (Klitgaard, 1988; Wilson, 1989). In addition to measuring the direct costs
of an anti-corruption intervention, as empirical studies typically do, we also provide evidence
that in our setting the indirect costs of excluding marginalized households from their legally
entitled benefits were also considerable.7
   Finally, our findings are directly relevant to research and policy discussions on using tech-
nology to improve governance and state capacity in developing countries. In prior work
(Muralidharan et al., 2016), we found that introducing biometric payments in rural welfare
programs in the state of Andhra Pradesh (AP) both reduced leakage and improved the
payment experience. The impacts of ABBA and reconciliation in the PDS in Jharkhand
were quite different, likely reflecting differences in both program and intervention design
and in policy priorities. Relative to Jharkhand, the intervention in AP featured greater
acceptance of manual overrides to prevent exclusion errors, greater emphasis on improving
the beneficiary experience as opposed to achieving fiscal savings, and relocation of the point
of service delivery closer to beneficiaries. The contrasting results caution against simplistic
characterizations of the effects of new technologies such as biometric authentication, without
reference to details of program and intervention design, and to the beneficiary experience.8
More broadly, they highlight that discussions of external validity in program evaluation need
to pay attention to differences in program and intervention "construct" as well as context.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the context and in-
tervention. Section 3 presents the research design including data collection and estimation
strategy. Section 4 describes results of point-of-sale authentication, Section 5 describes re-
sults of reconciliation and ration card deletion, and Section 6 offers a concluding summary.
   7
     In related work, Lichand and Fernandes (2019) find that the threat of audits reduced corruption but also
displaced spending on services such as public health care in Brazilian municipalities, and that this worsened
some local public health outcomes.
   8
     There are close parallels with the literature on education technology, where the impacts of technology-
based education interventions on learning outcomes have been found to vary widely as a function of design
details (Muralidharan et al., 2019a).




                                                     6
2       Context and intervention
Malnutrition remains a serious problem today in India, which ranked 102 of 117 countries in
the most recent Global Hunger Index Rankings (Grebmer et al., 2019) and had an estimated
38% of children stunted and 36% underweight as of 2015-2016 (UNICEF et al., 2017). The
Public Distribution System (PDS) is the main program by which the Government of India
aims to provide food security to the poor. Through a network of over 527,000 ration shops
known as "Fair Price Shops" (FPS), it distributes subsidized wheat and rice to targeted
households on a monthly basis, and other commodities such as sugar, salt, and kerosene
on an occasional basis.9 The quantity of subsidized goods each household can purchase is
capped based on the category of ration card it holds and the size of the household. Under the
National Food Security Act of 2013, the government has a mandate to include 75% (50%)
of the rural (urban) population as beneficiaries. Individual states administer targeting and
distribution within their boundaries. Overall, the PDS costs roughly 1% of GDP to operate.10
   In part because it creates a dual-price system, distributing commodities at prices well
below their market prices, the PDS has historically suffered from high levels of leakage and
corruption. Commodities "leak" from the warehouses and trucking networks meant to deliver
them to the FPS, or from the shops themselves. At the retail level, dealers have been known
to adulterate commodities, over-charge for them, or provide beneficiaries with less grains
than their legal entitlement.11 Historically estimated leakage rates have been high; Dreze
and Khera (2015) estimate that 42% of foodgrains nationwide and 44% in Jharkhand were
diverted in 2011-2012, which is itself an improvement on the estimate of 73% by the Planning
Commission in 2003 (The Programme Evaluation Organisation, 2005).
   Various reforms meant to address these challenges are underway, including several grouped
under the broad heading of "PDS computerization." We focus on one of the major com-
ponents of computerization: the introduction of electronic point-of-sale (ePOS) devices to
process and record transactions between dealers and beneficiaries. As we describe below,
these devices enabled Aadhaar-based biometric authentication (ABBA) as well as the cre-
ation of a digital transaction ledger. Rollout of these devices was well underway elsewhere in
    9
      Throughout the paper, we use the term "disbursal" to refer to commodities sent by the government to
FPS dealers, and the term "distribution" to refer to commodities provided by FPS dealers to beneficiaries.
   10
      The PDS is enabled in part by India's policy of a Minimum Support Price for essential commodities like
rice and wheat combined with public procurement of these commodities from farmers. The resulting stocks
of foodgrain with the government are then distributed to the poor through the PDS. In this way, Indian
agriculture and food policy intervenes in both the production and distribution side of the market. For PDS
expenditures, see http://www.indiabudget.gov.in/ub2018-19/eb/stat7.pdf. For GDP estimates, see
https://dbie.rbi.org.in/DBIE/dbie.rbi?site=statistics. Both sources accessed on 5 March, 2018
   11
      Under-provision can reflect both power asymmetry between dealers and beneficiaries (when dealers have
the grain), as well as diversion before stocks even reach the village (when they may not have the grain).



                                                     7
India by the time GoJH began its deployment; as of July 2016 an estimated 23% of India's
FPSs had received devices, rising to 54% by December 201712 with the rollout ongoing.13
   ePOS devices perform biometric authentication using Aadhaar, India's landmark unique
ID system. The Government of India launched Aadhaar in 2009 with the goal of issuing
an identification number linked to biometric information for every resident of the country.
As of June 2019, it had issued Aadhaar numbers to 1.24B people, or 91% of the country's
population.14 Investments in ID could be particularly important in India given its historically
unusual situation as a country with a substantial welfare state at relatively low levels of per
capita income and state capacity. Indeed, the government has touted Aadhaar as an enabling
technology which will support reforms to the implementation of a wide range of government
schemes ­ "a game changer for governance," as the Finance Minister at the time put it
(Harris, 2013). Abraham et al. (2017) estimate that it was being applied to at least 558 use
cases as of 2017. Government claims regarding the fiscal savings achieved by introducing
Aadhaar have at times been met with skepticism (Khera, 2016), in part because they did
not differentiate between real reductions in leakage and increased exclusion of legitimate
beneficiaries. To our knowledge, however, there has been no experimental evidence to date
on the impacts of an Aadhaar deployment in any welfare program.15
   Jharkhand is a relatively challenging environment in which to roll out an ambitious reform
such as ABBA. In terms of state capacity, it ranked 17th of 19 major states on the most
recent Governance Performance Index (Mundle et al., 2012), well below 3rd-ranked Andhra
Pradesh in which our previous evaluation of biometric authentication was set. As one con-
crete example, it had the highest rate of teacher absence among all Indian states in both
2003 and 2010 (Muralidharan et al., 2017). Jharkhand also rated relatively low in terms of
key pieces of enabling infrastructure such as rural teledensity (40 telephone or mobile phone
connections per 100 people in rural Jharkhand as of 31 October 2017, ranked 19 out of 19
reported states) and at the middle of the pack for Aadhaar penetration (93% penetration as
of 31 December 2017, ranked 17th of 36 states).16
  12
     For July 2016 statistics, see http://164.100.47.190/loksabhaquestions/annex/9/AS26.pdf/. For
December 2017 statistics, see http://pib.nic.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=1512902. Both sources
accessed 5 March 2018.
  13
     Other PDS computerization initiatives included digitization of beneficiary databases, computerization of
supply-chain management, and creation of grievance redressal mechanisms and online transparency portals.
  14
     For statistic on number of Aadhaar UIDs generated, see https://uidai.gov.in/aadhaar_dashboard/
india.php. For total population statistics, see https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.POP.TOTL.
  15
     In addition to the tradeoffs we discuss here, implementing large-scale biometric ID schemes such as Aad-
haar involves tradeoffs between state capacity and privacy. See Gelb and Metz (2018) for further discussion.
  16
     For rural teledensity statistics, see http://164.100.47.190/loksabhaquestions/annex/13/AU2751.
pdf, accessed March 5, 2018. For Aadhaar penetration statistics, see https://uidai.gov.in/enrolment-
update/ecosystem-partners/state-wise-aadhaar-saturation.html, accessed January 31, 2018.



                                                     8
2.1     The intervention
In August 2016, GoJH introduced ePOS machines in FPSs to authenticate beneficiaries
when they came to collect their rations (Figure 2 provides the rollout timeline). Prior to the
intervention, authentication in the Jharkhand PDS was relatively informal. Each beneficiary
was assigned to a unique FPS and issued a ration card listing members of the household and
displaying a photograph of the household head. To collect benefits, any one of these listed
household members was required to appear in person with the ration card at the assigned
FPS. Anecdotally it was not uncommon for neighbors or friends to collect benefits on their
behalf, or for dealers to hold on to beneficiaries' ration cards themselves. Dealers were
expected to record transactions both on ration cards and in their own ledgers; ledgers were
typically not audited, and anecdotally there was wide variation in record-keeping practices.17
   The reform modified authentication and record-keeping processes. The state gave each
dealer an ePOS device configured to authenticate beneficiaries in one of three modes: online
(81% of shops), offline (15%), and partially online (4%).18 In online mode, the device required
the operator to input a ration card number. It then displayed a list of all individuals who
were both (i) listed as beneficiaries on the relevant ration card, and (ii) had an Aadhaar
number linked ("seeded") to the card. The dealer selected the beneficiary present, and
the device then prompted him/her to place a finger of choice on the device's scanner to
be authenticated against the central Aadhaar database. If fingerprint authentication failed
on three consecutive attempts, the beneficiary could opt to receive a one-time password
texted to their mobile phone number as a fallback method of authentication.19 In offline
mode, the device simply captured and stored fingerprint information for the person collecting
benefits but performed no authentication checks. However, transaction logs were meant to
be synchronized with a server periodically (as explained below). In partially online mode,
the device functioned as in online mode if it detected a network connection and in offline
mode otherwise. Dealers did not have discretion to select modes (but could potentially have
tried to force the device to operate in offline mode by disrupting connectivity).
   The government varied the mode assigned to each FPS in an effort to balance the risks
of inclusion and exclusion error: it sought to enforce relatively strict authentication require-
ments in areas where connectivity was strong enough to provide a reliable connection to the
  17
       One common practice was to keep separate "official" and "unofficial" ledgers, where the unofficial ledgers
recorded actual transactions while official clean ledgers would be produced in case of a government audit.
    18
       Averages prior to August 2017; after this, the government ended the use of partially online mode, with
88% of FPSs operated in online mode and the remaining 12% offline.
    19
       Some officials claimed that at least initially if neither method of authentication succeeded there was
an "override" option available allowing the dealer to authenticate a beneficiary without using Aadhaar, but
officially no such option was meant to exist.



                                                       9
central Aadhaar database, but not deny benefits to legitimate beneficiaries in areas where
connectivity was weaker.20 In our experimental design assignment to receive a machine was
random but assignment to machine mode was not, so that the effects we report represent an
average of mode-specific effects given the assignment policy described here.21
   ePOS devices also enabled digital record-keeping. After authentication, the device would
display any previously uncollected commodity balances to which the beneficiary was entitled,
including the current months' entitlement and any uncollected balance from the previous
month (but not balances from two or more months previous). After completing a transaction
the dealer would record the amount of each commodity purchased in the device, which
would print a paper receipt and also voice the transaction details in Hindi. Dealers were
instructed to give the receipt to the recipient as well as recording the transaction in their
ration card. In practice, recipients often reported not receiving receipts or that these faded
quickly. In any case, the digital ledger maintained in the device became the source of truth
for balance information from the government's perspective, though dealers were of course
free to maintain their own parallel paper records if they wished.
   The government accessed transaction data by synchronizing ("syncing") regularly with
each device. Online devices synced their records with a central government server automat-
ically in real time. Dealers using partially online and offline devices were instructed to sync
data within 48 hours of a transaction, but did not face any obvious repercussions if they did
not. Instead their binding constraint appeared to be monthly: devices would not authorize
new transactions in a given month until the previous month's transactions had been synced.
   The process of seeding Aadhaar numbers to ration cards was ongoing during the period
we study. To seed their ration card, a household first needed to have at least one of the
members listed on the ration card obtain an Aadhaar number, either at camps organized
specially for this purpose or subsequently by applying at the local block or district office. It
then needed to link this Aadhaar number to its ration card, again either at camps organized
for this purpose during NFSA enrollment or by applying at the block or district office. As
of May 2016 (three months prior to ABBA launch), 76.5% of ration cards in areas assigned
to treatment and 79.9% of those in areas assigned to control had been seeded with at least
one Aadhaar number. These figures had risen to 94.5% and 92.6% by October of 2016
and to 99.8% and 99.5% by May of 2018 (roughly one year after the period we examine
experimentally). Note that the seeding process could itself have affected errors of inclusion
  20
       In data collected by our survey team, the proportion of FPS at which no cellular signal could be detected
was 5% for shops with online devices, 10% for shops with partially online devices, and 58% for shops with
offline devices, which is consistent with government guidelines.
    21
       We also report a non-experimental decomposition assuming that, had they been treated early, control
FPSs would have been treated with the same machine mode to which they were subsequently assigned.



                                                      10
and exclusion if it affected decisions about the deletion of ration cards, which we examine
in Section 5.4.


2.2    Reconciliation
Prior to the introduction of ABBA using ePOS devices, GoJH rarely (if ever) reconciled
balances with FPS dealers. For example, if the grain needed to serve all PDS beneficiaries
assigned to a given FPS was 100kg of rice per month, it was GoJH policy to ship 100kg of
rice to that FPS each month regardless of how much rice it had distributed to beneficiaries
in previous months. This reflected in part the simple fact that the government had no timely
and reliable data on transactions at the shops.
   By June of 2017, ePOS devices were actively in use for authentication in 93% of FPSs in
our study area, including those in control blocks, where they were rolled out during April
and May. Starting in July, GoJH introduced a second reform, reconciling its disbursements
of rice and wheat, though not of sugar, salt or kerosene. The full formula used to determine
disbursements under this regime is in Appendix C. To summarize, the government's new
policy was to calculate (a) the amount each dealer would need to meet claims by beneficiaries
against the current month's entitlements, as well as any outstanding claims on the preceding
one month's entitlements, and (b) the amount the dealer should have in stock given the full
history of deliveries and transactions (starting from the time the FPS first used an ePOS
device), and then disburse the difference between these quantities.
   From a dealer's perspective, this reform (if implemented by the book) had two effects.
First, it had a retrospective effect, reducing the amount of rice and wheat received starting
in July: dealers who had not distributed the full amounts disbursed to them in previous
months (as recorded by the ePOS machines) received less. We would expect this effect to
be larger for dealers in treatment blocks, since as of July they had been using devices for 11
months as opposed to 1-2 months for dealers in control blocks. As we discuss below, many
dealers had "opening balances" at the onset of reconciliation equivalent to over a month of
entitlement (based on the amount of grain they had received in previous months against
which no authenticated transaction log existed). This implied that by rule they should have
received no incremental grain at all, since they were supposed to be holding enough stocks
of grains to make all program-required distributions in July. This was true regardless of
the actual amount of stocks dealers held. In practice, many dealers' actual stock levels
were below the official opening balances, either because they had diverted stock to the open
market or grains had spoiled.
   Second, the reform prospectively affected dealers' marginal incentives to report via the


                                             11
ePOS devices that they had distributed grain to ration card holders, since reporting less than
full distribution would reduce the amount they received the next month. The legitimate
incentive to do so was the commission of 1 rupee per kilogram of grain they received for
distributing commodities. In addition, receiving more grains would also make it easy to
divert some while still providing beneficiaries with at least some benefits.
   From a beneficiary's perspective the consequences of reconciliation are unclear. On one
hand, dealers might pass on some share of the reduction in grains disbursed to them, reducing
in turn the amounts distributed to beneficiaries. On the other hand, dealers now needed
beneficiaries to appear and scan their fingerprints to "sign for" transactions on which future
grain disbursements were based; dealers may thus have distributed more grain to beneficiaries
in order to incentivize them to do so. Note, however, that strictly speaking the reform created
incentives for dealers to report that they had distributed grain, not to actually distribute it.
In the words of an official quoted in the media: "Even if someone uses his thumb and gets
2 kg of rice instead of 5 kg, what can you do?" (Singh, 2019).


2.3    Summary
Overall, the reforms introduced by GoJH were representative of the way in which the Govern-
ment of India has envisioned using Aadhaar to reform program administration. In particular,
they made possession of an Aadhaar number effectively mandatory for the receipt of PDS
benefits. ABBA and reconciliation likely made it more difficult for dealers to divert grains
through "over-reporting" the number of beneficiaries (including making up fake or ghost
beneficiaries), but its predicted impacts on their incentives for "under-payment" of benefits
to genuine beneficiaries were ambiguous.
   A priori one would thus expect it to have both strong potential to reduce errors of inclusion,
and a high risk of generating additional errors of exclusion. Media criticism has argued
that it has done exactly that, leading in some cases to preventable starvation deaths ­
"death by digital exclusion," as one headline put it (Singh, 2019). Yet, given the non-
representative nature of these anecdotes, and strong views both in favor of and against the
reform, understanding the impacts of making Aadhaar integration mandatory for receiving
PDS benefits (with a well-identified research design in a representative sample) is a key open
question for research and policy.




                                               12
3      Research design
Our research design follows a pair of pre-specified and pre-registered analysis plans, one
for the evaluation of Aadhaar-based authentication itself and another for the analysis of
reconciliation.22 Appendix D provides a comprehensive list of analysis reported in addition
to what was pre-specified.


3.1     Randomization
To obtain policy-relevant estimates of impact, we sought to design an evaluation that was
"at scale" in each of the three senses identified by Muralidharan and Niehaus (2017). These
include conducting our study in a sample that is representative of the (larger) population
of interest, studying the effects of implementation at large scale, and having large units of
randomization to capture general equilibrium or other spillover effects such as changes in
the market prices of subsidized commodities.23
   We first sampled study districts. Of Jharkhand's 24 districts, we excluded 1 in which the
intervention rollout had already begun and 6 in which a related reform (of Direct Benefit
Transfers for kerosene) was being rolled out. From the remaining 17 districts, home to 24
million people and 15.1 million PDS beneficiaries, we randomly sampled 10 within which to
randomize the rollout of the intervention.24 This design ensures representativeness of the 17
districts in our frame. In practice our 10 study districts appear fairly comparable on major
demographic and socio-economic indicators to all the 14 remaining districts of Jharkhand
(Table 1). Our frame is thus arguably representative of the full population of 5.6 million
PDS households and 26 million PDS beneficiaries in the state.
   Finally, we assigned treatment to large units. We randomized the rollout at the level of
the sub-district ("block"), which on average covers 73 FPSs and 96,000 people. Figure 1
maps treated and control blocks and illustrates their geographic balance and coverage of
  22
     https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/versions/39275/docs/version/document and https://
www.socialscienceregistry.org/versions/39274/docs/version/document respectively.
  23
     Each of these three design choices helps to improve external validity. Conducting experimental evalu-
ations in near-representative samples helps by reducing the risk of site-selection bias (Allcott, 2015). Eval-
uating a large-scale implementation helps because effect sizes have been shown to decline with size of im-
plementation (Vivalt, forthcoming), Finally, randomizing large units into treatment and control status helps
produce estimates that are inclusive of spillovers, which have been shown to be salient for policy in several
studies including Cunha et al. (2018), Egger et al. (2019), and Muralidharan et al. (2020).
  24
     We used stratified random sampling, stratifying on three variables related to geography and socio-
economic status. We used these 3 binary variables to classify the 17 available districts into 8 (2x2x2) distinct
categories. We then sampled half of the districts in each category, rounding down to the nearest integer
and using probability proportional to size (measured as number of FPSs) sampling, and lastly sampled
additional districts without stratification to reach our target of 10. Full details in the Pre-Analysis Plan:
https://www.socialscienceregistry.org/versions/39275/docs/version/document.


                                                      13
the state. We allocated 132 blocks into a treatment arm of 87 blocks and a control arm
of 45 blocks, reflecting the government's preference to delay treatment in as few blocks as
possible.25 Treatment and control blocks are similar in terms of demographic and program
characteristics, as one would expect (Table 2, Panel A). Of 12 characteristics we examine,
one is marginally significant at the 10% level.
   The evaluation was conducted within the context of a full-scale rollout, as GoJH deployed
ePOS devices to 36,000 ration shops covering the entire population of 26 million PDS ben-
eficiaries in the state. This deployment involved a major effort by the government and was
the stated top priority of the Department of Food and Civil Supplies for the year and (anec-
dotally) the single largest use to which they put staff time. We thus measure the effects
of implementation at full scale by a bureaucratic machinery fully committed to the reform,
which are the effects of interest for policy purposes.
   Consistent with this commitment, we find that GoJH complied closely and quickly with
the treatment assignment. By the time of our follow-up survey, households in treated blocks
reported that 96% of dealers in treated blocks possessed an ePOS device and 91% were using
it to process transactions (Table 2, Panel B). ePOS utilization was stable at 90-91% in treated
blocks during January-March 2017, which increases our confidence that we are estimating
steady state impacts and not transitional dynamics. In control blocks, on the other hand, 5%
of dealers possessed a device and 6% were using it to process transactions, largely reflecting
early rollout in one control block.26 Overall these figures suggest that it is sensible to
estimate intent-to-treat effects and to interpret them as fairly close approximations of the
overall average treatment effect.


3.2     Sampling and Data Collection
Our data collection focused on measuring three core concepts: the value of commodities
disbursed by the government, the value received by beneficiaries (both net of price paid),
and the real transaction costs incurred by dealers and beneficiaries to implement/obtain this
transfer of value. Leakage in this framework is simply the difference between value disbursed
and value received.
  25
     Within each district, we assigned blocks to treatment status as follows: We first divided blocks into
rural and urban samples, then stratified them into groups of three by ordering them on the first principal
component of three variables related to household size and benefit category. Within each group of 3 blocks
we randomly assign 2 to treatment and 1 to control. Full details, including how we dealt with districts with
residual strata of fewer than 3 blocks, are in the Pre-Analysis Plan: https://www.socialscienceregistry.
org/versions/39275/docs/version/document.
  26
     Of the 31 control households that report a dealer using an ePOS device, 24 are in one block. The
remaining 7 are scattered across 6 other blocks and most likely reflect reporting errors.




                                                    14
   To measure these quantities we begin with administrative records. These include informa-
tion on monthly quantities of commodities disbursed to all FPSs, which we obtained from
the National Informatics Centre (NIC),27 and the administrative database of eligible PDS
beneficiaries and their assignment to FPSs. We used the latter to draw samples of dealers
and households to survey, and attempted to survey them four times ­ once at baseline and
then at three subsequent follow-ups. We sampled as follows: from administrative records we
drew a sample of 3 FPSs in each study block, for a total of 396 shops.28 We successfully in-
terviewed the dealers operating 367 (93%) of these shops at baseline, and 373 (94%) of them
in the endline. Dealer surveys covered measures of the quantity of commodities received
by the shop each month, their operating costs, the dealers' perceived value of FPS licenses
and interest in continuing to operate a ration shop, and stated preferences for the reform as
opposed to the status quo system. Enumerators also measured using our own equipment the
strength of the four major cellular networks at the shop in order to capture connectivity.29
   For each sampled ration shop we sampled 10 households from the government's list of PDS
beneficiaries,30 which had been created as part of a targeting exercise conducted in 2015 to
comply with the National Food Security Act of 2013. This generated a target sample of
3,960 households. We attempted to interview these households for baseline and three follow-
up surveys to create a household-level panel.31 We ultimately identified and interviewed
  27
      In some cases we were also able to obtain and digitize disbursement records directly from District Supply
Officers, Market Supply Officers, Block Development Officers, and godowns run by the Food Corporation of
India and the state of Jharkhand. These records generally correlated strongly (from 0.87 to 0.95 for various
commodity × month pairs) but not perfectly with the NIC records. We use the NIC records to ensure
representative coverage, but obtain qualitatively similar results if we use the hand-captured ones instead.
   28
      The 3 shops were sampled using probability proportional to size (PPS) sampling, with "size" defined as
the number of ration cards assigned to the shop.
   29
      In follow-up surveys, we expanded the number of dealers surveyed, as a few (7.9%) of our sampled
households had been re-assigned to new dealers in the normal course of operations during the 10 months
since baseline. We report results for both the original and augmented dealer samples, as the reassignment
rate of households is balanced across treatment and control, and the incremental dealers are not statistically
distinguishable from the original ones on measured characteristics (Table A.1). Note also that the reassign-
ment of households to other shops does not affect our ITT estimates because we follow the originally sampled
households. It also does not affect the first-stage or the interpretation of our results because the reassign-
ment was to other FPS in the same block, with the same treatment status (which is another advantage of
randomizing at the block level)
   30
      We define a household here as those individuals listed on a single ration card. We first sampled one village
from the catchment area of each FPS using PPS sampling, with "size" defined as the number of ration cards
in the village assigned to that FPS. We sampled ration cards using stratified random sampling, with strata
including the method by which the household became eligible for the PDS and the benefit category to which
the cardholder is entitled. Full details in the Pre-Analysis Plan, https://www.socialscienceregistry.
org/versions/39275/docs/version/document.
   31
      Because our frame is the universe of households previously deemed eligible for the program, our sample
is not suited to examine errors of inclusion and exclusion in the process of determining who is eligible for
the PDS, as in the extensive literature on poverty targeting. Our focus here is rather on studying changes
in inclusion and exclusion resulting from increased stringency in verifying the identity of those previously



                                                       15
the corresponding household at least once in 97% of cases.32 Overall, we estimate that at
most 3% of beneficiaries were ghosts (see Figure A.1 for a more detailed categorization of
households).33 This is noteworthy as it suggests that the scope for eliminating leakage by
removing ghosts (or non-existent households) from the beneficiary list was relatively limited
in this setting.
   We timed follow-up surveys and their associated recall periods to obtain continuous
monthly data on beneficiaries' experiences with PDS from January through November of
2017. Figure 2 illustrates the recall window covered by each survey. We use data from
follow-up 1, covering January through March, to measures the impacts of ABBA, and use
data from all three follow-ups to examine the impacts of reconciliation. Topical coverage
varied across surveys; follow-up 1 was most comprehensive, while follow-ups 2 and 3 mea-
sured a subset of outcomes (e.g. for households, the quantities of each commodity received).
In particular, we did not measure market prices in follow-ups 2 and 3 and so do not examine
price effects of reconciliation.


3.3     Estimation strategy: Aadhaar-based biometric authentication
To examine the impacts of ABBA we estimate intent-to-treat specifications of the form

                               t                        0                       t
                             Yhf bs =  + T reatedbs + Yhf bs + s +              hf bs                         (1)

where Y is an outcome measured for household h assigned to FPS f in block b of stratum
s.34 Regressors include an indicator T for whether that block was assigned to treatment,
                      0
the baseline value Yhf  bs of the dependent variable, and a stratum fixed effect s . Where we
observe baseline values for multiple months we take their average. Where the baseline value
is missing we set it equal to the overall mean value, and include an indicator for baseline
missingness. When using survey data we weight specifications by (inverse) sampling prob-
abilities to obtain results that are representative of the sample frame.35 We use analogous
specifications for outcomes measured at the level of the FPS or block. We pool observations
for January-March 2017, following our pre-specified plan for dealing with the possibility of
deemed eligible for benefits.
   32
      We successfully interviewed 3,410 (86%) of these households at baseline and 3,583 (90%), 3,618 (91%),
and 3,562 (90%) at follow-ups 1, 2 and 3, respectively.
   33
      Our procedure to classify a household as a ghost is stringent: the survey team makes three visits and
attempts to locate the household as per the address in official records, and we only classify a household as
a ghost household after three neighbors have certified that no such household exists.
   34
      Because the randomization algorithm created 6 strata (3 urban and 3 rural) of size 1, we create a single
fixed effect s for each of these two groups.
   35
      Variation in sampling probabilities was driven largely by field logistics constraints, e.g. the need to plan
to interview a fixed number of households per village rather than a fixed proportion.


                                                       16
non-stationary treatment effects.36
   Each regression table below reports the percent of the original sample for which data were
non-missing and included in the estimation. In Tables A.2 and A.3 we examine missingness
by treatment status and generally do not find evidence of imbalance, with 9% of differences
significant at the 10% level. We impute zeros when calculating quantities and value received
for verified "ghost" ration cards (which account for 1.6% of sampled households and do not
differ across treatment and control groups). We report standard errors clustered by FPS.
In most cases, we have a single well-defined summary measure of outcomes such as value
disbursed or received. We adjust for multiple-hypothesis testing when reporting outcomes
at the individual commodity level, reporting both standard p-values and q -values adjusted
to control the false discovery rate.


3.4     Estimation strategy: reconciliation
GoJH introduced reconciliation in July 2017 across both treatment and control groups si-
multaneously. As mentioned in the Introduction, GoJH also suspended reconciliation in
November 2017 (since it was very unpopular with both dealers and beneficiaries). We there-
fore examine the effects of reconciliation using time series variation in value disbursed and
received using the following pre-specified model:

                     Yhf bst = hf bs + t + R Rt + Rt Rt (t - t ) + Pt +          hf bst                 (2)

where Rt is an indicator equal to one if disbursements for month t were calculated using the
reconciliation formula (i.e. for July through October), t is the first month of reconciliation
(i.e. July), and Pt is an indicator for the one post-reconciliation month in our data (i.e.
November). We estimate the model separately for treated and control blocks. To compare
the two, we pool the data and interact all terms on the right-hand side in Equation 2 with
an indicator for treatment.
   This specification embodies several substantive assumptions. First, we assume the effect of
reconciliation is identified once we control for a linear pre-trend. This is a strong assumption,
but the best that is realistic with 6 months of pre-treatment data (and as it turns out yields an
excellent fit). Second, because we include a distinct indicator for November we do not impose
  36
    We pre-specified that we would (i) estimate models for each month individually, pooled models, and
pooled models with a linear interaction between treatment and month, and then (ii) choose which specifi-
cation to privilege based on the overall tendency of the trend terms to be significant predictors of primary
outcomes. We generally do not observe any evidence of trends, and therefore privilege the pooled estima-
tors. This is consistent with the fact discussed above that program implementation also appeared to have
stabilized by the time of our follow-up. For completeness we report the other estimators in Appendix B.



                                                    17
that outcomes immediately revert to what they would have been absent the intervention.
While the latter assumption would significantly improve power if true, we find it implausible.
Third, we model the potential for (linear) time variation in the treatment effect. This reduces
power and increases the risk of overfitting if the treatment effect is in fact time-invariant,
but seems appropriate given both that (a) theory suggests reconciliation should generate
transitional dynamics, and (b) anecdotes suggest that the government granted many waivers
to the reconciliation policy, and these may vary over time. Finally, we present results using
time-series variation in value disbursed and received for both reconciled commodities (rice
and wheat), and unreconciled ones (salt, sugar, and kerosene). The latter commodities
provide a plausible contemporaneous placebo group to examine the effects of reconciliation.


4      Results: Biometric authentication
4.1     Measuring value transfer
We measure value (V ) as the sum across commodities c of quantity (Q) multiplied by the
difference between the local market price (pm ) of that commodity and the statutory ration
shop price (ps ).37 Formally,
                                 Vht =     Qcht (pm      s
                                                   ht - pht )                          (3)
                                                  c

In total, ration card holders are entitled to a meaningful monthly amount. The mean value
of these entitlements evaluated using Equation 3 is Rs. 595 per month, equivalent to 14%
of the national rural poverty line for an average household in our sample.38 In practice,
however, households receive less than their entitlement. The mean value received in the
control group at follow-up was Rs. 463 per month, or 78% of the mean entitlement. This
was largely not because the government failed to disburse commodities, as (according to its
own records) it disbursed commodities worth an average of Rs. 579 per month, or 98% of
mean value entitled. Rather, it reflects the fact that roughly 20% by value of the commodities
the government did disburse did not reach beneficiaries.
  37
     We find very little evidence of over-charging (below), and hence our results are essentially the same if we
use actual as opposed to statutory ration shop prices. We obtained data on local market prices for equivalent
commodities as those provided by the ration shops. Even if the prices reflected higher quality of market
grains, that would not affect our leakage calculations because we use the same price to estimate both value
disbursed and value received.
  38
     An average household in our sample had 4.4 members, and the national rural expenditure poverty line
was Rs. 972 / person / month (Commission, 2014). The poverty line had not been updated since 2014; if we
adjust it upwards for changes in the rural consumer price index from 2014-2017, then the mean entitlement
was 13% of the poverty line for an average household.




                                                      18
4.1.1    Value disbursed

Table 3 summarizes impacts on value transfer during January-March 2017, beginning in
Panel A with value disbursed by the government. Note that we observe this outcome for
the universe of FPSs in our study area and therefore use all of these data, with outcomes
expressed per rationcard × month. We expect no meaningful changes to disbursements, as
the government's policy during this period was to disburse to each FPS in each month the
full amount to which households assigned to that shop were entitled. We find this is largely
the case, though we do find some modest substitution away from wheat and towards rice
which nets out to a small but significant increase in total value disbursed of Rs. 12 per
ration-card month, or around 2%.39 In any case, there is no evidence that ABBA saved the
government money.

4.1.2    Value received

Panel B reports effects on value received by households using survey data. We see some
directional evidence of the shift from wheat to rice noted above, but no significant change
in overall value received. A 95% confidence interval for this effect is Rs. [-25.2, 22.8], ruling
out decreases greater than 4.3% and increases greater than 3.9% of value disbursed. Any
effects on value received by the average household were thus small in economic terms.
   If the intervention reduces quantities flowing into rural markets which in turn raises market
prices, we might see no overall effect even though recipient welfare had changed. We examine
this possibility in Panel B of Table A.4 reports, and see no significant changes in the mean
quantity of any commodity received, though there appears to be a shift from wheat to rice as
noted above. The market prices households faced for these commodities also did not change
significantly, with the possible exception of a fall in the price of sugar which is marginally
significant after adjusting for multiple testing (Table A.5, Panel A).40
   Turning to quality of goods, PDS dealers are alleged to sometimes adulterate the goods
they sell (e.g. by adding sand or stones to wheat) or sell spoiled goods (e.g. rotten grains).
This may have increased due to the treatment if dealers try to substitute for loss of rents
on the quantity margin. We test this in two ways. First, we asked respondents who had
completed purchases whether they received adulterated or low-quality goods. Overall, few
  39
      By default the government provided rice to rural blocks, but prior to the reform it made exceptions for
those that expressed a desire for wheat, providing them with rice and wheat in 3:2 proportions. After the
reform it appears to have reduced such exceptions.
   40
      Interestingly, dealers do report facing lower prices, notably for rice (Table A.5, Panel B). We view these
data cautiously as (i) unlike the household reports they are not based on actual transactions, and may not
reflect the pricing that is relevant to the beneficiaries whose welfare we wish to examine, and (ii) only the
effect on the price of rice survives the adjustment for multiple testing.


                                                      19
beneficiaries report experiencing these issues and rates are unaffected by treatment (Table
4). In the control group, reported adulteration rates range from 1% to 9% and none change
significantly with treatment. Reported rates of quality issues are similarly low with the
exception that 38% of control households report receiving low-quality salt; this rate is 6%
lower among treated households, with the difference significant before but not after adjusting
for multiple comparisons.
   Second, we asked respondents what amount of money they would have been willing to
accept in lieu of the bundle of goods they purchased at the FPS in each month. This
metric has important limitations; it measures stated as opposed to revealed preferences,
and requires asking subjects a series of questions which they often find confusing.41 On the
other hand, it has the advantage of capturing all aspects of both quantity and quality as
perceived by the beneficiaries. When we replace our default measure of total value received
with this alternative measure, we estimate an insignificant reduction in value received of Rs.
11 per month, equal to 1% of the control group mean. A 95% confidence interval for the
treatment effect is [-5.5%, 3.6%], letting us reject substantial changes in value received in
either direction.

4.1.3    Leakage

Given that value disbursed increased slightly while value received was unchanged, we do
not expect to find reductions in leakage. Panel C of Table 3 tests this directly. We use a
Seemingly Unrelated Regressions framework with the ration card × month as the unit of
analysis and with (i) value received as reported by the household, and (ii) value per ration
card disbursed to the corresponding block as the dependent variables, and then report the
difference between the estimated treatment effects on these variables.42
   We estimate that leakage increased insignificantly by Rs. 14 per ration card × month.
We can reject large decreases in leakage: a 95% confidence interval is [-10, 38] which lets us
reject changes in the share of value lost outside of [-1.7%, 6.6%].
   Because the value figures in Table 3 are based on the difference between market and
statutory ration shop prices, they pick up leakage on the quantity margin (e.g. the diversion
  41
      For households that purchased PDS commodities in a given month we elicited their stated willingness-
to-accept (WTA) by asking for a series of values ranging from Rs. 100 to Rs. 2,000 whether they would have
preferred to receive that amount of money to the opportunity to purchase the commodities they obtained.
We define their WTA as the smallest amount of money for which they answered "yes." For households that
did not purchase any PDS commodities in a given month we define WTA as zero. A high proportion (48%)
of respondents answered "yes" for a range of values but then subsequently answered "no" for at least one
higher value, likely reflecting confusion about the nature of exercise. We believe that the lowest "yes" coding
is the most reasonable way to interpret the data, but clearly they should be treated with caution.
   42
      This approach lets us take advantage of the fact that we observe the universe of disbursements while
also exploiting potential efficiency gains due to covariance in the error terms in the two equations.

                                                      20
of food grains) but may not pick up leakage due to overcharging by the FPS dealer. We
examine this separately in Panel D of Table A.5. Overall, we estimate that the average control
group household overpaid by Rs. 8 for the bundle of commodities it purchased, representing
a small share (less than 2%) of total value received. Treatment reduced overcharging by
a statistically insignificant Rs. 2.6. This makes sense given that the intervention did not
directly change marginal (dis)incentives for over-charging.


4.2     Transaction costs
Using household survey data, we estimate that the average control group household spent
the monetary equivalent of Rs. 41, or 9% of mean value received, in order to collect its
benefits in March 2017. We calculate this using information on the individual trips they
took to the ration shop, whether each trip succeeded, the time each trip took, and any
money costs incurred (e.g. bus fare), as well as information on the opportunity cost of time
of the household member who made the trip. Treatment increased these transaction costs
by a small but significant amount: Rs. 7, or around 1.5% of value received and 17% of
the control mean (Table 5, Column 1). In Table A.6 we examine impacts on the variables
that feed into our total cost measure; the cost increase appears to be due to (i) a significant
increase in the number of trips that were unsuccessful in the sense that they did not result
in any purchases, which doubled from 0.13 per household per month to 0.26, and (ii) an
increase in the opportunity cost of time of the household member who collected benefits,
consistent with the idea that the reform reduced households' flexibility to send whoever could
be spared from other work.
   Using dealer survey data, we reject economically meaningful treatment effects on dealer
costs of storing and transporting grains (Table 5, Columns 2-3), consistent with the lack
of impact on quantities. Finally, using official records, we calculate that the cost of ePOS
deployment was Rs. 6.2 per ration card per month, which was a 5% increase on GoJH's base
of cost of Rs. 144 per ration card per month operating the PDS.43 Thus, overall transaction
costs across the government, dealers, and beneficiaries increased by Rs. 13.6 per ration card
per month, which represents a non-trivial 7.8% increase on a base of Rs. 175.
  43
    The government paid around Rs. 1,600 per month per ePOS machine to an IT provider inclusive of
equipment rental, maintenance, and training. The average FPS in our data has 257 households, yielding an
incremental cost of Rs. 6.2 per ration card per month. While it is possible that some administrative costs
associated with paper-based record keeping were reduced (including time taken to do so), these savings were
not reported in any official spending records. Thus, we treat the costs of ePOS deployment as the change in
administrative cost in treatment areas




                                                    21
4.3     Food security
Given the results above, we would not expect to see impacts on food security outcomes.44
Table 6 confirms this. We examine two measures of a household's food security: a food
consumption score that follows standard World Food Program methodology to calculate a
nutrient-weighted sum of the number of times a household consumed items from each of a
set of food groups in the last week, and a simple food diversity score defined as the number
of groups from which the household consumed any items in the past week.45 We see a tightly
estimated null effect of treatment, with 95% confidence intervals expressed in control group
standard deviations of [-0.11, 0.12 ] and [-0.11, 0.09 ] respectively.


4.4     Distributional and heterogeneous effects
The notion that stricter ID requirements should trade off reductions in errors of inclusion
(including, broadly defined, leakage) against increases in errors of exclusion itself suggests
that effects are likely to be heterogeneous: many may be unaffected, or affected only to the
extent that transaction costs change, while the main risk is that some lose access to most or
all of their benefits.
   The distributional effects of treatment suggest this was the case. Figure 3 plots the CDFs
of value received in the treatment and control groups separately; these track each other
closely except for values close to zero, where there is more mass in the treatment group. The
probability that a treated household received zero value is 2.4 percentage points higher than
a control household (Table 7, Column 1), significant at the 10% level.
   For a sharper test, we examine how impacts differed for the household we would expect to
be most likely to lose access to benefits, namely the 23% of households that were "unseeded"
at baseline: those that did not have at least one member whose Aadhaar number had been
linked to their ration card. These households are generally poorer, less educated, and of
lower caste than "seeded" households.46
   Losses in value received are concentrated among unseeded households. Table 8 reports
estimated treatment effects split by this variable. The reform lowered value received by
  44
     Note that any treatment effects through indirect impacts on access to other, non-PDS benefits which
also required Aadhaar is likely to be minimal since the difference in Aadhaar registration rates between
treatment (96%) and control (92%) was only 4%.
  45
     For more details on these methods including the weights for each food group, which are defined based
on the group's nutrient density, see http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/
manual_guide_proced/wfp197216.pdf?_ga=1.115126021.300736218.1470519489
  46
     Figure A.2 plots the distributions of household income and mean years of schooling completed for the two
most educated household members, separately by seeded status, and in both cases a Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test rejects equality of distributions. Unseeded households are also 5% less likely to be upper caste (p < 0.01).



                                                       22
Rs. 49 per month for unseeded households, equivalent to 12.6% of the control group mean
for this category. This is significantly different from zero as well as from the mean effect
among seeded households. On the extensive margin, treatment lowered the probability
that unseeded households received any benefit by 10 percentage points, also significantly
higher than the (insignificant) impact on seeded ones. While we cannot of course identify
specific households that counterfactually would not have been excluded, this decrease fully
accounts in an accounting sense for the overall decrease in the fraction of households reporting
receiving any benefits in a given month. Treatment effects on stated willingness to accept
are also significantly lower for unseeded households, though not in this case significantly
different from zero. Transaction costs, on the other hand, increase slightly more for seeded
households, consistent with the idea that they are the ones able to continue transacting with
the system, albeit at a higher cost (and that unseeded households may not have bothered
making multiple trips).
   Overall, the results suggest that the reform did cause a significant reduction in value
received for the households least ready for the reform, likely driven by the total loss of
benefits of a subset of these households. Multiplying the 2.4 percentage point increase in
the likelihood that a household in a treated block received no benefits (Table 7, Column
1) by the total number of PDS beneficiaries in treated blocks (6.25 million), we estimate
that around 150,000 beneficiaries were likely denied benefits in treated blocks alone. If we
extrapolate to include the 7 non-study districts (that our study sample was representative
of and which rolled out ePOS everywhere) in addition to treated study blocks, we estimate
that 296,000 beneficiaries were denied benefits.
   We also examine heterogeneity along several additional pre-specified dimensions, including
(i) characteristics likely to matter for understanding the distributional and political conse-
quences of the reform such as caste, education level, and income level, and (ii) characteristics
of the location likely to predict heterogeneity in the implementation of the reform such as
rural status, cellular network signal strength, and the device mode (online, partially online,
or offline).47 In general we find limited evidence of heterogeneity along these dimensions
(Tables A.7, A.8, and A.9.). There is some evidence that wealthier and better-educated
households receive differentially more value and that wealthier households incur larger in-
creases in transaction costs.
  47
    Note that machine mode was not randomly assigned; we identify heterogeneous effects by assuming that
a control FPS would have been used the same machine type it was ultimately assigned once it received
treatment. Further details are in the notes to Table A.9.




                                                  23
4.5    Stakeholder preferences and perceptions
Overall, views on the reform were sharply divided (Table 9). Fifty-three percent of house-
holds and 51% of dealers preferred the reform to the status quo method of authenticating.
Even among unseeded households, which were most hurt as a group, 50% of households pre-
fer the reform to the status quo. Views are quite polarized, with 89% (87%) of households
(dealers) holding a strong as opposed to a weak view one way or the other. One interpre-
tation is that respondents view the question as being as much about their aggregate policy
preferences as about the direct effect of the policy on their wallets. Indeed, respondents often
framed their responses in broader terms (for example, "I prefer the machine because finally
the government is doing something about the PDS"). These responses highlight how even a
reform that hurts a significant minority of citizens may still be politically viable if perceived
as being done in the public interest (and may be supported by a majority of voters).
   We also asked dealers their expectations about future business prospects (Table 10).
Roughly the same share of treated dealers expect to continue running their FPS (Columns
1-2), but they predict that the going price to obtain a dealer's licenses in the first place
will drop substantially, by 72% (Columns 3-4). Expected payments to renew a license turn
out to be negligible and unaffected by treatment (Columns 5-6). We interpret this result
cautiously given that it is a sensitive question and only a minority of dealers provided an
answer. That said, it is intriguing that those who did answer expect the price of licenses to
fall substantially, despite the fact that the reform requiring Aadhaar-based authentication
to avail PDS by itself had not affected leakage. One possibility is that dealers in treated
blocks anticipated that the government would soon begin using authenticated transaction
data to reconcile commodity balances and that this would meaningfully reduce their ability
to divert grain onto the open market. We turn to this next.


5     Reconciliation & ration card deletion
5.1    Policy implementation
GoJH began allocating its disbursals of rice and wheat based on reconciliation of authen-
ticated transaction records from FPSs in July 2017. Anecdotally, reconciliation was only
partially implemented. FPS dealers pressed for and were often granted adjustments or ex-
ceptions to offset its effects (we discuss reasons further below). In Appendix C we examine in
more detail how strictly the government implemented its stated reconciliation formulae. Gen-
erally speaking, the policy had bite, but the government clearly made numerous exceptions
and disbursed grain somewhat more leniently than a strict "by the book" implementation

                                               24
would have implied. The results that follow should thus be interpreted as the effect of the
rules as actually implemented, net of various adjustments and exceptions which were made.


5.2     Effects of reconciliation on value transfer
Overall, the onset of reconciliation coincided with a drop in both disbursements and receipts
of reconciled commodities (rice and wheat), but not of unreconciled ones (sugar, salt and
kerosene). Figure A.3 illustrates this, plotting the evolution of value disbursed (Panel (a))
and received (Panel (b)) separately for reconciled and unreconciled commodities. It also
overlays the raw data with the fit we obtain from estimating Equation 2 and 95% confidence
bands around this fit.48 For both series our pre-specified functional form fits the temporal
patterns quite well.
   For reconciled commodities, both value disbursed and received show little change until
the onset of reconciliation, after which both drop sharply. They then rebound gradually
until October, before GoJH suspended reconciliation in November (see more below). For
unreconciled commodities ­ arguably a control or placebo group ­ both value disbursed
and received drift slightly downwards over time without any substantial change during the
period of reconciliation. If anything, the value of unreconciled commodities received during
this period was high relative to trend.
   The pattern we see for value of reconciled commodities disbursed from GoJH to FPSs is
in line with the government's plans. GoJH's view was that dealers should have been holding
grain stocks equivalent to the opening balances recorded on the ePOS machines at the start
of the reconciliation period and would initially be able to meet obligations to beneficiaries
by drawing these down, after which they would require fresh disbursements. As a corollary,
disbursements from GoJH to FPSs would fall initially but then gradually rebound, which is
exactly what we see in the data. As per the government's intentions, beneficiaries should
not have been affected in this scenario as dealers would be able to fully supply grains in spite
of the temporarily reduced flow of new disbursements from GoJH by drawing down their
retained stocks.49
  48
     We value commodities using market prices obtained from follow-up 1, as follow-ups 2 and 3 did not elicit
updated market price data. The evolution of value metrics thus reflects the evolution of quantities.
  49
     To illustrate, consider a dealer who distributes 85% of his allocation each month, but continues receiving
a 100% grain allocation each month. If ePOS records were available for 8 months before reconciliation, the
records would show an opening balance of 8 × 15% = 120% of a month's supply and the government would
not disburse any grains in month 1 of reconciliation, as the dealer's exiting stocks should be sufficient for all
registered beneficiaries. If the dealer distributes 85% from those stocks in month 1, his opening balance for
month 2 would be 120% - 85% = 35%, and the government would disburse 65% of a month's stock to bring
the stock to 100%. By month 3, a new steady state would be reached in which the government disburses
85% each month as opposed to 100% and the dealer continues to distribute 85% to beneficiaries.



                                                       25
   In the data, however, we see that a meaningful share of the drop in disbursements was
passed through to beneficiaries in the form of lower value received. This likely reflects the
fact that many dealers did not have as much grain stored as ePOS-based records indicated
they did, since some of that grain had previously been diverted. As a result the drop in
disbursements left them unable to meet their full obligations to beneficiaries. This likely
explains why the government came under pressure to adjust its stock records and/or issue
waivers to dealers, and why the data show that it adhered only loosely to the reconciliation
algorithm it had defined (Appendix C).
   In short, GoJH had hoped to achieve a "good" equilibrium in which the threat of recon-
ciliation was enough to ensure that grain was not diverted, allowing it to cut rents from FPS
dealers and other intermediaries without harming beneficiaries. However, once the grain had
been diverted, the government was not able to implement reconciliation without causing
some politically costly harm to beneficiaries, as dealers could and did pass on some of the
pain of reduced disbursals to them. This made the threat of reconciliation costlier for GoJH
to follow through on (and perhaps less credible in the first place).
   In Table 11 we quantify these effects by treatment arm. Figure 4 provides the correspond-
ing plots split by treatment arm. In the control group (which had ABBA for fewer months
before the onset of reconciliation), we estimate that value disbursed fell by Rs. 92, or 19%, in
the first month of reconciliation. Of this, an estimated 22% (Rs. 20) represents a reduction
in value received by legitimate beneficiaries (Panel B), while the remaining 78% represents
a reduction in leakage (Panel C). If we estimate Equation 2 with an indicator for receiving
any grain as the dependent variable to examine the extensive margin, we estimate that the
share of beneficiaries receiving no value increased by 4.3 percentage points. Averaging over
the full 4-month period of reconciliation, we estimate that disbursals were Rs. 46 (9%) lower
per month than they otherwise would have been, and that of this drop 34% was passed on
as a reduction in benefits, with the remaining 66% representing a reduction in leakage.
   The effects of reconciliation should have been more pronounced in treated areas, because
dealers in treated blocks had ePOS devices for longer than those in control blocks (11 months
vs 2), and had therefore accumulated greater recorded "opening balances" of undistributed
grain by the beginning of July 2017. Figure 5 plots the distribution of total grain stocks at
end of June for the treatment and control group separately, illustrating the difference. On
average, the government held treated shops responsible for 7,716 kg of undistributed grain
as opposed to 3,346 kg for control shops (p < 0.0001).
   In line with this intuition, reconciliation in treated areas had larger estimated effects overall
and generated a less advantageous tradeoff between errors of exclusion and inclusion. We
estimate that value disbursed to treated blocks fell by Rs. 182, or 38%, in the first month of


                                                26
reconciliation. Of this, an estimated 34% (Rs. 62) represents a reduction in value received by
legitimate beneficiaries (Panel B), while the remaining 66% represents a reduction in leakage
(Panel C). In each case these figures are significantly larger than the corresponding figures
for control areas.50 On the extensive margin, the share of beneficiaries receiving no value
increased by 13 percentage points. Multiplying this figure by the number of beneficiaries in
treated areas for which our data are representative, we estimate that 1.6 million more people
did not receive PDS benefits during the first month of reconciliation. Averaging over the full
4-month period of reconciliation, we estimate that disbursals were Rs. 86 (17%) lower per
month than they otherwise would have been, and that of this drop 49% was passed on as a
reduction in benefits, with the remaining 51% representing a reduction in leakage.
   As a result of these fairly dramatic reductions in benefits received, reconciliation triggered
considerable negative press coverage and complaints from both beneficiaries and FPS dealers.
Further, the larger reduction in benefits received in treated areas are more representative of
the overall experience in the state because the full state was treated except for the control
blocks, which account for only 13% of the state's total ration cards. Under pressure, GoJH
granted numerous waivers or exemptions and, ultimately, decided to temporarily rescind
reconciliation starting in November 2017. GoJH then restarted reconciliation in August
2018 (after our study period).


5.3     Clean-slate reconciliation
This episode highlights the general importance of managing the introduction of potentially
disruptive new policies carefully, and raises the question of whether there are ways GoJH
could have better managed this particular transition. Recall that from the point of view
of dealers the reconciliation reform had both an incentive effect (increasing their incentive
to record authenticated transactions, and thus potentially increasing beneficiaries' bargain-
ing power) and a resource constraint effect (reducing available grains to distribute to the
extent the dealers stocks were less than the recorded opening balances). The former effect
should tend to help beneficiaries, while the latter seems more likely to hurt them. If this
logic is correct, it suggests that reconciliation might have impacted beneficiaries more (less)
adversely if the resource constraint was tighter (looser). Thus, one alternative would have
been to introduce a "clean-slate" reconciliation, using the same algorithm to determine the
amount shipped each month but setting the initial values of stock for which dealers were
held accountable to zero as opposed to the cumulative opening balances from prior months.
  50
     The proportion of the drop in value disbursed that represents a reduction in benefits received is higher
in treated than in control areas, by 34% to 22%, (though statistically we do not reject the null that these
proportions are the same, p = 0.18).


                                                     27
   We can use our experimental variation to extrapolate and predict the likely results of
such a policy. Specifically, we estimate Equation 2 fully interacted with the FPS-level stock
balance as of the beginning of July 2017, expressed per ration card (the "opening balance").
Since opening balances are endogenous, but vary systematically with assignment to early
v.s. late treatment, we instrument for balance (and its interactions) with assignment to
treatment (and its interactions). This instrument is valid if assignment to treatment altered
the effects of reconciliation only through its effects on opening balances. We then interpret
the point estimates of the main effect of reconciliation, with opening balances set to zero, as
estimates of the initial effects of a clean slate reconciliation.
   The estimates from this procedure suggest that a clean-slate reconciliation would have
weakly increased value received by beneficiaries (Table A.10). Column 4 examines effects
on value received; setting the opening balance to zero, reconciliation would have increased
value received (insignificantly) by Rs. 7.3. The interaction of reconciliation with opening
balance is significantly negative, implying that it was the opening balances for which dealers
were held accountable rather than the reconciliation policy per se which led to the drop in
benefits received. Turning to value disbursed, the estimates suggest that value disbursed
would have declined by Rs. 59 per ration card (Column 1), substantially less than the drop
we see in our data although still greater than zero.
   Overall, this exercise suggests the government could have achieved more modest reductions
in leakage without adversely affecting beneficiaries. It should be interpreted with caution as
it necessarily involves extrapolation: the mean opening balance in the control group, while
only 32% of that in the treatment group, was not zero, so that we do not directly observe
the consequences of reconciliation at a zero balance. That said, the results are consistent
with the basic intuition that the incentive effects of reconciliation should benefit recipients,
while the resource constraint effects may not.


5.4    Ration card deletion
We close by examining the deletion of ration cards, another margin along which the govern-
ment traded off errors of inclusion and exclusion during the rollout of Aadhaar. Some card
deletion was normal, due for example to the death of beneficiaries, dissolution of beneficiary
households, or discovery of fraud. From 2014-2016, for example, GoJH reported deleting 2%
of the total number of ration cards.51 From October 2016 to May 2018 we observe 6% of
ration cards removed from the database for the 10 districts we study, suggesting that the
overall rate of deletion was higher after the rollout of ABBA in the PDS.
  51
     Data from https://data.gov.in/resources/stateut-and-year-wise-number-deleted-ration-
cards-2014-2018-ministry-consumer-affairs-food, accessed 12 July 2019.


                                              28
   Our survey data allows us to match these administrative actions with ground reality
on households whose cards were deleted (non-experimentally). The top panel of Table 12
examines the universe of ration cards in our 10 study districts. We define a card as deleted
if it appeared in the list we obtained in October 2016, but not the list we obtained in May
2018. We define a card as unseeded if no household member had seeded an Aadhaar number
to that card as of October 2016. We observe that unseeded cards were substantially more
likely to be deleted during this period, with 36% of unseeded cards (80, 085/213, 089) deleted
compared to 2% (64, 076/2, 236, 521) of seeded cards.
   Two key questions are whether and how effectively this removal of unseeded cards differ-
entially eliminated fraudulent accounts. In the bottom panel we restrict the analysis to our
sampled ration cards, for which we can categorize beneficiaries as ghosts or not based on the
results of our survey. We estimate that unseeded cards are disproportionately likely to belong
to ghosts, who make up 9.5% (21/232) of unseeded cards, as opposed to just 0.8% (32/3616)
of seeded cards (p < 0.001 from a two-way Pearson 2 test). Deleting unseeded cards does
thus differentially target ghost accounts. However, because ghosts make up such a small
share of the overall population, we estimate that the great majority (88%, or (90 + 97)/213)
of the deleted cards, and even of the deleted unseeded cards (84%, or 90/(15+90)), belonged
to real households. One would thus need to cost inclusion errors at more than five times the
cost of exclusion errors for these terms to be advantageous.
   To be clear, our data do not allow us to estimate a causal effect of ABBA on card dele-
tions. Further, deletions (even of real households) do not by themselves imply exclusion of
deserving beneficiaries. For example, a card might remain unseeded because a (relatively)
wealthy holder did not think it worth the trouble to seed it, and deleting this card would be
desirable.52 At the same time, data from our field surveys show that a considerable num-
ber of deleted cards corresponded to real households. This illustrates another way in which
attempts to reduce leakage may come at the cost of exclusion error of genuine households.


6      Conclusion
Navigating the tradeoffs between errors of inclusion and exclusion in social programming
is a common challenge facing governments worldwide. This is especially so in developing
countries such as India where state capacity is limited and lives may literally be at stake.
In this paper we examine the effect on inclusion and exclusion error of stricter identification
requirements, and do so in the context of Aadhaar, the world's largest biometric ID system.
  52
    In our data, cards held by the better-off among the unseeded are deleted somewhat more often, but this
pattern is not statistically significant.


                                                   29
   On its own, Aadhaar-based authentication of transactions in the PDS had no measurable
benefit; it slightly increased mean transaction costs for beneficiaries, excluded a minority
who did not have IDs "seeded" to their ration cards at baseline, and did not reduce leakage.
When paired with the new reconciliation protocols, ABBA facilitated a meaningful reduc-
tion in leakage but at the cost of concurrent reductions in mean value received by legitimate
beneficiaries, as well as a considerable increase in the fraction who were denied benefits.
These results illustrate how the costs of controlling corruption may include indirect "collat-
eral damage" beyond the direct costs of intervening. They also highlight how intermediaries
can pass on the pain of anti-corruption measures to more vulnerable beneficiaries, and the
importance of considering and studying the incidence of anti-corruption measures.
   Juxtaposed with prior evidence, our results also demonstrate the range of impacts that
"biometric authentication" can have depending on the specific ways it is used. The compar-
ison of these results with our own prior work (reported in Muralidharan et al. (2016)) on the
impacts of biometric authentication in a public employment program and a pension program
in the state of Andhra Pradesh (AP), is especially illustrative. A key point to note is that
both programs reduced leakage. However, in the case of AP, the money saved from reduced
leakage was passed on to beneficiaries, while there were no savings to the government. In
contrast, in the case of Jharkhand, the reduced leakage in the PDS led to reduced disbursals
from the government, but did not improve the beneficiary experience in any way (and wors-
ened it in some ways). In other words, the technology of biometric authentication "worked"
in both settings in terms of reducing leakage. But the question of how the benefits of this
leakage reduction should be shared between the government and beneficiaries is ultimately
a design question and also a political one.
   Overall, the reforms in AP focused more on improving the beneficiary experience and
less on fiscal savings (as seen by their generous manual override provision, which reflected a
strong priority on preventing exclusion errors). In contrast, the reforms in Jharkhand (im-
plementing the policy decision of the Government of India) focused more on reducing fraud
and generating fiscal savings. The differences in results across the studies are consistent with
this difference in emphasis.53 Taken together, our results suggest that "biometric authenti-
  53
     This difference in emphasis is also consistent with patterns of political priorities and messaging around
the world. The government in AP was run by a center-left party, and correspondingly placed greater emphasis
on preventing exclusion. The government in Jharkhand was of a center-right party (and was implementing
a policy priority of a center-right party at the central government) and correspondingly focused more on
reducing fraud. Both sets of emphases are legitimate political choices, and our data on beneficiary opinions
on ABBA suggests that political messaging around the importance of "fraud reduction" can be appealing to a
majority of voters even if a significant minority is hurt. Thus, our results may also be seen as illustrating the
limits of electoral democracy as an instrument for protecting the vulnerable and the importance of institutions
like Courts for securing the rights of such groups even under democratically elected governments.



                                                       30
cation" per se may not be a particularly stable or helpful construct for policy analysis: the
design details of how the technology is used and how it alleviates (or aggravates) existing
constraints matter a lot.
   Another key lesson to note is the importance of credible evaluations of major welfare
reforms. In the AP case, it would have been easy to think that there was no impact on
leakage because there was no change in government expenditure on welfare programs. It was
only with the matched data between administrative records and household surveys (and the
existence of a control group) that we could see that leakage had fallen sharply and that more
benefits were reaching people. Conversely, in the case of the PDS in Jharkhand, it would
have been easy to interpret the reduction in disbursals as evidence of reduced leakage (and
indeed, officials often made this claim). However, it was the matched data using household
surveys that clarified that at least some of the reductions in disbursal were coming at the
cost of exclusion errors.
   Our results suggest that it is important to both build in procedures to guard against ex-
clusion error at the program design phase, as well as monitor this during the implementation
phase. Some design choices that may improve the terms of the trade-off between leakage
reduction and exclusion errors include: (i) authenticating beneficiary lists (say annually)
rather than transactions,54 (ii) creating alternative methods of authentication or override
mechanisms,55 and (iii) conducting reconciliation on a clean-slate basis. Our estimates sug-
gest that the last option might have been effective at reducing leakage without increasing
exclusion errors.
   However, regardless of design safeguards, policy making can also benefit from improving
real-time visibility on the last-mile beneficiary experience with welfare programs to enable
rapid course correction of policies that may be hurting vulnerable populations. One promis-
ing way of doing this may be to use outbound call centers to call representative samples
of beneficiaries regularly and measure if they are receiving their benefits. Recent evidence
suggests that such an approach may be a scalable way of measuring and improving last-mile
service delivery (Muralidharan et al., 2019b).


  54
     Gelb and Metz (2018) similarly argue that "point-of-service biometric authentication for every service
can. . . be overkill" and that "programs also need to allow for people who cannot register or authenticate
themselves in the regular way. . . " On the other hand, authenticating every interaction may be valuable
in cases where physical attendance is an important margin. Bossuroy et al. (2019) find for example that
requiring (non-Aadhaar) biometric authentication in health clinics increased adherence, and reduced over-
reporting of adherence, to a tuberculosis treatment regimen. It may also be important for the portability of
benefits, whereby beneficiaries (especially internal migrant workers) can access their benefits outside their
home location.
  55
     For example, Aadil et al. (2019) find few reports of exclusion from PDS benefits due to ABBA in Krishna
district in Andhra Pradesh, which they attribute to the availability of several override mechanisms.


                                                     31
References
Aadil, Arshi, Alan Gelb, Anurodh Giri, Anit Mukherjee, Kyle Navis, and Mitul
 Thapliyal, "Digital Governance: Is Krishna a Glimpse of the Future?," Working Paper
 512, Center for Global Development June 2019.
Abraham, Ronald, Elizabeth S. Bennett, Noopur Sen, and Neil Buddy Shah,
 "State of Aadhaar Report 2016-17," Technical Report, IDinsight 2017.
Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin A. Olken, and Julia
 Tobias, "Targeting the Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia," American
 Economic Review, June 2012, 102 (4), 1206­40.
 , , , , Ririn Purnamasari, and Matthew Wai-Poi, "Self-Targeting: Evidence
 from a Field Experiment in Indonesia," Journal of Political Economy, April 2016, 124 (2),
 371­427.
Allcott, Hunt, "Site Selection Bias in Program Evaluation," The Quarterly Journal of
 Economics, March 2015, 130 (3), 1117­1165.
Bossuroy, Thomas, Clara Delavallade, and Vincent Pons, "Biometric Tracking,
 Healthcare Provision, and Data Quality: Experimental Evidence from Tuberculosis Con-
 trol," Working Paper 26388, National Bureau of Economic Research October 2019.
Cantoni, Enrico and Vincent Pons, "Strict ID Laws Don't Stop Voters: Evidence from a
 U.S. Nationwide Panel, 2008-2016," Working Paper 25522, National Bureau of Economic
 Research February 2019.
Commission, Planning, "Report of the expert group to review the methodology for mea-
 surement of poverty," Technical Report June 2014.
Cunha, Jesse M, Giacomo De Giorgi, and Seema Jayachandran, "The Price Effects
 of Cash Versus In-Kind Transfers," The Review of Economic Studies, 04 2018, 86 (1),
 240­281.
Currie, Janet, "The Take Up of Social Benefits," Techreport, National Bureau of Economic
 Research May 2004.
Dreze, Jean and Reetika Khera, "Understanding Leakages in the Public Distribution
 System," Economic and Political Weekly, February 2015, 50 (7).
 , Nazar Khalid, Reetika Khera, and Anmol Somanchi, "Pain without Gain? Aad-
 haar and Food Security in Jharkhand," Economic and Political Weekly, December 2017,
 52 (50).
Egger, Dennis, Johannes Haushofer, Edward Miguel, Paul Niehaus, and
 Michael W Walker, "General Equilibrium Effects of Cash Transfers: Experimental
 Evidence from Kenya," Working Paper 26600, National Bureau of Economic Research


                                           32
  December 2019.
FAO, IFAD, UNICEF, WFP, and WHO, "The State of Food Security and Nutrition
  in the World 2019. Safeguarding against economic slowdowns and downturns," Technical
  Report, FAO 2019.
Gelb, Alan and Anna Diofasi Metz, Identification Revolution: Can Digital ID Be Har-
  nessed for Development?, Center for Global Development, January 2018.
Grebmer, Klaus V., Jill Bernstein, Doris Wiesmann, and Hans Konrad Biesalski,
  "2019 Global Hunger Index: The Challenge of Hunger and Climate Change," 2019.
Harris, Gardiner, "India Aims to Keep Money for Poor Out of Others' Pockets," New
  York Times, January 5 2013.
Khera, Reetika, "Opinion: On Aadhaar Success, It's All Hype - That Includes The World
  Bank.," July 2016.
  , "Impact of Aadhaar on Welfare Programmes," Economic and Political Weekly, Dec 2017,
  52 (50).
Kleven, Henrik Jacobsen and Wojciech Kopczuk, "Transfer Program Complexity and
  the Take-Up of Social Benefits," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, February
  2011, 3 (1), 54­90.
Klitgaard, Robert, Controlling Corruption, University of California Press, 1988.
Lichand, Guilherme and Gustavo Fernandes, "The Dark Side of the Contract: Do
  Government Audits Reduce Corruption in the Presence of Displacement by Vendors?,"
  Working Paper, University of Zurich April 2019.
Mundle, Sudipto, Samik Chowdhury, and Satadru Sikdar, "The Quality of Gover-
  nance: How Have Indian States Performed?," Economic and Political Weekly, December
  2012, 47 (49).
Muralidharan, Karthik, Abhijeet Singh, and Alejandro J. Ganimian, "Disrupting
  Education? Experimental Evidence on Technology-Aided Instruction in India," American
  Economic Review, April 2019, 109 (4), 1426­60.
    and Paul Niehaus, "Experimentation at Scale," Journal of Economic Perspectives,
  2017, 31 (4), 103­124.
  , Jishnu Das, Alaka Holla, and Aakash Mohpal, "The Fiscal Cost of Weak Gover-
  nance: Evidence From Teacher Absence in India," Journal of Public Economics, January
  2017, 145, 116­135.
  , Paul Niehaus, and Sandip Sukhtankar, "Building State Capacity: Evidence from
  Biometric Smartcards in India," American Economic Review, 2016, 106 (10), 2895­2929.
  , , and , "General Equilibrium Effects of (Improving) Public Employment Programs:
  Experimental Evidence from India," Working Paper 23838, National Bureau of Economic


                                          33
  Research March 2020.
  , , , and Jeffrey Weaver, "Improving Last-Mile Service Delivery using Phone-Based
  Monitoring," Working Paper 25298, National Bureau of Economic Research July 2019.
Niehaus, Paul, Antonia Atanassova, Marianne Bertrand, and Sendhil Mul-
  lainathan, "Targeting with Agents," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy,
  February 2013, 5 (1), 206­38.
Organisation, Planning Commission The Programme Evaluation, "Performance
  Evaluation of Targeted Public Distribution System (TPDS)," Technical Report March
  2005.
Scott, James C., Seeing Like a State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Con-
  dition Have Failed, Yale University Press, 1998.
Singh, Shiv Sahay, "Death by digital exclusion? : on faulty public distribution system in
  Jharkhand," July 2019.
UNICEF et al., "WHO, The World Bank. Joint child malnutrition estimates--Levels and
  trends (2017 edition). Geneva: World Health Organization," 2017.
Vivalt, Eva, "How Much Can We Generalize from Impact Evaluations?," Journal of the
  European Economics Association., forthcoming.
Wilson, James Q., Bureaucracy: What Government Agencies Do and Why They Do It,
  Basic Books, 1989.




                                           34
                          Table 1: Representativeness within Jharkhand


                                        Study district      Non-study district      Difference     p-value
                                              (1)                   (2)                 (3)          (4)
Panel A: 2011 Census
Population in 2011                          1, 267, 604              1, 450, 864     -183, 260        0.50
Population growth, 2001-2011                       0.23                     0.24         -0.02        0.56
Population density                                  451                      459            -8        0.94
% Literate                                         0.62                     0.66         -0.04        0.22
Panel B: Beneficiary List
Ration cards per FPS                                  308                    293            15        0.45
Beneficiaries per FPS                                 981                 1, 041           -60        0.33
% FPS rural                                          0.92                   0.89          0.03        0.39
% AAY beneficiares                                   0.18                   0.18             0        0.92
Number of blocks                                    13.20                     12          1.20        0.58
Panel C: NSS 68
% With salary income                               0.11                     0.16          -0.04       0.25
Monthly per capita consumption                   1, 097                   1, 298           -201       0.10
Consumption value food                           4, 050                   3, 518            532       0.34
Consumption value fuel/light                        506                      462             44       0.16
N                                                     10                     14

This table compares the 10 districts studied with the remaining 14 districts in Jharkhand using data from the
2011 and 2001 Censuses (Panel A), the PDS beneficiary list prior to baseline (Panel B), and the 68th Round
of the National Sample Survey (NSS 68) (Panel C). Column 3 reports the raw difference in means between
columns 1 and 2. Column 4 reports the p-value from a test of equality of means. "Population density" is in
population per square mile. "Ration cards per FPS" is the ratio of PDS ration cards to the number of FPSs.
"Beneficiaries per FPS" is the ratio of PDS ration cards to the number of FPSs. "% FPS rural" is the share
of FPSs located in areas classified as rural. "% AAY beneficiaries" is the percentage of PDS beneficiaries
covered by the more generous Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) scheme. "% With salary income" is the share
of the population that reports earning a salaried income. "Monthly per capita consumption" is household
monthly per capita consumption in Rs. "Consumption value food" is household monthly expenditure on
food in Rs. "Consumption value fuel/light" is the household monthly expenditure on fuel and lighting in
Rs. Statistical significance is denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.




                                                      35
                      Table 2: Baseline balance and program implementation

                                                                                      Regression-
                                                           Treatment        Control    adjusted        p-value
                                                                                       difference
                                                                (1)           (2)          (3)           (4)

Panel A: Baseline Characteristics
 Priority households                                             13080       12292              345       .82
 AAY households                                                   2922        2576              125       .68
 Aadhaar numbers seeded per rationcard                             2.4         2.4             .046       .58
 Rice disbursed per priority household                              23          20               7.5      .13
 Rice disbursed per AAY household                                   35          32                11      .27
 Number of FPS                                                      73          71              -2.1       .8
 Median household size                                             4.4         4.3             .069       .42
 % of rationcard holders identified via SECC                       .71         .68             .023       .27
 % of rationcard holders identified by application                 .16         .16          -.0014        .93
 % of rationcard holders without eligibility info                  .13         .16            -.022       .22
 Whether at least one Aadhaar seeded                               .77          .8          -.025        .082
 Missing whether any Aaadhaar seeded                              .096         .16            -.024       .19

Panel B: Program implementation
 Dealer   has an ePOS machine at endline survey                       .96       .05         .91***       0.00
 Dealer   used ePOS in January 2017                                   .91       .06         .85***       0.00
 Dealer   used ePOS in February 2017                                  .91       .06         .85***       0.00
 Dealer   used ePOS in March 2017                                     .91       .05         .85***       0.00


This table compares treatment to control blocks within study districts on baseline characteristics (Panel A)
which should be balanced due to randomization, and measures of program implementation (Panel B) which
should not. Column 3 reports the regression-adjusted difference in means after conditioning on strata fixed
effects, and column 4 reports the p-value from a test that this quantity equals zero. "Priority households" is
the number of ration cards assigned to households under the priority households scheme; "AAY households"
is the number of ration cards assigned to households under the Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) scheme.
"Aadhaar numbers seeded per ration card" is the average number of verified Aadhaar numbers seeded per
ration card. "Rice disbursed per priority household" is kilograms of rice disbursed per PHH ration card.
"Rice disbursed per AAY household" is kilograms of rice disbursed per AAY ration card. "Number of FPS"
is the total number of FPSs. "Median household size" is the block median number of household members
listed on ration cards. "% of ration card holders identified via SECC" is the share of ration card holders
whose eligibility was established using data from the Socio Economic Caste Census. "% of ration card
holders identified by application' is the share of ration card holders whose eligibility was determined by local
authorities after submitting applications. "% of ration card holders without eligibility info" is the share of
ration card holders for which we do not observe how they became eligible. "At least one Aadhaar number
seeded" is an indicator equal to one if the household had at least one Aadhaar number seeded to its ration
card at baseline. "Missing Aadhaar seeding status" is an indicator equal to one if we do not observe the
count of Aadhaar numbers seeded to the ration card at baseline. Estimates in Panel B are weighted by
inverse sampling probabilities. "Dealer has an ePOS machine at endline" is an indicator equal to one for
endline survey respondents who reported that their FPS dealer had an ePOS machine. "Dealer used an
ePOS machine in Month X 2017" is an indicator equal to one for endline survey respondents who reported
that their FPS dealer used or attempted to use an ePOS machine in the corresponding month. Statistical
significance is denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.

                                                      36
                Table 3: Effects on value disbursed, value received, and leakage

                            Total          Rice         Wheat         Sugar          Salt         Kerosene
                             (1)           (2)             (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)

 Mean entitlement            595           492             18           19             9              57
Panel A: Value disbursed
Treatment               12**              35***           -27**         .093         .028            -.25
                        (4.9)              (12)            (12)        (.15)        (.045)          (.18)
                                          [0.05]          [0.16]       [1.00]       [1.00]          [0.68]
 Control mean                579           417            72            26           9.4             55
 Observations               26,611        26,611        26,611        26,611        26,611         26,611
 % of frame                   99            99            99            99            99             99

Panel B: Value received
Treatment               -1.2                17              -15          .55          .51            -.56
                        (12)               (10)            (11)        (1.6)         (.58)          (1.1)
                                          [0.96]          [0.96]       [1.00]        [1.00]         [1.00]
 Control mean                463           348            54            14           7.2             40
 Observations               10,396        10,557        10,654        10,670        10,726         10,618
 % of sample                  88            89            90            90            90             89

Panel C: Leakage
Treatment                     14            18              -11          -.46         -.48           .56
                             (12)          (12)            (7.2)        (1.6)        (.56)          (1.1)
                                          [0.72]          [0.72]       [1.00]        [1.00]         [1.00]
 Control mean                116            68            19            12           2.1             15
 Observations               10,396        10,557        10,654        10,670        10,726         10,618
 % of sample                  88            89            90            90            90             89


This table reports estimated treatment effects on the value of commodities disbursed by the government
(Panel A), received by recipients (Panel B), and the difference (Panel C) in endline one (January - March).
The unit of measurement is rupees per ration card-month throughout. In Panel A the unit of observation is
FPS × month and we use the universe of FPSs; in Panels B and C the observation is the ration card × month
and a representative sample of ration card holders in Panels B and C. The dependent variable in columns 2-6
is the relevant quantity of the commodity multiplied by the difference between the median market price of
that commodity in control blocks in the same district, and the statutory PDS price for that commodity. The
dependent variables in column 1 is the sum of the values in columns 2-6. In Panel C, estimated effects are the
difference between estimated effects on block-level mean value disbursed per ration card and value received
per ration card, estimated within a Seemingly Unrelated Regression framework. All specifications include
strata fixed effects and the baseline value of the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered at the block
level are reported in parentheses, with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01. q
values adjusted to control the false discovery rate across the five commodities are reported in brackets.




                                                     37
                           Table 4: Effects on quality of ration received

                            Rice            Wheat             Sugar              Salt            Kerosene
                            (1)               (2)               (3)              (4)                (5)

Panel A: Adulteration
Treatment             .0097                 .0074               .01             -.0036             -.0019
                      (.012)                (.027)           (.0079)           (.0076)             (.003)
                      [0.88]                [1.00]            [0.88]            [1.00]             [1.00]
 Control mean               .087             .068             .028               .033              .0095
 Observations              3,308              971             2,305             2,381              3,205
 % of sample                 84               25               58                 60                 81

Panel B: Low quality
Treatment                  -.0014            .045              .014            -.058**             -.0008
                          (.0068)           (.031)           (.0088)            (.029)            (.0026)
                           [1.00]           [0.58]            [0.58]            [0.52]             [1.00]
 Control mean               .036             .069             .056               .38               .0076
 Observations              3,329              975             2,319             2,402              3,228
 % of sample                 84               25               59                61                  82


This table reports estimated treatment effects on the quality of commodities received by beneficiaries in
endline one (January - March). The unit of analysis is the ration card in both panels. The dependent
variable in Panel A is an indicator equal to one if the respondent reported receiving adulterated commodities
at least once in the past three months for each of the five commodities. The dependent variable in Panel
B is an indicator equal to one if the respondent reported that the overall quality of commodities received
over the past three months was "very bad" or "bad" (as opposed to "OK" or "good') for each of the five
commodities. In both panels, observation of the outcome is conditional on the ration card holder purchasing
a positive quantity of the commodity during January-March 2017. All regressions include strata fixed effects
and the baseline value of the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported
in parentheses, with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01. q values adjusted to
control the false discovery rate across the five commodities are reported in brackets.




                                                     38
                                 Table 5: Effects on transaction costs

                                    Beneficiary                      Dealer                     Government
                                      costs                          costs                         costs
                                         (1)                (2)                (3)                   (4)
 Treatment                              6.9                 .51                .65                   6.2
                                        (3.8)              (.95)              (.63)                   ­
 Adjusted R2                             .09                .10              .28                      ­
 Reference group mean                    41                 6.8              5.9                     144
 Observations                           3,538               441              367                      ­
 % of sample                             89                  ­               93                       ­
 Sample                                   ­                 Full          Restricted                  ­


This table reports estimated treatment effects on measures of transaction costs incurred transferring PDS
commodities. In column 1 the unit of analysis is the ration card and the dependent variable is the total cost
incurred in March by the household holding that ration card in purchasing or attempting to purchase PDS
commodities, including time and money costs (see text for details). In columns 2 and 3 the unit of analysis
is the FPS and the dependent variable is the total cost incurred by the dealer to transport and store PDS
commodities in an average month in January - March divided by the number of ration cards assigned to that
dealer. In column 2 the sample includes all dealers surveyed, including those to whom sampled households
switched between baseline and endline; in column 3 it includes only dealers drawn in the original sample.
Column 4 reports the mean administrative cost per ration card × month incurred by the state government
to administer the PDS, but does not report an estimated treatment effect as cost data disaggregated by
block are not available. All specifications include strata fixed effects, and regressions in columns 1-3 include
the baseline value of the outcome variable. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in
parentheses with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.




 Estimated separately using vendor costs. We do not calculate if this is significantly different from that in
the control group.




                                                      39
                                      Table 6: Effects on food security

                                      Dietary diversity score                        Food consumption score
                                                 (1)                                              (2)
 Treatment                                      -.011                                             .08
                                               (.061)                                             (1)
 Adjusted R2                                     .05                                              .10
 Control mean                                    5.7                                               43
 Observations                                   3,578                                            3,578
 % of sample                                     90                                               90


This table reports estimated treatment effects on measures of food security in March. The unit of observation
is the ration card. The dependent variable in column 1 is the sum of a series of indicators each equal to one
if the household has consumed any items from within a major food group during the previous week. The
dependent variable in column 2 is a weighted sum of the number of times the household consumed items
from each major food group in the past week, with weights based on the group's nutrient density.The major
food groups are: main staples, pulses, vegetables, fruit, meat and fish, milk, sugar, oil, and condiments. The
definition of food groups and their weights can be found from the World Food Programme. All regressions
include strata fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in parentheses. Statistical
significance is denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.



                     Table 7: Effects on the extensive margin of value received


                       Any Commodity              Rice        Wheat         Sugar         Salt           Kerosene
                               (1)                (2)           (3)           (4)          (5)             (6)
 Treatment                   -.024*               -.025        -.064         -.011       .0049             -.013
                             (.014)              (.016)       (.047)        (.019)       (.018)           (.018)
                                                 [1.00]       [1.00]        [1.00]       [1.00]           [1.00]

 Adjusted R2                  0.10               0.10          0.32          0.05         0.04             0.10
 Control mean                  .85                .83           .28           .28          .29              .75
 Observations                10,396             10,557        10,654        10,670       10,726           10,618
 % of sample                   88                 89            90            90           90               89


This table reports estimated treatment effect on the extensive margin of the values received by beneficiaries
per month in endline one (January - March). The unit of analysis is the ration card-month. The dependent
variable in columns 2-6 is an indicator equal to one if the ration card holder received a positive quantity
of the commodity in a given month. The dependent variable in column 1 is an indicator of whether the
household received a positive quantity of any commodity in a given month. All regressions include strata
fixed effects and the baseline value of the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered at the block level
are reported in parentheses, with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01. q values
adjusted to control the false discovery rate across the five commodities are reported in brackets.




                                                         40
                        Table 8: Heterogeneous effects by Aadhaar seeding


                                                                       At least one
                                                                     Aadhaar seeded?
                                                    (1)                      (2)                       (3)
                                                    No                      Yes
                                                                                                       
                                                  (N=797)                 (N=2645)
 Value received (market prices)                    -49                         .054                  49
                                                    (18)                       (14)                   (15)
 Value received>0                                  -.1                        -.023                 .079
                                                   (.024)                    (.015)                  (.022)
 Value received (WTA)                                -31                        37                     68
                                                    (36)                       (22)                   (35)
 Transaction costs                                   6.8                      8.9                      2.1
                                                    (6.6)                     (4.3)                   (6.9)



This table reports estimated differential treatment effects by Aadhaar seeding status in endline one (January
- March). Column 1 (2) reports estimated treatment effects for households that did not (did) have at least one
member with an Aadhaar number seeded to their ration cards at baseline. Column 3 reports the difference
between these effects. Each row represents a different primary outcome; all estimates are derived from a
single underlying regression that interacts treatment with an indicator equal to one for households with one
or more Aadhaar numbers seeded. All specifications include strata fixed effects and the baseline value of the
dependent variable when available. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in parentheses
with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.




                                                     41
                          Table 9: Perceptions of the ePOS intervention


                                                                                  Households      Dealers
 Overall, do you prefer ePOS to the old system of manual transactions?             (N=2182)      (N=288)
 Strongly disagree                                                                    .44          .45
 Weakly disagree                                                                      .03          .04
 Weakly agree                                                                         .08          .09
 Strongly agree                                                                       .45          .42
 Did not know/answer                                                                  .01           ­
 Reasons for preference of manual transactions:                                    (N=1023)      (N=150)
 It is cheaper to run FPS operations                                                   ­            1
 Manual transactions faster                                                           .66          .75
 Manual transactions easier to understand                                             .44          .62
 There are no problems with network or software                                       .28          .74
 Anyone can collect rations on my behalf                                              .43          .06
 Could give ration to those who did not have ration cards                              ­           .03
 Dealer to verify amounts purchased                                                   .01           ­
 It is more profitable                                                                 ­           .01
 Other                                                                                .01          .02
 Reasons for preference of ePOS enabled transactions:                              (N=1165)      (N=137)
 ePOS transactions are faster                                                         .54          .60
 There is a lower chance of fraud by the FPS dealer                                   .56           ­
 The official transaction is equal to what I receive                                  .14           ­
 I know my exact ration entitlement and payment amounts                               .15           ­
 Nobody else can collect ration in my name                                            .38           ­
 Ration balance carry forward if I don't collect                                      .06          .13
 I receive physical receipts after ePOS transactions                                  .18           ­
 I receive text messages after ePOS transactions                                      .02           ­
 The dealer calls me to buy ration as he cannot hide supply                           .07           ­
 Better relationship with beneficiaries                                                ­           .64
 Beneficiaries are more informed                                                       ­           .35
 Nobody can steal ration from beneficiary                                              ­           .48
 Other                                                                                 ­           .02

This table reports summary statistics of households' and FPS dealers' stated preferences for and perceptions
of the ePOS intervention in March. The sample is restricted to households and dealers in treated blocks.
In Panel B the sample is further restricted to respondents who said they strongly or weakly disagreed in
Panel A, while in Panel C it is restricted to those who strongly or weakly agreed. Estimates are weighted by
inverse sampling probabilities. Some values are missing because the list of options provided to households
and dealers differed.




                                                    42
                               Table 10: Effects on dealer expectations

                       Intends to continue                 Expected bribes            Expected bribes
                          running FPS?                    to obtain license?          to renew license?
                       (1)            (2)              (3)              (4)           (5)           (6)
 Treatment             .054           .033          -56,816           -58,393        -111           -83
                      (.055)         (.059)          (28,561)         (33,370)      (123)          (147)
 Adjusted R2           .093          .13               .31             .27           .053         .035
 Control mean           .73          .71             76,590          81,188          565           555
 Observations          437           366              150              127           370           307
 % of sample                         92                                32                          78
 Sample                Full       Restricted           Full         Restricted       Full       Restricted


This table reports estimated treatment effects on measures of FPS dealers' expectations in March about the
future. The unit of analysis is the FPS. The dependent variable in columns 1-2 is an indicator equal to 1 if
the dealer responded "yes" when asked whether they intended to continue running an FPS for the next two
years and to 0 if they responded "maybe" or "no." The dependent variable in columns 3-4 is the dealer's
estimate of the additional money (excluding official fees) someone would have to pay to obtain a new license
to operate a FPS. The dependent variable in columns 5-6 is the dealer's estimate of the additional money
(excluding official fees) an existing FPS dealer would have to pay to renew his or her license. In columns
1, 3 and 5 the sample includes all dealers surveyed, including those to whom sampled households switched
between baseline and endline; in columns 2, 4 and 6 it includes only dealers drawn in the original sample.
All specifications include strata fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in
parentheses with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.




                                                     43
                                  Table 11: Effects of reconciliation


                                           Reconciled                              Unreconciled
                              Treatment      Control       Difference   Treatment    Control      Difference
                                  (1)          (2)            (3)          (4)         (5)           (6)

 Mean entitlement                 512          504             8           71           68            3
Panel A: Value disbursed
Reconciliation                 -182***       -92***         -90***       -2.1***        .24        -2.3***
                                 (2.3)        (2.9)          (3.8)        (.24)        (.39)        (.46)
 Reconciliation * Month          64***        31***          33***       8.2***       7.9***          .3
                                  (1)         (1.2)          (1.6)        (.11)        (.15)        (.19)
 January 2017 mean               496          488                          86           83
 Observations                   66,404       31,350                      66,404       31,350
 % of frame                       96           96                          96           96

Panel B: Value received
Reconciliation                  -62***        -20**         -43***         19         -4.1**         23
                                 (7.4)        (7.9)          (11)         (32)         (1.7)        (32)
 Reconciliation * Month          13***         2.9            10*          -8.3       2.2**          -10
                                 (3.9)        (4.2)          (5.7)        (8.8)       (.84)         (8.9)
 January 2017 mean               406          408                          66           60
 Observations                   25,469       13,447                      25,349       13,334
 % of sample                      89           91                          88           90

Panel C: Leakage
Reconciliation                 -121***       -72***         -49***         -21        4.7***         -25
                                 (9.1)        (10)           (14)         (32)         (1.8)        (32)
 Reconciliation * Month          51***        28***          23***         17*        5.5***         11
                                 (4.7)        (5.4)          (7.1)         (9)         (.93)         (9)
 January 2017 mean                90           81                          20           23
 Observations                   25,469       13,447                      25,349       13,334
 % of sample                      89           91                          88           90


This table reports estimates of the effect of reconciliation on measures of the value disbursed by the gov-
ernment (Panel A), received by recipients (Panel B), and the difference (Panel C) separately for treatment
and control areas using data from all three endlines. The unit of analysis is the FPS-month in Panel A and
the ration card-month in Panels B and C, but all figures are per ration card-month. Observation counts
vary by panel because we use the universe of FPSs to estimate effects on disbursements in Panel A, and
a representative sample of ration card holders in Panels B and C, but all samples are representative. The
dependent variable in columns 1 and 2 is the sum of values for rice and wheat, and the dependent variable
in columns 4 and 5 is the sum of values for sugar, salt, and kerosene. Per-commodity values are defined in
the notes to Table 3 above. Columns 3 and 6 test the difference between columns 1 ,2 and 4,5, respectively.
Standard errors clustered at the FPS level are reported in parentheses, with statistical significance denoted
as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.

                                                      44
                          Table 12: Decomposition of ration card deletions

                                     Deleted           Non-deleted             Total                 %

                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                 (4)

 Admin data
 Unseeded                             80,085             133,004             213,089               8.7%
 Seeded                               64,076            2,172,445           2,236,521             93.1%
 Total                               144,161            2,305,449           2,449,610              100%
 % of overall total                   5.9%                94.1%               100%
 Survey data
 Unseeded and ghost                      15                 6                    21                .5%
 Unseeded and not ghost                  90                142                  232               5.9%
 Seeded and ghost                        11                 21                   32                .8%
 Seeded and not ghost                    97                3519                3616               92.7%
 Total                                  213                 3688               3901                100%
 % of overall total                    5.5%                94.5%               100%

This table reports the decomposition of ration card deletions by Aadhaar seeding status. The top panel
shows the results from the universe of ration cards in our 10 study districts, and the bottom panel shows
results from our sampled ration cards, for which we show counts adjusted by sampling probability and
categorized beneficiaries as based on survey results. A ration card is if it was present in the beneficiary list
in October 2016 but absent in May 2018, and is if still present in May 2018. A ration card is if it did not
have any Aadhaar number seeded to the card in October 2016, and if it did.




                                                      45
                            Figure 1: Blockwise treatment assignment




                                                                      Non-study    Control   Treatment



This figure shows the assignment of districts within Jharkhand to study (10) and non-study (14) status,
and the assignment of blocks within these districts to treatment and control. Note that four of the census
blocks depicted here are further sub-divided for the purposes of PDS administration into an urban and a
rural "PDS block;" in these cases we give the entire census block the color corresponding to the treatment
status of its larger, rural PDS block.




                                                   46
                                                 Figure 2: Intervention and data collection timeline


                                                     2016                                                             2017

                        Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul           Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul                 Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

      Interventions

      ePOS
      (T blocks)
      ePOS
      (C blocks)

      Reconciliation

      Data coverage

      Baseline survey




47
      Endline one

      Endline two

      Endline three

      Transactions
      (T blocks)
      Transactions
      (C blocks)
      Disbursements
      (Manual)
      Disbursements
      (Digital/NIC)


     This figure plots the evolution of the interventions delivered by the Government of Jharkhand (top panel) and the coverage of the various data sources
     we use for analysis (bottom panel). Transaction data coverage in control areas in May 2017 is partial, as the rollout of ePOS devices in control areas
     began but did not finish in that month.
                          Figure 3: Value received as a proportion of entitlement
             1.00




             0.75
Proportion




             0.50




             0.25




             0.00
                    0.0      0.2               0.4                 0.6                   0.8         1.0
                                    Value delivered/statutory value entitled per month

                                                     Control         Treatment




This figure plots the empirical cumulative distribution, separately for households in treatment and control
blocks, of value received divided by value entitled per month, pooling the months of January, February, and
March 2017. To improve legibility we right-censor the distributions at the 90th percentile.




                                                        48
                                                       Figure 4: Effects of reconciliation on value disbursed and received, by treatment
                                                                                              (a) Value disbursed
          Average disbursement value per rationcard




                                                      500


                                                      400


                                                      300


                                                      200


                                                      100


                                                        0
                                                             Jan    Feb      Mar       Apr       May       Jun       Jul      Aug      Sep       Oct      Nov
                                                                                                          Month


                                                                                              (b) Value received



                                                 500
 Average receipt value per rationcard




                                                 400



                                                 300



                                                 200



                                                 100



                                                       0
                                                            Jan    Feb       Mar       Apr      May       Jun        Jul      Aug      Sep       Oct      Nov
                                                                                                         Month

                                                                   Fitted values, control, non-reconciled          Observed values, control, non-reconciled
                                                                   Fitted values, control, reconciled              Observed values, control, reconciled
                                                                   Fitted values, treatment, non-reconciled        Observed values, treatment, non-reconciled
                                                                   Fitted values, treatment, reconciled            Observed values, treatment, reconciled

This figure plots the evolution of the average value of commodities disbursed (Panel A) and received (Panel
B) by treatment status from January to November of 2017. The unit is the ration card-month. Value
disbursed and value received are as described in Figure A.3. Dotted lines represent the raw data, while solid
lines and dashed lines represent fitted values obtained by estimating Equation2 for treatment and control,
respectively. The shaded bands represent 95% confidence
                                                      49 intervals for the fitted values. Values are shown
separately for commodities that were (blue) and were not (black) separately subject to reconciliation. The
shaded region from July to November indicates the period of reconciliation.
                           Figure 5: Recorded grain stock as of June 2017, by treatment status

              .4      .3
   Proportion of shops
           .2 .1
              0




                           0           5,000         10,000        15,000             20,000      25,000
                                                          Kilograms

                                                      Treated               Control



This figure shows the distribution of grain (i.e. rice and wheat) in kilograms held by FPSs at the end of
June 2017 according to government records, separately for shops in treated and control blocks. The unit of
observation is the FPS. To increase legibility the distributions are right-censored at the 95th percentile.




                                                           50
A       Supplemental exhibits

                              Table A.1: Comparison of dealer samples


                                                                                   Regression-
                                                   Original       Additional
                                                                                    adjusted         p-value
                                                   sample          sample
                                                                                    difference
 Treatment                                            .67             .77             -.081*           .07
 Age                                                   44              43                1.5           .33
 Years of education                                   9.8              10               -.22           .74
 Has an FPS dealer in family                          .13             .27               -.12           .18
 Years as FPS dealer                                   14              14              -.094           .95
 Has other income sources                             .79             .73              .066            .32
 Runs FPS out of own home                             .61             .73              -.16*           .06
 Days open per month                                   19              20              -1.4*           .10
 Hours open per day                                   6.7             6.7              -.073           .80
 Days mandated to be open per month                   23               24               -.58           .56
 Hours selling PDS commodities per day                6.5             7.3               -.78           .50
 Hours mandated to be open per day                    6.9               7                .01           .97
 Number of total ration cards                         269             291               -20            .51
 Number of PH ration cards                            225             249               -21            .46
 Number of AAY ration cards                            44              42                 .7           .89
 Number of villages                                    2              2.5               -.38           .12


This table compares the PDS dealers originally sampled at baseline ("original sample") with those added at
the first endline as a result of ration card re-assignment across ration shops ("additional sample"). Columns
1 and 2 report the means of each variable for the respective groups. Column 3 reports the coefficient from a
regression of the given variable on an indicator for being in the original sample, controlling for strata fixed
effects, and column 4 reports the p-value for a test that this coefficient is zero. Estimates are weighted by
inverse sampling probabilities. Statistical significance is denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01




                                                      51
             Table A.2: Outcome missingness by treatment status: all households

                                                        Treatment      Control    difference    p-value
     HH classified as ghost                                    .013        .025        -.0059        .15
     Quantity rice purchased in January                        .032        .039        -.0039        .66
     Quantity rice purchased in February                       .035        .037      -.00042         .96
     Quantity rice purchased in March                          .034        .041        -.0071        .41
     Quantity wheat purchased in January                       .026        .025         .0031        .69
     Quantity wheat purchased in February                      .028        .025         .0034        .67
     Quantity wheat purchased in March                         .025        .024         .0016        .82
     Quantity sugar purchased in January                       .021        .029        -.0078        .18
     Quantity sugar purchased in February                       .02        .028        -.0076        .19
     Quantity sugar purchased in March                         .024        .026        -.0017        .75
     Quantity salt purchased in January                        .016        .024        -.0073        .17
     Quantity salt purchased in February                       .015        .023        -.0081        .11
     Quantity salt purchased in March                          .017         .02        -.0033        .51
     Quantity kerosene purchased in January                    .025        .038        -.0084        .35
     Quantity kerosene purchased in February                   .025        .036        -.0081        .38
     Quantity kerosene purchased in March                      .026        .038        -.0081        .33
     Value rice purchased in January                           .032        .039        -.0039        .66
     Value rice purchased in February                          .035        .037      -.00042         .96
     Value rice purchased in March                             .034        .041        -.0071        .41
     Value wheat purchased in January                          .026        .025         .0031        .69
     Value wheat purchased in February                         .028        .025         .0034        .67
     Value wheat purchased in March                            .025        .024         .0016        .82
     Value sugar purchased in January                          .021        .029        -.0078        .18
     Value sugar purchased in February                          .02        .028        -.0076        .19
     Value sugar purchased in March                            .024        .026        -.0017        .75
     Value salt purchased in January                           .016        .024        -.0073        .17
     Value salt purchased in February                          .015        .023        -.0081        .11
     Value salt purchased in March                             .017         .02        -.0033        .51
     Value kerosene purchased in January                       .025        .038        -.0084        .35
     Value kerosene purchased in February                      .025        .036        -.0081        .38
     Value kerosene purchased in March                         .026        .038        -.0081        .33
     Total value purchased in January                          .049        .054        -.0019        .84
     Total value purchased in February                         .045        .054        -.0069        .47
     Total value purchased in March                            .049        .054        -.0047        .62

This table reports the rate at which various household outcomes measured in endline one (January - March)
are not observed, by treatment status. We include all surveyed households and all households categorized
as "ghosts." Columns 1 and 2 report the mean of each outcome among treatment and control households,
respectively. Column 3 reports the simple differnece between these, and Column 4 reports the p-value on a
test of the null that this difference is equal to zero. Estimates are weighted by inverse sampling probabilities.




                                                       52
       Table A.3: Outcome missingness by treatment status: surveyed households

                                                Treatment   Control   difference p-value

Sampled rationcard is inactive                       .019      .013       .0089      .097*
Household does not know of sampled rationcard        .054      .073        -.015       .18
Willingness to accept in January                      .12       .12       .0036        .78
Willingness to accept in February                     .14       .12         .025       .11
Willingness to accept in March                        .14       .12         .022        .2
Rice was low quality                                 .071       .06         .021    .043**
Wheat was low quality                                 .77       .66           .08      .15
Sugar was low quality                                 .36        .3         .038       .22
Salt was low quality                                  .33       .34       .0021        .95
Kerosene was low quality                               .1      .094         .023     .097*
Rice was adulterated                                 .077      .067         .019     .095*
Wheat was adulterated                                 .77       .66         .081       .15
Sugar was adulterated                                 .36        .3         .039       .21
Salt was adulterated                                  .34       .35     .00093         .98
Kerosene was adulterated                               .1       .11         .016       .27
Access cost in January                                .11       .13        -.015       .27
Access cost in February                               .11       .13        -.015       .31
Access cost in March                                .0085      .016      -.0057        .13
Total access cost in March                          .0085      .016      -.0057        .13
Overcharge on rice in January                        .045      .062      -.0099        .37
Overcharge on rice in February                       .047      .063          -.01      .35
Overcharge on rice in March                          .045      .069          -.02    .074*
Overcharge on wheat in January                       .035      .045      -.0041        .69
Overcharge on wheat in February                      .037       .05      -.0071        .51
Overcharge on wheat in March                         .034      .048      -.0081        .41
Overcharge on sugar in January                       .041      .052      -.0074        .34
Overcharge on sugar in February                       .04      .056        -.017     .099*
Overcharge on sugar in March                         .042      .045      -.0024        .74
Overcharge on salt in January                        .032      .037      -.0037        .58
Overcharge on salt in February                       .028      .036      -.0092         .2
Overcharge on salt in March                          .031      .036      -.0053        .35
Overcharge on kerosene in January                    .044      .058      -.0085        .48



                                        53
 Overcharge on kerosene in February                                   .044         .058        -.0092        .47
 Overcharge on kerosene in March                                      .051         .059        -.0047         .7
 Total overcharge in January                                          .094          .11          -.004       .79
 Total overcharge in February                                         .089          .12          -.024       .12
 Total overcharge in March                                            .097          .12          -.021       .17
 FPS-level market price of rice in March                              .027         .039          -.011       .62
 FPS-level market price of wheat in March                              .38          .47          -.098     .064*
 FPS-level market price of sugar in March                             .027         .045          -.019       .38
 FPS-level market price of salt in March                             .0051            0         .0056        .18
 FPS-level market price of kerosene in March                           .36          .42          -.078       .16
 HH-level market price of rice in March                                .53          .53          -.025       .22
 HH-level market price of wheat in March                               .87          .87          -.021       .16
 HH-level market price of sugar in March                               .45          .49          -.037        .2
 HH-level market price of salt in March                                 .3           .3          -.005       .81
 HH-level market price of kerosene in March                            .87          .89          -.018       .19

   This table reports the rate at which various household outcomes measured in endline one (January -
March) are not observed, by treatment status. We include only surveyed households. Columns 1 and 2
report the mean of each outcome among treatment and control households, respectively. Column 3 reports
the simple differnece between these, and Column 4 reports the p-value on a test of the null that this difference
is equal to zero. Estimates are weighted by inverse sampling probabilities.




                                                      54
           Table A.4: Effects on quantity disbursed, quantity received, and leakage

                               Rice            Wheat             Sugar             Salt           Kerosene
                                (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)

 Mean entitlement                24                1               1                1                 2
Panel A: Quantity disbursed
Treatment                1.457**               -1.072*           0.007            0.003             0.000
                         (0.568)               (0.559)          (0.008)          (0.005)           (0.000)
                          [0.13]                [0.33]           [1.00]           [1.00]            [0.38]
 Control mean                   20                3.4             1.3               1                2.4
 Observations                 26,611            26,611           26,611          26,611            26,611

Panel B: Quantity received
Treatment                   .76                   -.58            .026             .056              -.034
                            (.5)                 (.48)            (.08)           (.065)            (.048)
                           [1.00]               [1.00]           [1.00]           [1.00]            [1.00]
 Control mean                   17                2.6             .72              .81               1.8
 Observations                 10,557            10,654           10,670          10,726            10,618

Panel C: Leakage
Treatment                       .68               -.5             -.019            -.053             .034
                               (.57)             (.32)           (.081)           (.063)            (.047)
                               [1.00]           [1.00]           [1.00]           [1.00]            [1.00]
 Control mean                  3.4                .86             .61              .23               .68
 Observations                 10,557            10,654           10,670          10,726            10,618


This table reports estimated treatment effects on the quantity of commodities disbursed by the government
(Panel A), received by recipients (Panel B), and the difference (Panel C) in endline one (January - March).
The unit of analysis is the FPS-month in Panel A and the ration card-month in Panels B and C. Observation
counts vary by panel because we use the universe of FPSs to estimate effects on disbursements in Panel A,
and a representative sample of ration card holders in Panels B and C, but all samples are representative. In
Panel C, estimated effects are the difference between estimated effects on quantity disbursed per ration card
and quantity received per ration card with block-level mean imputation in a Seemingly Unrelated Regression
framework. All specifications include strata fixed effects and the baseline value of the dependent variable.
Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in parentheses with statistical significance denoted
as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01. q values adjusted to control the false discovery rate across the five
commodities are reported in brackets.




                                                        55
                       Table A.5: Effects on market prices and overcharges

                        Total         Rice          Wheat           Sugar           Salt         Kerosene
                         (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)

Panel A: Local market prices--reported by households
Treatment                        .043           5.6                -1.1***          .17              1.4
                                 (.29)         (5.3)                (.39)          (.16)            (1.8)
                                [1.00]        [1.00]                [0.09]         [1.00]          [1.00]
 Control mean             .            23              22             43             10              43
 Observations             .            383            248            382            392             229

Panel B: Local market prices--reported by dealers (Rs)
Treatment                       -1.3***        .021                 -1.3*           -.31           -1.7*
                                 (.46)         (.92)                (.69)          (.54)            (.94)
                                 [0.06]       [1.00]                [0.25]         [1.00]          [0.25]
 Control mean             .            19              17             38            8.5              38
 Observations             .            344            109            283            282             251

Panel C: Statutory prices
Treatment                               ­              ­              ­              ­             .027
                                                                                                   (.03)


 Control mean                           ­              ­              ­              ­              18
 Observations             .             .              .              .              .              396

Panel D: Overcharges
Treatment           -2.6               .069          -.13**          -2.1           .016             -.66
                   (1.9)              (.24)          (.056)         (1.7)          (.035)           (.51)
                                      [1.00]         [0.21]         [0.84]         [1.00]          [0.84]
 Control mean            8.2           1.1            .22            .91            .17               6
 Observations           9,623        10,183         10,317          10,260         10,375          10,185


This table reports estimated treatment effects on the market prices reported by beneficiaries (Panel A),
market prices reported by FPS dealers (Panel B), statutory prices (Panel C), and total overcharges (Panel
D) in endline one (January - March). The unit of analysis is the FPS for Panels A and B, the block-month
for Panel C, and the ration card-month for Panel D. Prices are in rupees per kilogram except for kerosene,
which is priced in rupees per liter. Observation counts vary in panels A and B as we observe outcomes
only when at least one household purchased the commodity and when the dealer reported the commodity
is sold in the private market, respectively. In Panels A-C the dependent variables are the median market
price reported by beneficiaries assigned at baseline to the given FPS, the local market price reported by
FPS dealers (Panel B), and the statutory PDS price, respectively. We do not report effects on statutory
prices for goods other than kerosene as these did not vary. In Panel D the dependent variable is the amount
beneficiaries report paying above what they should have paid for the quantity they received, by commodity
in columns 2-6 and in total in column 1. All regressions include strata fixed effects; those in Panels C and
D also include the baseline value of the dependent variable. Standard errors clustered at the block level are
reported in parentheses with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01. q values
adjusted to control the false discovery rate across the five commodities are reported in brackets.


                                                     56
                                            Table A.6: Effects on determinants of beneficiary transaction costs


                                   Total            Opportunity      Unsuccessful        Unsuccessful        Successful       Successful       Transport
                                   Cost                cost           trip count          trip length        trip count       trip length         cost
                            (1)            (2)          (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)              (7)              (8)
      Treatment            7.2             6.9          .87              .13                  .14               .016              .15              -.81
                           (3.8)           (3.8)        (.5)             (.024)              (.32)             (.054)           (.092)            (.52)
      Baseline lag                         1.6
                                           (.79)
      Adjusted R2           .06         .09             .08               .10                 .01               .06               .06              .00
      Control mean           41          41              11               .13                 1.2               1.5               2.3              1.6
      Observations         3,538       3,538           3,066             3,565                449              3,565             3,062            3,538




57
      % of sample            90          90             78                91                  11                91                77               90


     This table reports estimated treatment effects on the costs incurred by beneficiaries to access PDS rations in March 2017. The unit of analysis is the
     ration card. The dependent variable in columns 1-2 is the total estimated cost as reported in Table 5, and the remaining columns show impacts on its
     components. The dependent variable in column 3 is the weighted mean opportunity cost in rupees per hour of household members, weighted by the
     number of trips each household member made to their FPS in March. The dependent variables in columns 4 and 5 are the number of unsuccessful
     trips made to the ration shop (defined as trips that did not result in the purchase of positive quantities of any rationed commodity) and the average
     time in hours spent on these trips. Note that our survey asked about both the number of unsuccessful trips made by each individual on the household
     roster and for the total number of unsuccessful trips taken. When the latter exceeds the sum of the former we attribute the stated total number of
     trips to household members in proportion to their stated individual number of trips; the results are not sensitive to alternatives.; tThe dependent
     variables in columns 6 and 7 are the analogous quantities for successful trips. Finally, the dependent variable in column 8 is the average monetary
     cost in rupees of any transport fees paid to make these trips (e.g. bus fare). Thus, the total cost in column1 equals to unit opportunity cost * (total
     time spent on unsuccessful trips + total time spent on successful trips) + transporation cost * (number of unsuccessful trips + number of successful
     trips) = column 3 * (column 4 * column 5 + column 6 * column 7) + column 8 * (column 4 + column 6). All regressions include strata fixed effects.
     Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in parentheses, with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.
                                           Table A.7: Heterogeneous effects by household characteristics


                                                                                         HH above median                       HH above median
                                                  HH is upper caste?
                                                                                          education level?                      annual income?
                                               (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)            (5)         (6)        (7)           (8)          (9)
                                               No           Yes                      No            Yes                     No            Yes
                                                                                                                                                      
                                           (N=1875)      (N=1705)                 (N=2083)      (N=1500)                (N=1634)      (N=1608)
      Value received (market prices)          -1.4           -5          -3.6        -21           23          44          -15           11          26
                                             (15)          (12)          (13)       (13)           (14)        (13)       (14)          (15)        (14)
      Value received (WTA)                   55             -14         -69           38          -.027         -38         26           30          4.1
                                             (26)          (24)          (25)       (25)           (27)        (29)       (26)          (27)        (27)
      Transaction costs                       4.5          9.6            5.1       7.9             5.4         -2.5         2          14          12




58
                                             (4.4)         (4.7)          (5)       (3.9)         (4.5)        (3.7)      (3.9)         (4.6)       (3.8)



     This table reports differential estimated treatment effects along dimensions of household characteristics for ration card-level outcomes in endline one
     (January - March). Each row represents a different primary outcome, and each column grouping represents a different dimension of heterogeneity.
     Within each column group, the first column reports the average treatment effect on households that do not satisfy the stated condition, the second
     column reports the average effect on those that do, and the third column reports the difference in these two effects, all estimated from a single
     underlying regression that interacts treatment with an indicator for the stated condition. The indicator "HH is upper caste" is equal to one if the
     household does not belong to Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe. The indicator "HH above median education level" is equal to one if the average
     number of years of schooling of the two highest-educated household members is above the sample median. The indicator "HH above median annual
     income" is equal to one if the household's annual income (as predicted from assets and household characteristics at baseline) is above the sample
     median. All regressions include strata fixed effects and baseline value of the outcome variable when available. Standard errors clustered at the block
     level are reported in parentheses, with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.
                  Table A.8: Heterogeneous effects by location characteristics


                                                                                Network strength
                                           FPS in urban area?
                                                                                 above median?
                                         (1)          (2)        (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)
                                         No          Yes                    No            Yes
                                                                                                      
                                     (N=3129)      (N=513)               (N=1565)      (N=1444)
 Value received (market prices)         -.74         -5.9        -5.2      -3.1           -4.2        -1.1
                                       (13)          (19)        (23)      (13)          (16)        (18)
 Value received (WTA)                    30           -79       -109        9.2           4.4         -4.8
                                       (23)          (48)        (53)      (29)          (29)        (37)
 Transaction costs                     7.1            4.3        -2.8       5.9            1.1        -4.8
                                       (3.9)         (14)        (14)       (5)          (5.7)       (6.5)



This table reports differential estimated treatment effects along dimensions of location characteristics for
ration card-level outcomes in endline one (January - March). Each row represents a different primary
outcome, and each column grouping represents a different dimension of heterogeneity. Within each column
group, the first column reports the average treatment effect on households that do not satisfy the stated
condition, the second column reports the average effect on those that do, and the third column reports the
difference in these two effects, all estimated from a single underlying regression that interacts treatment
with an indicator for the stated condition. The indicator "FPS in urban area?" is equal to one if the
household's FPS belongs to block that is administratively classified as urban. The indicator "Network
strength above median?" is equal to one if the measured signal strength of the Airtel network (which was
the most common SIM card type installed in ePOS machines) at the household's assigned FPS is above
the sample median. All regressions include strata fixed effects and baseline value of the outcome variable
when available. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in parentheses, with statistical
significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.




                                                    59
                        Table A.9: Heterogeneous effect by machine mode


                         Value received (mkt prices)       Value received (WTA)        Transaction costs
                                      (1)                            (2)                       (3)
 Treatment*Online                      1.8                             1                       3.1
                                      (15)                           (30)                     (5.2)
 Treatment*Offline                    -1.6                            -57                      9.2
                                      (22)                           (52)                     (9.5)
 Treatment*Partial                     -37                           -52                      19
                                      (29)                          (104)                     (10)
 Adjusted R2                          .20                            .06                       .08
 Control mean                        463                            1028                        41
 Observations                        9733                           9787                      3337
 % of sample                          82                              84                       86


This table reports differential estimated treatment effects by machine mode assigned to dealers per month
for ration card-level outcomes in endline one (January - March). We assign counterfactual machine modes
to control FPS's by assuming they could have received machines operating in the same mode as it was
ultimately assigned once treated. This assumption appears reasonable in the sense that the distribution of
machine types 6-8 months after the reform was implemented appear similar in both treatment and control
areas, with the one exception that the government ended the use of partially online mode in August 2017 and
so we impute fewer partially online machines in control. We define the mode in which a machine operated
from transaction data as the modal transaction type conducted by that machine and during that month.
On average the modal transaction type accounts for 99% of the transactions in a given machine × month
cell. The unit of analysis for columns 1 and 2 is the ration card-month and for column 3 the ration card.
The dependent variable in column 1 is the sum of the values for each commodity, defined as the quantity
multiplied by the difference between the median market price of that commodity in control blocks in the
same district, and the statutory PDS price for that commodity. The dependent variable in column 2 is
the household reported willingness to accept (WTA), constructed as the smallest value X for which the
respondent reported that they would have preferred in cash to the commodities received. The WTA for
ration cards that did not receive any ration is set to zero. The dependent variable in column 3 is the total
cost incurred in March by the household holding that ration card in purchasing or attempting to purchase
PDS commodities, including time and money costs. All regressions include strata fixed effects, and columns
1 and 3 include the baseline value of the outcome variable. Standard errors clustered at the block level are
reported in parentheses, with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.




                                                    60
Table A.10: Heterogeneous effects of reconciliation on value disbursed and received by FPS
balance


                                                  Value disbursed                      Value received
                                          (1)          (2)           (3)       (4)         (5)        (6)
                                         Total         Rice         Wheat     Total        Rice      Wheat
 Reconciliation                          -59          -35           -19         7.3         3.7         -2.1
                                          (3.9)        (3.3)         (2.6)     (13)        (11)         (18)
 Reconciliation*Balance                 -.21          -.24            .03     -.1         -.1           -.014
                                        (.0089)       (.0092)       (.056)    (.028)      (.026)        (.61)
 Reconciliation*Month                    18            14           3.8         -4          -3.2         3
                                         (2.1)         (1.9)         (1)       (8.6)       (6.6)        (16)
 Reconciliation*Month*Balance           .078          .083           .022      .027       .027          -.072
                                        (.0045)       (.0045)       (.021)    (.017)      (.015)         (.6)
 January 2017 mean                        493          439            54       407         363            44
 Observations                            92489        95581         93258     35518       36269         36046
 % of frame/sample                         91          94            92        82           83            83


This table reports differential effects of accumulated stock balance at the time of reconciliation onset (July
2017) on value disbursed by dealers (columns 1 - 3) and received by beneficiaries (columns 4 -6). The
unit of analysis is the FPS-month for columns 1-3 and ration card - month for columns 4-6. Observation
counts vary because we use the universe of FPSs to estimate effects on disbursements in columns 1-3, and
a representative sample of ration card holders in columns 4-6, but both samples are representative. The
dependent variable in columns 2, 3, 5, and 6 is the per-commodity value disbursed and received as defined
in the notes to Table 3 above. The dependent variable in column 1 is the sum of the values from columns 2
and 3, and the dependent variable in column 4 is the sum of values in columns 5 and 6. We calculate average
balance per ration card as the balance per FPS at the beginning of July 2017, provided by NIC, divided
by ration card counts per FPS, and we instrument for this FPS-level average balance per ration card using
the block's initial ePOS treatment assignment. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in
parentheses, with statistical significance denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01. All regressions include
strata fixed effects and their interactions with stock balance.




                                                      61
                             Figure A.1: Household classification results


                                              Sampled
                                                3,960




                     Surveyed                                       Never surveyed
                   3,840 (97.0%)                                     120 (3.0%)




          Legitimate         Pseudo-ghost           Exists               Ghost             Unknown
         3835 (96.9%)          5 (0.1%)            0 (0.0%)            59 (1.5%)           61 (1.5%)


This figure classifies the households listed in the ration cards we originally sampled and attempted to survey.
"Surveyed" households are those we were able to locate and survey at least once across baseline and the three
endline surveys, as opposed to "never surveyed" households. Among the former "legitimate" are those that
knew of the ration card based on which we sampled them, and "quasi-ghosts" are those that were unaware
of the existence of this ration card across all surveys. Among the latter, households "exist" if we were able
to locate the household but not survey it; are a "ghost" if we could not locate it after an exhaustive search
and confirmed with multiple neighbors that it did not exist; and as "unknown" otherwise.




                                                        62
                   Figure A.2: Household expected income and years of schooling by seeding status


                                                 Panel A: Expected income
                          .4
   Proportion of households
   0    .1    .2    .3




                               0       100,000                 200,000                 300,000   400,000
                                                  Predicted annual income(Rupees)


                                                 Panel B: Years of schooling
   Proportion of households
      0 .05 .1 .15 .2




                               0         5                       10                      15         20
                                                     Average years of education

                                                       Seeded               Unseeded




This figure shows the distribution of measures of household income (Panel A) and education (Panel B)
by whether the ration card that household was attached to had at least one Aadhaar number seeded at
baseline. In Panel A, the outcome is the linear prediction of annual income based on assets and household
characteristics at baseline. In Panel B, the outcome is the average years in education of the two most
educated members in the household.




                                                             63
                                                     Figure A.3: Effects of reconciliation on value disbursed and received
                                                                                  (a) Value disbursed
 Average disbursement value per rationcard




                                             500


                                             400


                                             300


                                             200


                                             100


                                               0
                                                   Jan    Feb     Mar      Apr       May          Jun       Jul      Aug       Sep         Oct   Nov
                                                                                                 Month

                                                                                   (b) Value received



                                             500
 Average receipt value per rationcard




                                             400


                                             300


                                             200


                                             100


                                               0
                                                   Jan    Feb     Mar      Apr       May          Jun       Jul      Aug       Sep         Oct   Nov
                                                                                                 Month

                                                                 Fitted values, non-reconciled           Observed values, non-reconciled
                                                                 Fitted values, reconciled               Observed values, reconciled

This figures plots the evolution of the average value of commodities disbursed (Panel A) and received (Panel
B) from January to November of 2017. The unit is the ration card-month. Value disbursed is calculated
from administration data and value received from our series of endline surveys, using market price data as
described in the notes to Table 3. Dashed lines represent the raw data, while solid lines represent fitted
values obtained by estimating Equation 2. The shaded bands around the latter represent 95% confidence
intervals for the fitted values. Values are shown separately for commodities that were (blue) and were not
(black) separately subject to reconciliation. The shaded region from July to November indicates the period
during which reconciliation was in effect.
                                                                                           64
B      Temporal heterogeneity

              Table B.1: Effects on value received using alternative specifications

                              Total         Rice          Wheat        Sugar         Salt        Kerosene
                                (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)           (6)

Panel A: March only
Treatment                       9.7        31***           -19*         .049         1.1             .94
                               (13)         (11)           (10)         (2.1)       (1.2)          (1.8)
                                           [0.09]         [0.45]       [1.00]       [1.00]         [1.00]
 Control mean                 456.71       337.81         55.57        15.80         8.56          37.83
 Observations                 3,460        3,517          3,553        3,551        3,575          3,533

Panel B: Pooled data with linear trend
Treatment                   -12         -1.1                -9            3          -.88           -1.9
                           (18)         (16)               (12)         (5.5)       (1.8)          (1.8)
                                       [1.00]             [1.00]       [1.00]       [1.00]         [1.00]
 Month                         -5.7         -8.3*          1.5          1.9          1.2*         -1.9***
                               (5)          (4.5)         (1.6)        (1.4)         (.68)         (.47)
 Treatment X Month              5.2           9            -3*          -1.2          .69           .66
                               (6.7)        (5.6)         (1.8)        (2.3)         (.89)         (.86)
 Control mean                 463.30       348.18          53.73       13.80         7.25           39.64
 Observations                 10,396       10,557         10,654      10,670        10,726         10,618

Panel C: Pooled data with no baseline lag
Treatment                  .85          14                  -13         .38           .62            -.33
                          (14)         (12)                (11)        (1.5)         (.58)          (1.1)
                                      [1.00]              [1.00]      [1.00]        [1.00]         [1.00]
Control mean             463.30       348.18               53.73       13.80         7.25           39.64
Observations             10,396       10,557              10,654      10,670        10,726         10,618


This table reports alternative specifications for Panel B in Table 3 by reporting models with March data
only (Panel A), pooled data with a linear trend (Panel B), and pooled data without baseline lag (Panel C).
All regressions include strata fixed effects, and regressions in panels A and B include the baseline value of
outcome variable. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in parentheses, with statistical
significance is denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01. q values adjusted to control the false discovery
rate across the five commodities are reported in brackets.




                                                     65
           Table B.2: Effects on quantities received using alternative specifications


                                  Rice          Wheat            Sugar            Salt           Kerosene
                                  (1)              (2)             (3)             (4)              (5)

Panel A: March only
Treatment                       1.5***             -.75          .0084              .13             .034
                                 (.55)            (.47)          (.11)             (.13)           (.083)
                                [0.10]           [0.64]          [1.00]           [1.00]           [1.00]
 Control mean                    16.28            2.68            0.82             0.95             1.71
 Observations                    3,517           3,553            3,551           3,575            3,533

Panel B: Pooled data with linear trend
Treatment                     -.15                 -.29           .14             -.097              -.1
                             (.77)                (.53)          (.27)             (.2)             (.08)
                             [1.00]              [1.00]          [1.00]           [1.00]           [1.00]
 Month                           -.42*            .071             .1             .14*              -.04*
                                 (.22)            (.08)          (.071)          (.075)            (.021)
 Treatment X Month                .45             -.14            -.059           .077              .035
                                 (.28)           (.089)           (.12)          (.099)            (.039)
 Control mean                   16.81             2.59            0.72            0.81              1.76
 Observations                   10,557           10,654          10,670          10,726            10,618

Panel C: Pooled data with no baseline lag
Treatment                    .53            -.5                   .018            .069              -.019
                             (.6)          (.52)                 (.076)          (.064)            (.051)
                            [1.00]        [1.00]                 [1.00]          [1.00]            [1.00]
Control mean                16.81          2.59                   0.72            0.81               1.76
Observations                10,557        10,654                 10,670          10,726            10,618


This table reports alternative specifications for Panel B of Table A.4 by reporting models with March data
only (Panel A), pooled data with a linear trend (Panel B), and pooled data without baseline lag (Panel C).
All regressions include strata fixed effects, and regressions in panels A and B include the baseline value of
outcome variable. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in parentheses, with statistical
significance is denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01. q values adjusted to control the false discovery
rate across the five commodities are reported in brackets.




                                                     66
               Table B.3: Effects on overcharges using alternative specifications


                              Total         Rice          Wheat        Sugar         Salt        Kerosene
                               (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)           (5)           (6)

Panel A: March only
Treatment                       .7          .033           -.11*      .88***         -.12            -1.4
                              (.61)        (.25)          (.063)       (.31)        (.078)          (1.4)
                                           [1.00]         [0.53]       [0.06]       [0.53]         [0.91]
 Control mean                  7.74         1.12           0.22         0.94         0.32           5.18
 Observations                 3,184        3,391          3,438        3,418        3,447          3,377

Panel B: Pooled data with linear trend
Treatment                  -7.3          .14              -.15***       -6.6        .25**            .11
                          (4.8)        (.28)               (.056)      (4.5)         (.11)          (.95)
                                       [1.00]              [0.11]      [0.55]       [0.18]         [1.00]
 Month                        -.63**        .011          .0071         .16         .13**          -1***
                               (.27)       (.032)         (.02)        (.16)        (.055)         (.19)
 Treatment X Month             2.4          -.038         .0067         2.3          -.12*          -.38
                              (1.7)        (.062)         (.022)       (1.6)        (.062)         (.59)
 Control mean                  8.22         1.08           0.22        0.91          0.17           5.95
 Observations                 9,623        10,183         10,317      10,260        10,375         10,185

Panel C: Pooled data with no baseline lag
Treatment                  -2.2         .11               -.13**        -1.8         .019            -.59
                          (1.8)       (.29)               (.056)       (1.5)        (.035)          (.49)
                                      [1.00]              [0.23]      [0.92]        [1.00]         [0.92]
Control mean               8.22        1.08                0.22        0.91          0.17           5.95
Observations              9,623      10,183               10,317      10,260        10,375         10,185


This table reports alternative specifications for Panel D of Table A.5 by reporting models with March data
only (Panel A), pooled data with a linear trend (Panel B), and pooled data without baseline lag (Panel C).
All regressions include strata fixed effects, and regressions in panels A and B include the baseline value of
outcome variable. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in parentheses, with statistical
significance is denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01. q values adjusted to control the false discovery
rate across the five commodities are reported in brackets.




                                                     67
          Table B.4: Effects on willingness to accept using alternative specifications


                                 January           February           March                    Pooled
                                    (1)               (2)               (3)             (4)              (5)

Panel A: All households
Treatment                          -7.6                -23             -1.8             -11               -19
                                   (27)               (28)             (29)            (26)              (29)
 Month                                                                                                  -22***
                                                                                                         (5.9)
 Treatment X Month                                                                                        4
                                                                                                        (7.2)
 Control mean                     1,045              1,041             1,000          1,028             1,028
 Observations                     3,395              3,522             3,520          10,437            10,437

Panel B: Excludes HHs who did not purchase ration in a given month
Treatment                   23              11              32                          22                9.6
                           (21)            (24)            (22)                        (21)              (26)
 Month                                                                                                  -26***
                                                                                                         (7.5)
 Treatment X Month                                                                                       6.3
                                                                                                        (8.9)
 Control mean                     1,163              1,157             1,111           1,143            1,143
 Observations                     3,165              3,122             3,102           9,389            9,389


This table reports a robustness check to Panel B of Table 3 by measuring value as the amount a household
is willingness to accept in lieu of ration. We report estimates from both the sample that includes (Panel A)
and excludes (Panel B) households that did not purchase any ration in a given month. The unit of analysis
is the ration card - month. The dependent variable is the household reported willingness to accept (WTA),
constructed as the smallest value X for which the respondent reported that they would have preferred in
cash to the commodities received. The WTA for ration cards that did not receive any ration is set to
zero. All regressions include strata fixed effects. Standard errors clustered at the block level are reported in
parentheses, with statistical significance is denoted as:  p < .10, p < .05, p < .01.




                                                      68
C     Reconciliation protocol and implementation
As provided to us, the protocol governing the disbursements of reconciled commodities (i.e.
wheat and rice) which the government of Jharkhand introduced was given by

                    Dt = max(0, Et + Ct - St-1 )                                            (1)
                     St = St-1 + D  ^ t - Ot                                                (2)
                           
                              i,t-1 - (Oi,t-1 - Ci,t-1 ) Oi,t-1 > Ci,t-1
                           E
                    Ci,t =                                                                  (3)
                           E
                              i,t-1                      Oi,t-1  Ci,t-1

Equation 1 defines the amount Dt to disburse at the beginning of period t as a function of
the amount Et = i Ei,t to which recipients assigned to the FPS in period t were entitled,
the amount Ct = i Ci,t is the total carryover commitment owed to recipients in period t
because they did not collect their entitlement in period t - 1, and the amount of stock St-1 the
government believes the FPS should have been holding at the end of the preceding month.
Equation 2 defines the law of motion for stock, which increases with disbursements Dt and
decreases with offtake Ot = i Oi,t by beneficiaries. Offtake is interpreted as first accruing
against carryover commitments from the previous period until these have been exhausted,
and then accruing against current period commitments.


C.1     Adherence
We next examine how closely the government adhered to this protocol during the four-
month period of reconciliation. To do so we examine two sources of data: measures of the
aggregates St , Et , Ct , Dt and Ot which the National Informatics Commission maintained for
each FPS and month, and transaction-level data directly from the ePOS devices themselves
which record Oi,t for each household and month (also provided by the National Informatics
Commission).
   According to its own records, the government was fairly flexible in its implementation of
reconciliation. Figure C.1 illustrates this, showing scatterplots of the left- and right-hand
sides of Equations 1 and 2 for the months July-October 2017 and for wheat and rice pooled.
For both relationships, the actual quantities on record are positively associated with those
we obtain by mechanically re-calculating them using the reconciliation formulae, but with
substantial noise. It is particularly striking the extent to which the government held dealers
accountable for less stock than implied by formula in August and September, and that in
many cases they recorded a negative closing stock, something that should not have been
possible if dealers accurately reported transactions.

                                              69
   Indeed, there is some evidence that the government did not take transaction data on
offtake by beneficiaries at face value in all cases. Panel A of Figure C.2 plots the relationship
between offtake as recorded in the official aggregates and our own independent measure of
offtake calculated from the raw transaction data. In the majority of cases the two coincide
exactly (85%) or are within 1% of each other (92%), but in other cases the transaction
data imply higher offtake than the government aggregates acknowledge. This suggests the
government may have suspected that the transaction data were over-stating actual offtake,
as for example would be the case if FPS dealers asked beneficiaries to "sign" for more grain
than they actually received. Indeed, Panel B ­ which restricts focus to our sampled ration
cards ­ illustrates that beneficiaries generally report receiving less grain than the transaction
data say they did.
   Overall, reconciliation as actually implemented was somewhat less punitive than recon-
ciliation strictly by the book would have been. We illustrate this in Figure C.3, where we
plot the evolution of actual grain disbursements per FPS against the counterfactual time se-
ries obtained by (i) recalculating disbursements assuming that the government implemented
reconciliation strictly, while (ii) leaving unchanged the reported offtake of grain. If the
government had implemented Equations 1 and 2 and disallowed negative values for stock,
we estimate that grain disbursements would have been lower than actually observed in all
four months. If it had instead allowed stock to take negative values, disbursements would
initially have fallen more than they did but eventually rebounded to be even higher than en-
titlements, reflecting the implausibly large disbursements some ration shops were reporting
and the resulting negative stock values they accumulated.




                                               70
                                                                                                           Figure C.1: Adherence of disbursement and stock to reconciliation policy, by month


     Panel A: Actual vs. Calculated disbursement
                                                                                        July                                                                                                                August                                                                                                       September                                                                                      October
                           100,000                                                                                                                100,000                                                                                                              100,000                                                                                  100,000
                                                    q                                                                                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                         q                                                                                                    q




                                     q   q                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                    q                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                   q                                        q




                                                                                                           q                                                                                                                        q                                                                                                       q                                                                           q
                                                                                               q                                                                                                                 q   q
                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                                    q          q                                                                             q                                                                           q q
                                                                              q                                                                                     q                                                     q                                                                                                             q                                                                                    q
                            50,000                                                                                                                 50,000                                                                                                               50,000                                                                                   50,000
                                                                                                                                q                           q                                                                                                                    q                                                                                        q
                                              q                                                                                                             q                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                                q    q   q
                                                                                                   q                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                     q q                                                                                      q    q
                                                                           q                                                q                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                        q                                      q
                                                                                   q                                                                                                             q      q                                                                                                  q                                                                                                            q                q
                                                                                    q                                                                       q                                  q                                                                                                                         qq        q                                                                                 q       q           q
                                                                                  q                        q                                                                                          q                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                     qq                                                                                                                     q                               qq                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                      q       q                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                  q q               q     q
                                                                                                                                                            q                              q    qq    q                                                                                                        qqq      q      q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                     q                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq                      q




     Actual disbursement
                                                                         q                         q                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q        q
                                                                q       q           q     qq           q                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                            q                      q    qq q                qq                                                                                                qq qq q q      q q qq                                                              q  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq  qq q q
                                     q q              q         qq
                                                                 q qq
                                                                       q                  q                            q                                    q                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq qq q      q qq q qq                                                                q qq  q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q            qq
                                         q q           qq q q   q                                              q                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q q q q q
                                                                                                                                                            q                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                        q qq          q                                                                          q                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q q       q   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q               qq      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q     q q qq   q q
                                     q                         qq       q q        qq                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                            q                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                   qq qq   q        q                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q q q
                                     q          qq qq q
                                                                q            q qqqq                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                       qq q q
                                                                                                                                                                            q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                  qq q q                                                                                         q              q      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq qq q q   q                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q  qqq qq   qq q q q
                                     q
                                     q qq         qqqq
                                                           q q
                                                               qqq  qq
                                                                      q qq  q                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                            q         qq        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                  q            qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q    q              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q qq q                                                 q q          qq q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqq   qq q qq q q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                     q   qq           qqq qq     q qqqq    qqq q                                                                            qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                q qqq  q q    q q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q  qq                                                                              q     q q q q q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq                                                                 qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q   q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q        q
                                     q
                                     q         qqq    q
                                                      qq
                                                       qq
                                                        qq
                                                         qq qqqqq qq
                                                                   qq qq
                                                                      q                   q q                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                            qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                qq qq  qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q     q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                qqqq  q q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q    q         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q     q q   q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q qq         q
                                     qq
                                      q     qq    q
                                                  qqqq
                                                     qq
                                                      q  q
                                                         qq q
                                                            q
                                                            qqq
                                                              q qqqq q
                                                                     qq qq      q qq q      q q                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q q     q
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     qq qqq
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                    q    qqqqq q                                                                                 q   q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q      q                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                     q qq   q
                                            q q
                                              qqqqq
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   qq
                                                    q
                                                    qq
                                                     qq
                                                      q q
                                                        q
                                                        qqq
                                                          qqqq
                                                             qqq
                                                               qqq
                                                                 qq q
                                                                    qq q
                                                                    q     q     q qq      q                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                            q qqqqqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q q q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                qq qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq                                                                                     q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq  q q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                     q
                                     qqq
                                         qq
                                           q  q
                                              qqq
                                                qq
                                                 qq
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   qq
                                                    q
                                                    qq
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     qqq
                                                       qq
                                                        qq
                                                         q
                                                         qq
                                                          qq
                                                           qq
                                                            qq
                                                             qq
                                                              q
                                                              qq
                                                               q
                                                               q
                                                               qq
                                                                qqqqq
                                                                    q    q
                                                                            qq
                                                                            qq  q                                      q                                    q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              q  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq q q                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q   q  qqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                     qq q
                                        q
                                        q
                                         qq
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          qqq
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                qq
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   qq
                                                    q
                                                    qq
                                                     q
                                                     qqq
                                                       q
                                                       q
                                                       qq
                                                        q
                                                        qq
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         qq
                                                         qq q
                                                            q
                                                            qq
                                                             q
                                                             q
                                                             qq
                                                              q
                                                              q
                                                              qq
                                                               qq
                                                                qqq
                                                                  q qqq qq                    q                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qqqq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                               qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq               q                                               qq  qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                     q
                                     qq
                                      qq
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          qq
                                           qq
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               q
                                               q
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                qqq
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   qqq
                                                     q
                                                     qq
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      qq
                                                       q
                                                       qq
                                                        q
                                                        qq
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         qq
                                                          q
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           qq
                                                            qq
                                                             qq
                                                              q
                                                              qqq
                                                                q
                                                                q
                                                                q
                                                                qq
                                                                   qq
                                                                   qqq
                                                                     qq
                                                                      qq
                                                                       q
                                                                          q q q qq q
                                                                                      q                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                  q       q          q                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq                                                                 qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q               q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                      qq
                                       qq
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          q
                                          qq
                                           q
                                          qq
                                          qq
                                           qq
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               q
                                               q
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                qq
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   qq
                                                    q
                                                    qq
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     qq
                                                      q
                                                      qq
                                                       q
                                                       q
                                                       qq
                                                        q
                                                        qq
                                                         qq
                                                          q
                                                          q
                                                          q
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           qq
                                                            qq
                                                             q
                                                             q
                                                             qq q
                                                                qq
                                                                 q   q     q   q q q                                             q                          q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                q                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q qq                q                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                      q
                                      qq
                                       q
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          q
                                          q
                                          qq
                                           q
                                           qq
                                           q
                                           qq
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                           qq
                                           q
                                          qqq
                                            q
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                q
                                                qq
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   qq
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                    qq
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     qq
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      qq
                                                       q
                                                       q
                                                       q
                                                       qq
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        qq
                                                         q
                                                         qq
                                                          q
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           q
                                                           qq
                                                            q
                                                            q
                                                            qq
                                                             q
                                                             qq
                                                              q
                                                              qq
                                                               q
                                                               q
                                                               q qqq
                                                                   q  q                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                             qq    q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q qq
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                      q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                      qq
                                       qqq
                                         q
                                        qq
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         q
                                        qq
                                        qqq
                                          q
                                          q
                                          q
                                          qq
                                           q
                                           q
                                           q
                                           q
                                           qq
                                           qq
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               q
                                               q
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                q
                                                qq
                                                 q
                                                qq
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   qq
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                    q
                                                    qq
                                                     qq
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      qq
                                                       q
                                                       q
                                                       qq
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        qq
                                                        q
                                                        qq
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         qq
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           q
                                                           q
                                                           qq
                                                            q q qq  qqqq q q q
                                                                        q                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                  qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                          qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                           q                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q             q                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                     qq
                                      qq
                                       q
                                       q
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         q
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          q
                                          q
                                          q
                                          qq
                                           q
                                           q
                                           q
                                           q
                                           q
                                           q
                                          qqq
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               q
                                               q
                                               q
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                q
                                               qq
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                qq
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   qq
                                                    q
                                                    qq
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     q
                                                     qq
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      qq
                                                       q
                                                       q q
                                                         qqq
                                                           qq qq
                                                               qq
                                                                q qqq           q q                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                        qq q q                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq qqqq                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                      q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                     qq
                                      qqq
                                       q
                                       q
                                       q
                                       q
                                       qq
                                       q
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         q
                                         q
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          q
                                          q
                                          qq
                                          q
                                          qq
                                           q
                                           q
                                           q
                                           q
                                           qq
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               q
                                               q
                                               q
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                q
                                                qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                qq
                                                 q
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   q
                                                   q
                                                   qq
                                                    qqqqqqq  q
                                                             qq      q                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     qqq          q                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q qqq       q                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                      q
                                      qq
                                      q
                                      q
                                      q
                                      qq
                                       q
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        q
                                        qq
                                        q
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          qq
                                          q
                                          q
                                         qq
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          qq
                                           q
                                           q
                                           q
                                           qqq
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            q
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               q
                                               q
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                qqq
                                                  qq qqq q q    q                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  qqqq   q                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq q q                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq q qq
                                     qq
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                      q
                                      q
                                      q
                                      q
                                      q
                                      qq
                                       q
                                       q
                                       q
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         q
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          q
                                          qq
                                           qq
                                           qq
                                           q
                                           qq
                                            q
                                            q
                                            qq
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              qq
                                               qq
                                                q
                                                q
                                                q
                                                q q
                                                  qq
                                                   qq  q                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                q q qq                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     q
                                     qq
                                     qq
                                      qq
                                      qq
                                      q
                                      q
                                      q
                                     qq
                                     qq
                                     q q
                                       q
                                       q
                                       qq
                                        q
                                        qq
                                         q
                                         q
                                         qq
                                          q
                                          q
                                         qq
                                         qq
                                          qq
                                           q
                                           qq
                                           q
                                           qq
                                            q
                                            q
                                            qq
                                             q
                                             q
                                             qq
                                              q
                                              q
                                              qqq
                                               qq
                                               qq
                                                qq
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  qq
                                                   qqqqqq
                                                        qq
                                                         qq
                                                          qqqq      q      q q        q                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     qqqqqq q                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq qq q                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqqqqq q q
                                 0                                                                                                                      0                                                                                                                    0                                                                                        0
                                     0                                            50,000                                            100,000                 0                                               50,000                                       100,000                 0                                            50,000                 100,000              0                                              50,000                             100,000
                                                          Calculated disbursement                                                                                                 Calculated disbursement                                                                                              Calculated disbursement                                                                   Calculated disbursement




71
     Pane B Recorded vs Ca cu a ed s ock
                                                                                        July                                                                                                                Augus                                                                                                        Sep embe                                                                                       Oc obe
                           100,000                                                                                                           qq   100 000                                                                                                              100 000                                                                                  100 000
                                                                                                       q               q
                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                              q q        q
                                                                                                           q                  q q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                               q qq
                                                                                                               q            qq   qq
                                                                                                                            q       q
                                                                                                                            q q q
                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                               qq        q                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                           q qqq
                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                   q qq qq qqq
                                                                                                                    q       q
                                                                                                            q         q
                                                                                                                      q qq q q                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                             qqq q q
                                                                                                                   q qq
                                                                                                                      qq q q
                                                                                                             q q  q
                                                                                                                  qqqq q
                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                       q     q
                                                                                                   q q qq
                                                                                                               q qqq
                                                                                                                   qqqqqq                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                               qqq qq
                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                    q q
                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                       qq   q
                                                                                                            qqqq qq
                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                  qqq                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                         qq qqq
                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                            q  q
                                                                                                               qq q q q
                            50,000                                                      q        q q    qqqqqqq
                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                             qqq                                   50 000                                                                                                               50 000                                                                                   50 000
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         q q q
                                                                                                             q q                                                                                                              q             q
                                                                                                 qq qq
                                                                                                    q qq q
                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                             qqqq  q q
                                                                                                     qqqq
                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                          qqq q
                                                                                                qqqqqq
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     q qqq
                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                         q q  q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              q qq q
                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                     q q
                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                       q q q
                                                                                      q qq
                                                                                            qqqqq
                                                                                               q
                                                                                               q q qqq
                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                       q q q
                                                                                      q q    q
                                                                                             q qq
                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                    q
                                                                                      qq  q
                                                                                          qqqqqqq
                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                    q                                                                                                                    q qq
                                                                               q qq     q  q
                                                                                           qq
                                                                                            qq
                                                                                             qq
                                                                                              qq
                                                                                               q
                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                     qq q                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                         qq         qq qqq
                                                                                         qq
                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                            qq
                                                                                             q
                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                               q
                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                q
                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                 qqqq q
                                                                                                      qq
                                                                             qq     q  qq
                                                                                        qq
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         qq
                                                                                          qq
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                          qq
                                                                                           q q
                                                                                             q
                                                                                             q
                                                                                             qq
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              q
                                                                                              qq
                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                qqqq                                                                                                                   q      q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     qqqq
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q q
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          qq
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           qq
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            qq
                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                               qqqq                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                            q qq q qqq
                                                                                     qq
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       qq
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        qq
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         qq
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          qq
                                                                                           q
                                                                                           qq
                                                                                            q
                                                                                            qq
                                                                                             qq
                                                                                              qq
                                                                                               q                             q                                                                                         qq             q
                                                  q                         q      qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       qq
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        qq
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         qq
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          qq
                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                             qq
                                                                                              q q qq
                                                                                                q      q                                                                                                         qq          qq
                                                                             qq
                                                                              qqq
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    qq
                                                                                     qq
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       qq
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        qq
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         qq
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          qq
                                                                                           qq
                                                                                            qqqq                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q      q
                                                                        qq q
                                                                             qqqq
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    qq
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     qq
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       qq
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                          q
                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                            q                                                                                                                qqq q       q    q                    q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q qqq
                                                                             qqqq
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    qq
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     qq
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       qq
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        q
                                                                                        qqqqq                                                                                                             qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq q q  q      q              q
                                                                         qq  qqq
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    qq
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     qq
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       qqqq q  q      q                                                                                         q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq        q q   qq q          qq
                                                                         qq q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             qq
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    qq
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     qq
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       qq
                                                                                        qqqq q                                                                                             q            q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q              q         qq                         q
                                          q                  q q  qq q  qq
                                                                         qq
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             qq
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                     q
                                                                                     qq
                                                                                      q
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q qqq          q    q      q
                                                                 q q qqqq
                                                                        qqq
                                                                          q
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             qq
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    qq
                                                                                     qq
                                                                                      qq
                                                                                       q
                                                                                       qq
                                                                                        q                                                                                                       q q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q    q q               qq q q
                                                             qqq      qq
                                                                       qqq
                                                                         qq
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             qq
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    qqqq
                                                                                       qqq                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqqq    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q            q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q            q
                                                             q qq qqqqq
                                                                      q
                                                                      qq
                                                                       qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                          qq
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             qq
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                     q                                                                                                        qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qq qqq       qq      q q q
                                                  q          q
                                                             qq   qq  q
                                                                     qq
                                                                     q
                                                                     qqq
                                                                       q
                                                                       qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             qq
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   q
                                                                                   qq
                                                                                    q
                                                                                    qqq qq                                                                                             qq       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q  qqq qqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q      q        q q
                                                      q
                                                      q q q qq  q  q
                                                                   qq
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                    qq
                                                                     q
                                                                     qq
                                                                      qq
                                                                       qq
                                                                       q
                                                                       qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                         qqq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                            qq
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                            qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                            qqq
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qq
                                                                                   qq                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq qq q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q  qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq q qqqq q
                                                            q qq
                                                                qq
                                                                q
                                                                qqq
                                                                  qq
                                                                   qqq
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                     qq
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      qqq
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                      qq
                                                                       qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        qqq
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          qq
                                                                          q
                                                                          qq
                                                                          q
                                                                         qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                        qqqq
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                         qqq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                          qq
                                                                          qqqq
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             qq
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               q
                                                                               q
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 q
                                                                                 qq
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  q
                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                    q                                                                                                qqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                           q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q  qq       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q  qq q                  q
                                                  qqq
                                                    q qq qq
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           qqq
                                                             q
                                                             qq
                                                              qq
                                                               q
                                                               qq
                                                                q
                                                                qq
                                                                 q
                                                                 qq
                                                                  q
                                                                  q
                                                                  qq
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   qq
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                   qq
                                                                    qq
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                    qq
                                                                     q
                                                                     qqq
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      qq
                                                                       qq
                                                                       qq
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                      qq
                                                                       qq
                                                                        qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        qq
                                                                       qq
                                                                       qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                       qq
                                                                        q
                                                                       qq
                                                                        qqq
                                                                         q
                                                                         qqq
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          qq
                                                                          qq
                                                                          q
                                                                         qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                         qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                            q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                             q
                                                                            qqq
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              q
                                                                              qq
                                                                               qq
                                                                                q
                                                                                q
                                                                                qq
                                                                                 q    q                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                     q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q  q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q   qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q  q
                                                              qqq
                                                                qqq
                                                                  qq
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   qq
                                                                    qq
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                     qq
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      qq
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                       q
                                                                       qq
                                                                        qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          q
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q
                                                                            qq
                                                                             qqq                                                                                                    qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq        q qq      q    q q
                                 0                      q qqq     qqqq
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                     qq
                                                                      q
                                                                      q
                                                                      qq
                                                                       q
                                                                       qq
                                                                        qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          qq
                                                                           qq q
                                                                              q q                                                                       0                              qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqqq   qqq   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q     q q q qq                                    0                                                                                        0




     Recorded stock
                                                               qqqq
                                                                  qq
                                                                   q
                                                                   qqq
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                     q
                                                                     qq
                                                                      q
                                                                      qq
                                                                       q
                                                                       qq
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        q
                                                                        qq
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q
                                                                         qq
                                                                          qq
                                                                           q
                                                                           q                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q      q qqqqq                         q
                                                               qq
                                                                q  qq
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                    q
                                                                    qq
                                                                     q
                                                                     qqq q
                                                                         q
                                                                         q                                                                                                   q qq    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q qqqq   qqqq qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq q
                                                        q      q  q
                                                                  q
                                                                  q
                                                                  qq
                                                                   q
                                                                   q qqq q
                                                                         q q                                                                                                     q qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                           q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                 q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   q  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                          q  q      q       q         qq              q
                                                             q q qq q qq
                                                                       q qqq
                                                                          q q                                                                                                   qqqq qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                          qqqqq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                    q qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq     q        q
                                                               qqq                                                                                                       qq           q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q q
                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                         q  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                             q q q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq                   q
                                                                          q                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq    qq qq  q   q q                 q                           q
                                                           qq q                                                                                                            qq                           q
                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                      q                                                                                         q             q
                                                                                                                                                                         q




                           -50,000                                                                                                                -50 000                                                                                                              -50 000                                                                                  -50 000
                                 -50,000                                  0                            50,000                           100,000         -50 000                                0                           50 000                            100 000         -50 000                                0                       50 000    100 000         -50 000                                  0                             50 000             100 000
                                                                      Calculated stock                                                                                                         Ca cu a ed s ock                                                                                                     Ca cu a ed s ock                                                                          Ca cu a ed s ock



     Th s figure shows the scatterp ots of the eft- and r ght-hand s des of Equat ons 1 and 2for the months Ju y-October 2017 us ng aggregate measures
     obta ned from NIC data n k ograms Pane A has actua d sbursements on the y-ax s and uncensored ca cu ated d sbursements on the x-ax s and
     the Pane B recorded stock on y-ax s and ca cu ated stock on x-ax s
                                                                                                                           Figure C.2: Comparison of offtake from three data sources, by month


     Panel A: Offtake from NIC aggregates vs. Offtake from transaction data
                                                                                                          July                                                                                              August                                                                                        September                                                                                            October
                                                                                                                           q




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q


                                     135,000                                                                                     135,000                                                                                                 135,000                                                                                                  135,000


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                             q
                                      90,000                                                                                      90,000                                                                                                  90,000                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   90,000                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                         q
                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                         q
                                                                                         q                                                                                                 q                                                                                                      q                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                       qq                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                   q                                                                                                       q
                                      45,000                                                                                      45,000                                             q                                                    45,000                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q                                                           45,000
                                                                                                                                                                                 q                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                   q
                                                                            q                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q                                                                                                       qq
                                                                           qq
                                                                            q                                                                                            q q
                                                                                                                                                                           q            q                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                          q  q                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                         q q                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                        q                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                       qq                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                       q                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                      q                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq                                                                                                      q q
                                                                      q
                                                                      qq                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                     q                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq                                 q                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                    q
                                                                    qq                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                   q  qq                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   q
                                                                   qq
                                                                    q
                                                                    q   q                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  q       q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                  q
                                                                  q    q                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                  qq q                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q q




     Offtake from NIC aggregates
                                                                 q
                                                                 q
                                                                 q
                                                                 qq
                                                                  q                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                               qq q                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q q qq q                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                               qq
                                                                q
                                                                q
                                                                q                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              q  q                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q q
                                                              q
                                                              qq
                                                               q
                                                               q
                                                               q    q                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q    q  q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q q      q                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q   qq
                                                             q
                                                             q
                                                             qq
                                                              q q qq                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                               q                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                           qq
                                                            q
                                                            q
                                                            qq
                                                             q
                                                             q
                                                             qqq                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                            q   q q qq                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q qq                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q  qq
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           q
                                                           q
                                                           qq
                                                            q
                                                            q
                                                            q
                                                            qqqqq q
                                                               q                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          qqqq qq      q                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq q q
                                                         q
                                                         qq
                                                          qq
                                                          q
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           qq                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                         q qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                           qq                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqqq                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        qq
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                         qq
                                                          q q
                                                            qqq                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       qqq                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                      qq
                                                       q
                                                       q
                                                       q
                                                       qq
                                                        q
                                                        q
                                                        qqq
                                                          q
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           qq                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                       qqqqq qq                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq q                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                     q
                                                     qq
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                     qqq
                                                       q
                                                       q
                                                       qq
                                                        q
                                                        qqq                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                      qq   q                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq     q
                                                     q
                                                     qq
                                                     qq
                                                     q
                                                     qq
                                                      q
                                                      qq
                                                       q
                                                       qq
                                                        qq
                                                         q
                                                         qq
                                                          q
                                                          qqq
                                                            qq
                                                            q q                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                        qqq q qq  qqq                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qqqq                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq q q
                                               0                                                                                           0                                                                                                       0                                                                                                        0
                                                    0                     45,000                       90,000    135,000                          0                          45,000                             90,000   135,000                        0                        45,000                           90,000          135,000                        0                         45,000               90,000              135,000
                                                                   Offtake from transaction data                                                                         Offtake from transaction data                                                                      Offtake from transaction data                                                                             Offtake from transaction data



     Panel B: Offtake from transaction data vs. Offtake from survey data




72
                                                                                                      July                                                                                          August                                                                                      September                                                                                                  October
                                     200                                                                                         200                                                                                                     200                                                                                                      200

                                                                                                                                                                                                    q

                                                                                                                                                                                            q

                                     150                                                                                         150                                                                                                     150                                                                                                      150
                                                        q                                                                                                                                                                                      q             q                     q

                                                                                                                                       q                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                             q q                                                                                 q                                                                                      q                 q                 q                       q

                                                                                                                                       q                                 q                                                                     q                               q                                                                                                        q

                                           q                        q                                                                  q               q q           q   q                                                                     q                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq q q                                                                          q                         q   qq
                                     100                                                                                         100                                                                                                     100                                                                                                      100
                                           q                     qqq                                                                   q                         q
                                                                                                                                                               q qq
                                                                                                                                                                  qqqq                                  q                                      q                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq                                                                            q             q            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                             q                                                                                                                                                                                                            q                                                                                                q
                                           q                qqqq                                                                       q               q    q
                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q                               q                                              q                 qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q               q                                                                q                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                           qq         q
                                                     qq q
                                                       qqqq
                                                         qq
                                                         qq
                                                          qq                     q                                                     q       q qq
                                                                                                                                                  qq       q
                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                              qqqq       q   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                 q q q                                                         q             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                      qq                                                           q         q       qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq                  qqq
                                                                          q                                                                                                  q                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                           q    q q qq qqqq
                                                          qq          qqqqqq                                                           q          qq  qq
                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                           qq         q qq qqq
                                                                                                                                                                             q                                                                 q q    q      qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q qq q      q qqqqq                                                                    q             qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q           qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                         q q          qqqq                                                             q                               q qqq                                                                   q                   q q      qqqq                                                                        q                qq q         qqq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                           q     q q q
                                                     qq
                                                      qq
                                                       q
                                                       qq q
                                                        q   q q  q q qqq                                                               q
                                                                                                                                       q     qq qqq q
                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                        q  q qqq q     q
                                                                                                                                                                       qqq                                                                     q    qq q qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q q   qqqqqq                                   q                                     q       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq q qqqq q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                      50   q    q q       q     qqq
                                                                  qq
                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                  50   q      q q        q qq     q
                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                     q                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          50   q    q q      q q     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   50   q       q         qq  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                           q     qqqq
                                                    qqqq
                                                       qq
                                                        q qqq
                                                            qq
                                                             qq
                                                              q
                                                              qqq
                                                                q
                                                                q
                                                                qqq
                                                                  q                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                       q   q q q q
                                                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                    qqqqqqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                 qqq                                                                           q       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqq                                                                              q       qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                           qqq q qq  qq
                                                      qqqqq
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           qq
                                                            qq
                                                             q
                                                             q
                                                            qqq
                                                              q
                                                              q
                                                              qq
                                                              qq
                                                               q
                                                               qq
                                                                q
                                                                qqq                  q                                                 q   q     qq
                                                                                                                                                 q  qqq qq
                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                               qq q                q                                                           qqq q qq    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq              q                                                                   q    q      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                                       q   q
                                           qq q qqq
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   q qq
                                                      qq q
                                                         qq
                                                          q
                                                          qq
                                                           q
                                                          qqq
                                                            q
                                                            qq
                                                             q
                                                             q qq     q                                                                q     q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                             qqq
                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                 qq q
                                                                                                                                                    qqqq
                                                                                                                                                       qqq
                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                           qq            qq                                                                    qq q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qqqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q qqq       q     q                                                                    q   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq  qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                           q   q q qq qq
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      qqq
                                                       qq
                                                       qq
                                                        qqq
                                                         q
                                                         q
                                                        qq
                                                         qqq q q                                                                       q       qq
                                                                                                                                                qqq q
                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                      qqq
                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                         q q
                                                                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                                                                             qq        q q                                                                     q      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqqq q          q                                                                         q   qqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qqq q        qq
                                                   q                                                                                   q                                                                                                       q




     Offtake from transaction data
                                           qqqqq
                                               qq
                                                qqqq
                                                   qq
                                                    q
                                                    qq
                                                     qq
                                                      q
                                                      q
                                                      qq
                                                       qq
                                                        q
                                                        q q
                                                          q       q q                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                       q   q
                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                           qqq
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                             qq
                                                                                                                                              qqqq
                                                                                                                                                 qq
                                                                                                                                                  qqq
                                                                                                                                                   q
                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                    q
                                                                                                                                                    qqqqqqqq q                                                                                 q qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    qqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq q         q                                                                               q q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqqqq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q qq q
                                                     q                                                                                                               q
                                           q   qqq
                                                 q
                                                 qq
                                                  q
                                                  q
                                                  qq
                                                   q         q q                                                                       q    qqq
                                                                                                                                              qq
                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                qq
                                                                                                                                                 q
                                                                                                                                                 q         qq                                                                                  qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       q         qq           q                                                                         qq qqqqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                qq    qq qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qq           q
                                           qqq
                                             qqq
                                               q
                                               q
                                               qq
                                                q      qq      q                                                                       q   q
                                                                                                                                           q q
                                                                                                                                             q
                                                                                                                                            qqq
                                                                                                                                              q      qq       q                                                                                qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   qq qq q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    q                                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            q
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            qq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             q q      q       q
                                           qqq
                                             q                q     q                                                                  q   qq
                                                                                                                                           q
                                                                                                                                           q        q qq q                                                                                     qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 q                  q                                                                                   qqq
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          q        q         q
                                           q                                                                                           q                                                                                                       q                                                                                                        q
                                       0                                                                                           0                                                                                                       0                                                                                                        0
                                           0                         50                           100            150       200         0                                 50                                 100          150       200         0                            50                                100                 150       200         0                             50                       100                  150       200
                                                                   Offtake from survey data                                                                              Offtake from survey data                                                                           Offtake from survey data                                                                                  Offtake from survey data



     This figure compares offtake from three data sources: NIC aggregates provided by the government, transaction data from ePOS records, and survey
     data from beneficiaries in kilograms. Panel A plots the relationship between FPS-level offtake as recorded in the official aggregates and our own
     independent measure of offtake calculated from the raw transaction data. Panel B plots the relationship between ration card-level offtake as recorded
     in transaction data and reported by beneficiaries.
                             Figure C.3: Adherence to reconciliation protocol


               7,000

               6,000

               5,000
   Kilograms




               4,000

               3,000

               2,000

               1,000

                  0
                       Jan   Feb    Mar    Apr    May     Jun      Jul     Aug     Sep      Oct      Nov
                                                         Month

                                   Actual disbursement
                                   Entitlement
                                   Counterfactual disbursement
                                   Counterfactual disbursement (disallowing negative stock)



This figure plots the evolution of actual grain disbursements per FPS against the counterfactual time series
obtained by recalculating disbursements assuming that the government implemented reconciliation strictly
and while leaving unchanged the reported offtake of grain. "Counterfactual disbursement (disallowing neg-
ative stock)" censors negative stock in the calculation.




                                                    73
D     List of additional analysis conducted
The following pieces of analysis reported in the paper are additional to those pre-specified:

  · Table 1, which reports the representativeness of our study area with Jharkhand;
  · Panel B of Table 2, which compares measures of program implementation in treated
    and control areas;
  · Table 7, which examines impacts on the extensive margin of value received;
  · Table 8, which reports heterogeneous effects by Aadhaar seeding;
  · Figure 3, which plots the distribution of value received in treated and control areas;
  · Figure A.2, which compares household income and education levels between seeded and
    un-seeded households;
  · Table A.1, which compares the dealers we originally sampled to those we added to the
    sample as households were re-assigned to them;
  · Figure 4, which plots the evolution of value disbursed and received in treated and
    control areas;
  · Figure 5, which plots the distribution of grain stocks as of June 2017 by treatment
    status.




                                             74
