                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DETERMINANTS OF INCOME SEGREGATION AND INTERGENERATIONAL MOBILITY:
             USING TEST SCORES TO MEASURE UNDERMATCHING

                                            Raj Chetty
                                         John N. Friedman
                                          Emmanuel Saez
                                          Nicholas Turner
                                           Danny Yagan

                                        Working Paper 26748
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w26748

                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     February 2020

  This work was conducted under IRS contract TIRNO- 16-E-00013 and reviewed by the Office of
  Tax Analysis at the U.S. Treasury. We thank Joseph Altonji, David Deming, Eric Hanushek, Jess
  Howell, Michael Hurwitz, Lawrence Katz, David Lee, Richard Levin, Sean Reardon, anonymous
  referees, and numerous seminar participants for helpful comments; Trevor Bakker, Kaveh
  Danesh, Katie Donnelly Moran, Niklas Flamang, Robert Fluegge, Jamie Fogel, Benjamin
  Goldman, Clancy Green, Sam Karlin, Carl McPherson, Daniel Reuter, Benjamin Scuderi,
  Priyanka Shende, Jesse Silbert, Mandie Wahlers, and our other pre-doctoral fellows for
  outstanding research assistance; and especially Adam Looney for supporting this project. Chetty,
  Friedman, Saez, and Yagan acknowledge funding from the Russell Sage Foundation, the Bill &
  Melinda Gates Foundation, the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the Schmidt Futures
  Foundation, the Center for Equitable Growth at UC-Berkeley, the Washington Center for
  Equitable Growth, the UC Davis Center for Poverty Research, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation,
  the Laura and John Arnold Foundation, the Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative, the Overdeck
  Foundation, and Bloomberg Philanthropies. The opinions expressed in this paper are those of the
  authors alone and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Internal Revenue Service, the U.S.
  Treasury Department, the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, the College Board, or the
  National Bureau of Economic Research. The results in this paper build on those reported in an
  earlier NBER working paper entitled "Mobility Report Cards: The Role of Colleges in
  Intergenerational Mobility." A manuscript that combines the results from both papers is available
  at https://opportunityinsights.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/coll_mrc_qje_paper.pdf and is
  forthcoming in the Quarterly Journal of Economics.

  NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
  peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
  official NBER publications.

  © 2020 by Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan.
  All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
  explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Determinants of Income Segregation and Intergenerational Mobility:
Using Test Scores to Measure Undermatching
Raj Chetty, John N. Friedman, Emmanuel Saez, Nicholas Turner, and Danny Yagan
NBER Working Paper No. 26748
February 2020, Revised June 2020
JEL No. J0

                                         ABSTRACT
We analyze how changes in the allocation of students to colleges would affect segregation
by parental income across colleges and intergenerational mobility in the United States. We do so
by linking data from tax records on parents' incomes and students' earnings outcomes for
each college to data on students' SAT and ACT scores. We find that equalizing application,
admission, and matriculation rates across parental income groups conditional on test scores
would reduce segregation substantially, primarily by increasing the representation of middle-
class students at more selective colleges. However, it would have little impact on the
fraction of low-income students at elite private colleges because there are relatively few
students from low-income families with sufficiently high SAT/ACT scores. Differences in
parental income distributions across colleges could be eliminated by giving low and middle-
income students a sliding-scale preference in the application and admissions process similar
to that implicitly given to legacy students at elite private colleges. Assuming that 80% of
observational differences in students' earnings conditional on test scores, race, and parental
income are due to colleges' causal effects-- a strong assumption, but one consistent with
prior work -- such changes could reduce intergenerational income persistence among
college students by about 25%. We conclude that changing how students are allocated to
colleges could substantially reduce segregation and increase intergenerational mobility, even
without changing colleges' educational programs.

Raj Chetty                                     Nicholas Turner
Department of Economics                        Federal Reserve Board
Harvard University                             Nick.Turner@frb.gov
Littauer 321
Cambridge, MA 02138                            Danny Yagan
and NBER                                       Department of Economics
chetty@fas.harvard.edu                         University of California, Berkeley
                                               530 Evans Hall, #3880
John N. Friedman                               Berkeley, CA 94720
Department of Economis                         and NBER
Robinson Hall                                  yagan@berkeley.edu
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
john_friedman@brown.edu

Emmanuel Saez
Department of Economics
University of California,
Berkeley 530 Evans Hall #3880
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER
saez@econ.berkeley.edu
Publicly available college-level data is available at
https://opportunityinsights.org/data/?geographic_level=0&topic=105&paper_id=536#resource-listing
I        Introduction

What role do colleges play in shaping intergenerational mobility in America? In a paper released in
2017 (Chetty et al. 2017), we took a step toward answering this question by publishing statistics on
the distribution of students' earnings in their thirties and their parents' incomes for each college in
the U.S. using anonymized data from tax records. We then documented three facts that emerged
from those statistics. First, the degree of segregation by parental income is very high across colleges,
similar to levels of segregation across neighborhoods in the average American city. Second, children
from low- and high-income families who attend the same college go on to have relatively similar
levels of earnings in adulthood. Third, colleges with high levels of student earnings (e.g., Ivy
League colleges) typically have few students from poorer backgrounds, limiting their scope to serve
as ladders for upward mobility.
        Building on these earlier findings, in this paper we study how much of the difference in the
types of colleges that children from low vs. high-income families attend is explained by differences
in their qualifications when they apply to college. We then analyze the extent to which changes in
the college application and admission process could reduce segregation by parental income across
colleges and increase intergenerational income mobility. We study these questions by linking tax
data to information on SAT and ACT scores to construct a comprehensive dataset that contains
information on the colleges that students attend, their earnings in their early thirties, their parents'
household incomes, and their SAT/ACT scores. In our baseline analysis, we focus on children born
between 1980 and 1982 ­ the oldest children whom we can reliably link to parents ­ and assign
children to colleges based on the college they attend most frequently between the ages of 19 and
22.1
        We begin by evaluating the extent to which differences in parental income distributions across
colleges can be explained by differences in academic preparation before students apply to college,
as proxied for by SAT or ACT scores.2 We find that at any given level of SAT/ACT scores,
children from higher-income families attend more selective colleges, suggesting that low- and middle-
income students "undermatch" to colleges (Bowen, Chingos and McPherson 2009). To quantify the
    1
      We measure children's earnings between the ages of 32 and 34; we show that children's percentile ranks in the
earnings distribution stabilize by age 32 at all types of colleges.
    2
      We follow a large body of prior work in using standardized test scores as a widely available measure of end-of-high-
school academic preparation (e.g., James et al. 1989, Dale and Krueger 2002) that is highly predictive of long-term
outcomes such as earnings. We confirm and extend these results by showing that SAT scores are strong predictors
of later earnings even conditional on parental income, race, and the high school or college a child attends in Online
Appendix L. Of course, other measures may also be helpful in assessing academic preparation and qualifications. Our
analysis does not speak to the relative merits of test scores vs. other proxies to assess pre-college qualifications.


                                                            1
degree of undermatching, we construct an "income-neutral" student allocation process, in which
we fill each college's slot for a current student who has test score s with a random draw from
the population of college students with test score s who come from the same state and are of
the same race. In this scenario, colleges continue to enroll students based on both academic and
non-academic credentials but eliminate variation in enrollment rates by parental income ­ whether
due to differences in application, admissions, or matriculation ­ among students with comparable
academic credentials, preserving the racial and geographic composition and the total size of each
college. This counterfactual thus provides a natural benchmark to gauge the extent to which
student bodies are representative of the underlying population of academically qualified students.3
    Income segregation across colleges would fall significantly if students enrolled at colleges in
an income-neutral manner conditional on their test scores. The degree of under-representation of
students from the bottom parental income quintile at selective (Barron's Tier 6 or higher) colleges
would fall by 38% relative to a benchmark in which all colleges have the same fraction of bottom-
quintile students as in the current population of college-goers. This is because top-quintile students
are currently 34% more likely to attend selective colleges than their bottom-quintile peers with the
same test scores. The income-neutral allocation would also increase the representation of middle-
income students (the second, third, and fourth quintiles) at selective colleges substantially.
    The picture is somewhat different at the most selective elite private (Ivy-Plus) colleges. There,
the fraction of students from the middle class (the second, third, and fourth quintiles) would
rise substantially, from 28% to 38%, under income-neutral allocations. But, there would be little
absolute change (from 3.8% to 4.4%) in the fraction of students from the bottom income quintile,
reducing under-representation relative to the benchmark in which all colleges have the same fraction
of bottom-quintile students by only 9%. These findings show that it is in fact middle-income
students who attend Ivy-plus colleges at the lowest rates, conditional on test scores ­ what many
have referred to as the "missing middle" at elite private colleges.4 Our results imply much less
undermatching of high-achieving low-income students at such colleges than found by Hoxby and
Avery (2013) because there are few children from low-income families who have sufficiently high
SAT/ACT scores. For instance, only 3.7% of children who score above a 1300 on the SAT come
   3
     This counterfactual exercise differs from the approach of simply admitting students with the highest test scores
considered by Bastedo and Jaquette (2011) and Carnevale et al. (2019). Since colleges do place significant weight on
factors unrelated to test scores in practice, we believe this counterfactual provides a more plausible benchmark for
understanding the extent to which differences in test scores can explain income segregation across colleges.
   4
     The term "missing middle" has been used to describe the relative under-representation of middle-class students
at elite private institutions since at least Todd (1976). More recently, Caroline Hoxby and Sarah Turner document
results consistent with these findings, as reported in Rampell (2019).


                                                         2
from families in the bottom income quintile.5 High-scoring students from low-income families are
scarce in substantial part because of disparities in schools, neighborhoods, and other environmental
factors that cumulate since birth (Heckman and Krueger 2005, Fryer and Levitt 2013, Chetty and
Hendren 2018, Reardon 2019). These pre-college disparities limit the scope to increase the number
of students from the lowest-income families at elite colleges purely by recruiting more applications.
       Further increasing the fraction of low-income students at selective colleges would require policies
that induce low-income students to attend highly selective colleges at higher rates than higher-
income students with currently comparable SAT scores. If low-income (bottom quintile) students
attended colleges comparable to high-income (top quintile) students with 160 point higher SAT
scores, the higher education system would be fully desegregated, in the sense that parental income
distributions would be very similar across all colleges.6 To benchmark the magnitude of this change,
a 160-point SAT increment would be equivalent to increasing Ivy-plus attendance rates from 7.3%
to 25.8% for low-income students with an SAT score of 1400. This increment is very similar in
magnitude to the implicit preference in admissions given to various preferred groups, such as legacy
students, recruited athletes, and underrepresented minorities, at elite colleges, who are admitted at
substantially higher rates than other students with similar qualifications (Espenshade, Chung and
Walling 2004, Arcidiacono, Kinsler and Ransom 2019).7
       How would such changes in segregation affect intergenerational mobility? To answer this ques-
tion, we need an estimate of the fraction of the earnings premium at each college (conditional on
parental income, race, and SAT/ACT scores) that is due to the causal effect of attending that
college. Naturally, our simulated impacts on intergenerational mobility are highly sensitive to this
parameter: if differences in earnings across colleges are driven purely by selection rather than
causal effects, reallocating students across colleges would have no impact on mobility. To gauge
what fraction of the difference in earnings across colleges is due to causal effects, we regress stu-
   5
      We find many fewer high-achieving students from low-income families than that estimated by Hoxby and Avery.
This difference arises because we measure parental income at the individual level rather than using geographic
imputations and because of differences in the thresholds used to define quantiles of the income distribution; see
Section V.A for details.
    6
      Phasing out this increment roughly linearly from 160 SAT points in the bottom quintile down to 0 for the students
in the top quintile leads to equal representation of students from all parental income levels across colleges. Note that
we use the SAT here simply as a convenient metric to quantify the degree of need-affirmative preference needed to
desegregate colleges; in practice, one could implement such policies using a variety of other metrics and approaches.
    7
      Our results do not speak to the debate about whether standardized tests provide comparable measures of aptitude
for students from low vs. high income families. We simply use test scores to quantify the gap between students from
low vs. high-income families in end-of-high-school academic qualifications. Whether that gap can be closed through
changes in K-12 education, test design or preparation, or the college application or admissions process is a question
left for future work.




                                                           3
dents' earnings on our estimates of mean earnings premia (conditional on race, parental income,
and test scores), controlling for other observable characteristics such as gender, high-school GPA,
and high-school fixed effects. We then follow Dale and Krueger (2002) and additionally control for
the set of colleges to which a student applied to capture selection on unobservables. Including such
controls yields a coefficient between 0.8-1, suggesting that at least 80% of the difference in earnings
premia across colleges (conditional on parental income, race, and test scores) reflects causal effects.
We therefore assume that 80% of the earnings premium at each college is driven by a causal effect
in our baseline analysis. We also assume that student reallocations do not change colleges' causal
effects, even though the composition of the student body might change substantially.
   We measure intergenerational mobility as the difference in the chance that college students
from low vs. high income families reach the top earnings quintile, a simple measure of relative
mobility (Chetty et al. 2014). Empirically, this difference is 22 percentage points for children in
the 1980-82 birth cohorts. The income-neutral benchmark would narrow the gap by 15%, while
need-affirmative admissions would narrow the gap by 27%. These are substantial effects given that
children's outcomes in adulthood are shaped by a cumulation of environmental factors from birth
until the point they enter the labor market (Chetty and Hendren 2018) and most people spend at
most 25% of their pre-labor-market years in college. The precise magnitudes that result from these
simulations must of course be interpreted with caution because they hinge on strong assumptions,
namely about the causal effect of colleges. Nevertheless, they suggest that changing which colleges
students attend ­ i.e., reducing segregation without making any efforts to increase colleges' value-
added or reduce disparities that emerge before students apply to college ­ could increase economic
mobility substantially.
   Our analysis builds on and reconciles various conflicting findings in prior work. First, several
papers have studied income segregation in higher education by selectivity tier or at selected colleges
(e.g., Avery et al. 2006, Goodman 2008, Deming and Dynarski 2010, Hoxby and Turner 2013, Marx
and Turner 2015, Andrews, Imberman and Lovenheim 2016, Manoli and Turner 2018). These
studies find a wide range of estimates using small samples; for instance, the estimated fraction of
students from bottom-quartile families at elite colleges ranges from 3% (Carnevale and Strohl 2010)
to 11% (Bowen, Kurzweil and Tobin 2006, Chapter 7) across studies. Our statistics (reported in
Chetty et al. (2017)) provide more definitive estimates of the degree of segregation across college
tiers, shed light on segregation across colleges within selectivity tiers, and offer the first statistics
on top-income shares by college.


                                                   4
     Second, a smaller literature has measured the returns to attending certain colleges using quasi-
experimental methods (e.g., Black and Smith 2004, Hoekstra 2009, Hastings, Neilson and Zimmer-
man 2013, Zimmerman 2014, Kirkeboen, Leuven and Mogstad 2016, Cellini and Turner 2019). Our
analysis complements these studies by providing information on earnings distributions for all col-
leges. These data allow us to characterize how students' earnings distributions vary with parental
income within each college and identify "outlier" colleges in terms of students' outcomes whose
admissions policies or educational practices could be studied in future quasi-experimental work.
     Finally, our counterfactual analysis follows prior work examining how alternative admissions
rules would affect the composition of colleges by selectivity tier (e.g., Arcidiacono 2005, Bowen,
Kurzweil and Tobin 2006, Epple, Romano and Sieg 2006, Krueger, Rothstein and Turner 2006,
Howell 2010). This work has again reached conflicting conclusions on the degree of undermatching
and the consequences of alternative admissions regimes (Carnevale and Rose 2004, Hill and Winston
2006, Carnevale and Strohl 2010, Bastedo and Jaquette 2011, Hoxby and Avery 2013). In addition
to reconciling these findings, we contribute to this literature by (1) analyzing counterfactuals across
all colleges rather than by college tier, which proves to be quantitatively important and (2) showing
impacts not just on the composition of the student body but on rates of intergenerational mobility.
     The paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the data. Section III examines the
relationship between SAT/ACT scores and parent income (undermatching). Section IV discusses
the counterfactual simulations. Section V concludes. College-level statistics and replication code
can be downloaded from the project website.


II     Data

In this section, we describe how we construct our analysis sample, define the key variables we use
in our analysis, and present summary statistics. The data we use to measure students' and parents'
incomes and college attendance are identical to those in Chetty et al. (2017) and hence much of
this section overlaps with that paper.

II.A     Sample Definition

Our primary sample of children consists of all individuals in the U.S. who (1) have a valid Social
Security Number (SSN) or Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN), (2) were born be-




                                                  5
tween 1980-1991, and (3) can be linked to parents with non-negative income in the tax data (see
Appendix A for more details).8 There are approximately 48.1 million people in this sample.
       We identify a child's parents as the most recent tax filers to claim the child as a child dependent
during the period when the child is 12-17 years old. If the child is claimed by a single filer, the
child is defined as having a single parent. We assign each child a parent (or parents) permanently
using this algorithm, regardless of any changes in parents' marital status or dependent claiming.
Children who are never claimed as dependents on a tax return cannot be linked to their parents
and are excluded from our analysis. However, almost all parents file a tax return at some point
when their child is between ages 12-17, either because their incomes lie above the filing threshold
or because they are eligible for a tax refund (Cilke 1998). Thus, the number of children for whom
we identify parents exceeds 98% of children born in the U.S. between 1980 and 1991 (Appendix
Table I).9

II.B       College Attendance

Data Sources. We obtain information on college attendance from two administrative data sources:
federal tax records and Department of Education records spanning 1999-2013.10 We identify stu-
dents attending each college in the administrative records primarily using Form 1098-T, an in-
formation return filed by colleges on behalf of each of their students to report tuition payments.
All institutions qualifying for federal financial aid under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of
1965 must file a 1098-T form in each calendar year for any student that pays tuition. Because
the 1098-T data do not always cover students who pay no tuition--who are typically low-income
students receiving financial aid--we supplement the 1098-T data with Pell grant records from the
Department of Education's National Student Loan Data System (NSLDS). See Appendix B for
details on these two data sources and how we assign students to colleges.
       Because neither of our data sources relies on voluntary reporting or tax filing, our data provide
a near-complete roster of college attendance at all Title IV accredited institutions of higher edu-
   8
     Because we limit the sample to children who can be linked to parents in the U.S. (based on dependent claiming on
tax returns), our sample excludes college students from foreign countries. We limit the sample to parents with non-
negative income (averaged over five years as described below in Section II.C) because parents with negative income
typically have large business losses, which are a proxy for having significant wealth despite the negative reported
income. The non-negative income restriction excludes 0.95% of children.
   9
     The fraction of children linked to parents drops sharply prior to the 1980 birth cohort because our data begins
in 1996 and many children begin to the leave the household starting at age 17 (Chetty et al. 2014). Hence, the 1980
birth cohort is the earliest cohort we analyze.
  10
     Information on college attendance is not available in tax records prior to 1999, and the latest complete information
on attendance available from the Department of Education at the point of this analysis was for 2013.




                                                           6
cation in the U.S. Aggregate college enrollment counts in our data are well aligned with aggregate
enrollments from the Current Population Survey and college-specific enrollment counts from IPEDS
(Appendix Table I, Appendix B).11
       Definition of College Attendance. Our goal is to construct statistics for the set of degree-seeking
undergraduate students at each college. Since we cannot directly separate degree seekers from other
students (summer school students, extension school students, etc.) in our data, we proceed in two
steps in our baseline definition of college attendance. First, we define a student as attending a given
college in a given calendar year if she appears in either the 1098-T or NSLDS data. We then assign
each student the college she attends for the most years over the four calendar years in which she
turns 19, 20, 21, and 22. If a student attends two or more colleges for the same number of years
(which occurs for 9% of children), we define the student's college as the first college she attended.12
Since we do not observe degree completion, students who do not graduate are included in all of the
statistics we report.
       To evaluate the robustness of our results, we also consider two alternative attendance measures:
age 20 college (the college a student attends in the calendar year that she turns 20) and first-
attended college (the college a student attends first between the calendar years in which she turns
19 and 28).
       For certain analyses, we report statistics for groups of colleges rather than individual colleges.
We classify colleges as "4-year" or "2-year" based on the highest degree they offer using IPEDS
data.13 Following prior work (e.g., Deming et al. 2015), we use data from the Barron's 2009 index
(Barron's Educational Series, College Division 2008) to classify 4-year colleges into five tiers based
on their selectivity: Ivy-Plus (the Ivy League plus Stanford, MIT, Chicago, and Duke), other
elite (Barron's Tier 1 excluding the Ivy-Plus; 65 colleges for the 1980-1991 birth cohorts), highly
selective (Barron's Tier 2; 99 colleges), selective (Barron's Tiers 3-5; 1,003 colleges), and non-
selective (Barron's Tier 9 and all four-year colleges not included in the Barron's selectivity index;
287 colleges).
  11
     Students at some multi-campus systems cannot be assigned to a specific campus and therefore are aggregated into
a single cluster. There are 85 such clusters, comprising 17.5% of students and 3.9% of colleges in our data. Separately,
1.8% of student-year observations are assigned to a "colleges with incomplete or insufficient data" category due to
incomplete 1098-T data.
  12
     If the student attended multiple "most attended" colleges in the first year, which occurs for 1.6% of students,
then a college is chosen at random from that set.
  13
     Since many colleges offer both 2-year and 4-year programs, many students attending a "4-year" college may be
enrolled in a 2-year program.




                                                           7
II.C       Incomes

We obtain data on children's and parents' incomes from federal income tax records spanning 1996-
2014. We use data from both income tax returns (1040 forms) and third-party information returns
(e.g., W-2 forms), which contain information on the earnings of those who do not file tax returns.
We measure income in 2015 dollars, adjusting for inflation using the consumer price index (CPI-U).
       Parent Income. We measure parent income as total pre-tax income at the household level. In
years where a parent files a tax return, we define family income as Adjusted Gross Income (as
reported on the 1040 tax return). This income measure includes both labor earnings and capital
income. In years where a parent does not file a tax return, we define family income as the sum
of wage earnings (reported on form W-2) and unemployment benefits (reported on form 1099-G).
In years where parents have no tax return and no information returns, family income is coded as
zero. Importantly, the income distribution in the tax data is very similar to that in the American
Community Survey (ACS) when one uses the same income definitions (Appendix C, Appendix
Table II).
       We average parents' family income over the five years when the child is aged 15-19 to smooth
transitory fluctuations (Solon 1992) and obtain a measure of resources available at the time when
most college attendance decisions are made.14 We then assign parents income percentiles by ranking
them based on this mean income measure relative to all other parents who have children in the
same birth cohort.
       Child Income. Our primary measure of children's income in adulthood is total pre-tax individual
earnings. For single filers, individual earnings is defined as the sum of wage earnings and net self-
employment income if positive (i.e., net of one-half of the self-employment tax) as reported on
Form 1040. For joint filers, it is defined as the sum of the individual's wage earnings reported on
his own W-2 forms, the individual's net self-employment income (if positive) reported on Form SE,
and half of the additional wage earnings reported on Form 1040 relative to the sum of the spouses'
W-2 wage earnings (see Appendix A for details). For non-filers, individual earnings is defined as
the sum of wage earnings reported on the individual's W-2 forms.
  14
    Following Chetty et al. (2014), we define mean family income as the mother's family income plus the father's
family income in each year from 1996 to 2000 divided by 10 (or divided by 5 if we only identify a single parent). For
parents who do not change marital status, this is simply mean family income over the 5 year period. For parents
who are married initially and then divorce, this measure tracks the mean family incomes of the two divorced parents
over time. For parents who are single initially and then get married, this measure tracks individual income prior to
marriage and total family income (including the new spouse's income) after marriage. We exclude years in which
a parent does not file when computing mean parent income prior to 1999 because information returns are available
starting only in 1999.


                                                         8
       We measure children's incomes in 2014 ­ the most recent year in which we observe earnings ­
to minimize the degree of lifecycle bias that arises from measuring children's earnings at too early
an age. We assign children income percentiles by ranking them based on their individual earnings
relative to other children in the same birth cohort. We show in Appendix D that the earnings ranks
of children in our analysis sample stabilize by 2014.
       We also consider two alternative measures of child income in sensitivity analyses: household
income, defined in the same way as parents' household income, and household earnings, the sum
of individual earnings (defined as above) for the child and his or her spouse. Household income
includes capital income, whereas household earnings does not.

II.D       Test Scores and Race

We obtained records from the College Board and ACT on standardized college entrance exam scores
and race/ethnicity for children in our analysis sample. Our data cover high school graduating
cohorts 1996-2004 for SAT and 1995-2007 for ACT.
       We focus on individuals' SAT composite score (ranging from 400 to 1600), defined as the
mathematics score plus the critical reading score, and the composite ACT score (ranging from
1 to 36). We map ACT scores into equivalent SAT scores using existing concordance tables, we
prioritize the SAT if it is available, and we use an individual's maximum composite score if she has
taken multiple of the same tests (see Appendix E for details). We use five race/ethnicity categories
(referred to hereafter as race): Black, Asian, non-Hispanic white, Hispanic, and other.
       SAT/ACT coverage rates (and therefore race coverage rates) are very high at selective colleges
where standardized tests are typically required for admission; for instance, we observe a score for
98.5% of Ivy-Plus attendees. We use SAT/ACT scores and race primarily in our counterfactual
analysis in Section IV.15 In that section, we describe and validate a procedure to impute SAT/ACT
scores and race for the 26.2% of students for whom we do not observe a test score and race.

II.E       Summary Statistics

Table I reports summary statistics for children in our analysis sample. Overall, 62% of the 10.8
million children in 1980-82 birth cohorts attend college at some point between the ages of 19 and
22. Another 12% attend college at some point by age 28; and 27% of children do not attend college
  15
    Due to confidentiality restrictions governing the test score data, we are unable to disclose statistics that make
use of test score data and/or race data by college and hence cannot report estimates of earnings conditional on test
scores, race, or other related measures in this study.



                                                         9
at all before age 28. The median parental household income of children born between 1980-82 is
$59,100. The 20th percentile of the parent income distribution is $24,600 and the 80th percentile
is $111,100. The children in these cohorts have median individual earnings of $26,900 in 2014 (at
ages 32-34). The 20th percentile of the child earnings distribution is $900 and the 80th percentile
is $55,800. Approximately 18.5% of children have $0 in individual earnings in 2014. See Table II
and Appendix Table III for additional summary statistics.


III     Undermatching: SAT/ACT Scores by Parent Income

The relationship between test scores on college entrance exams and parental income is important
for understanding the types of policies that could mitigate segregation in higher education. If a
large fraction of high-achieving (high-scoring) students come from low- and middle-income families
relative to their representation at highly selective colleges, one could potentially reduce segregation
at elite colleges by recruiting and admitting high-achieving, low-income applicants at higher rates.
If in contrast low-income students have much lower SAT/ACT scores than high-income students,
one may require other approaches such as need-affirmative admissions to reduce segregation across
colleges.
    Several studies in the literature on "undermatching" have analyzed how SAT/ACT scores vary
with parental income, but they have reached conflicting conclusions. Some studies (e.g., Carnevale
and Strohl 2010, Hoxby and Avery 2013) find that there are many high-achieving, low-income
students, but others (e.g, Carnevale and Rose 2004, Hill and Winston 2006, Bastedo and Jaquette
2011) find relatively few such students.
    Our data permit a more precise analysis of the degree of undermatching than prior work by
combining administrative data on parental income, college attendance, and SAT/ACT scores. How-
ever, like many prior studies, we do not observe test scores for a significant share (26.2%) of college
students, presumably because they were not required to take a standardized entrance exam by the
college they attended. We impute an SAT score to these students using the SAT/ACT score of the
college student from the same parent income quintile, state, and college selectivity tier who has the
closest level of earnings in adulthood.16
    This imputation methodology relies on the assumption that the joint distribution of college,
parent income quintile, state, and imputed test scores matches what one would observe if all stu-
 16
    All students missing a test score are also missing race, since we obtain race information from the SAT/ACT data.
We impute race to these students using exactly the same procedure as for test scores.



                                                        10
dents were to take the SAT or ACT. This assumption would be violated if the latent scores of
non-SAT/ACT-takers differ systematically from SAT/ACT-takers. We evaluate the validity of
this assumption using data from five states where the SAT or ACT is administered to nearly all
students--Louisiana, Connecticut, Maine, North Dakota, and Tennessee. We run our imputation
algorithm in two ways: as above, but ignoring state in the imputation algorithm, and then sep-
arately pretending that we do not observe SAT or ACT scores for anyone in these five states.
We then compare the distribution of imputed scores to the distribution of actual scores. Both
unconditionally and within each college tier by parent income quintile cell, the quantiles of the
imputed SAT distribution match the quantiles of the actual SAT/ACT distribution almost exactly,
supporting the validity of the imputation procedure (Appendix Figure II).17
       Figure Ia plots the parental income distribution of college students in our analysis sample
who have an SAT/ACT test score above 1300 (the 93rd percentile of the SAT/ACT distribution).
Appendix Table IV shows the full joint distribution of test scores and parent income ranks among
all college students. We find that students from low-income families have substantially lower test
scores on average and that there are very few high-achieving students from low-income families.18
For example, 3.7% of college goers with an SAT/ACT score of at least 1300 come from families in
the bottom quintile, while 53.7% come from the top quintile. If we limit the sample to the 73.8%
of college goers whose test scores are not imputed, we find even fewer high-scoring, low-income
students ­ e.g., a 3.1% bottom-quintile share among those with scores above 1300 ­ because low-
income college goers are less likely to take the SAT or ACT (Appendix Table V). As an additional
robustness check, we replicate this analysis using data from the National Postsecondary Student
Aid Study, which has student-reported family income data. The NPSAS-based estimate of the
bottom-quintile share of 1300+ scorers is 4.0% (Appendix Table VI).
       Our estimates of the fraction of high-achieving students who come from low-income families
are broadly similar to those reported by Carnevale and Rose (2004), Hill and Winston (2006), and
Bastedo and Jaquette (2011), but are substantially smaller than those estimated in the influential
study of Hoxby and Avery (2013).19 Hoxby and Avery estimate that 17% of graduating high school
  17
      Furthermore, we find that running our imputation procedure purely using SAT scores (pretending we do not have
ACT data) yields very similar results.
   18
      One should not infer from this result that SAT/ACT scores simply serve as a proxy for parent income: parental
income ranks actually explain only 8.6% of the variance in SAT/ACT scores in our analysis sample. Though students
from lower-income families have lower SAT/ACT scores on average, there are many students from middle- and
high-income families who do not have high SAT/ACT scores.
   19
      Carnevale and Rose use the National Educational Longitudinal Study of 1988 to find that 3% of those with
an SAT score or ACT equivalent above 1300 have bottom-SES-quartile parents, where SES is the NELS-provided
socioeconomic-status composite of parent income, education, and occupation. Hill and Winston use population-level


                                                        11
seniors with an SAT score or ACT equivalent of at least 1300 have parents in the bottom quartile
of the income distribution.20 By contrast, our estimate of this statistic is 5.0%. Similarly, Hoxby
and Avery estimate that 39% of students with SAT/ACT scores above 1300 come from families
below the median, compared with 16.6% in our data.
    One reason for this discrepancy may be that Hoxby and Avery impute family income using
Census tract-level means rather than using individual-level measures, a natural approach given that
parental income is frequently missing and potentially noisy in their self-reported data. However,
we find that higher-income children within small geographies tend to have higher SAT/ACT scores
using our individual-level data. As a result, using tract-level means overestimates the number of
students from low-income families who have high test scores. A second reason may be that Hoxby
and Avery define the 25th percentile of the income distribution based on family income data from
the American Community Survey (ACS), but measure parental incomes based on information
drawn from financial aid forms. Because of differences in household units and income definitions
across these sources, it is possible that Hoxby and Avery's approach would classify more than 25%
of parents as falling in the bottom 25% of the distribution.21 By contrast, because we compute
percentile thresholds and measure parental incomes using the same data, 25% of parents fall in the
bottom 25% in our analysis by construction.
    Having established the relationship between test scores and parental income, we now analyze
how alternative allocations of students to colleges would affect income segregation and intergener-
ational mobility.
SAT and ACT data to find that 4.8% of those with at least a 1300 have bottom-quintile parents, based on student-
reported incomes and American Community Survey thresholds. Bastedo and Jaquette report means and standard
deviations from the Educational Longitudinal Study of 2002 that, under Normality, imply that 4.1% of those with
an SAT score or ACT equivalent above 1300 have bottom-SES-quartile parents.
  20
     Hoxby and Avery also require a self-reported grade point average of A- or higher, but they note that the GPA
restriction matters very little once they apply the SAT/ACT restriction.
  21
     Hoxby and Avery classify a child as falling in the bottom quartile if the child's estimated family income lies below
$41,472, the 25th percentile of family income in the 2008 American Community Survey. The income data they use
in their analysis is based on College Scholarship Service (CSS) Profile family income data reported by the student,
which in turn comes from parents' tax returns and supplementary information. In the tax data, however, the 25th
percentile of the Adjusted Gross Income distribution is about $25,000, well below the ACS threshold. In Appendix
C, we show that the differences between the tax data and the ACS are entirely due to differences in the definition of
household units and incomes.




                                                           12
IV        How Would Changes in the Allocation of Students to
          Colleges Affect Segregation and Intergenerational Mobility?

In this section, we use our estimates to simulate how income segregation across colleges and inter-
generational mobility would change if students were allocated to colleges differently, using data on
SAT and ACT scores as a proxy for students' academic qualifications at the point of application.
To do so, we simulate how alternative allocations of students to colleges would change the degree
of income segregation across colleges and the rate of intergenerational mobility in the economy.
       The reallocations we propose hold constant total national spending on higher education, since
we hold the number of seats at each college fixed. However, they would require a change in the
allocation of funding across families and colleges, as some colleges would have larger shares of
low-income students and thus have lower net tuition revenue given the financial aid packages they
currently offer. Hence, the counterfactual allocations we simulate below should not be thought of
as policy proposals, but rather as benchmarks that shed light on the drivers of segregation across
colleges and the potential impacts of changing which students attend which colleges on economic
mobility.

IV.A        Income Segregation

We begin by evaluating the extent to which income segregation across colleges can be explained
by differences in academic credentials when students apply to college (as proxied for by SAT or
ACT scores), holding fixed each college's current racial composition and the geographic origins of
their students. We impose the geographic and racial constraints to better approximate feasible
reallocations, recognizing that many institutions (e.g., public state institutions, local community
colleges, or Historically Black Colleges and Universities) effectively face geographic or racial con-
straints in practice.22 This analysis provides a natural benchmark to gauge the extent to which
colleges' student bodies are representative of the underlying population of academically qualified
students from which they seek to draw. For example, are the parental incomes of Ivy League
students representative of all students with similar test scores who come from the same states and
racial groups?
    To conduct this analysis, we first record the actual vector of SAT/ACT test scores at each
college-by-state-by-race group -
                               s g . We then allocate students by filling each college-state-race's
  22
    The impacts of our counterfactuals on aggregate segregation and mobility actually turn out to be quite similar
if we permit reallocations without any racial or geographic constraints (Appendix Table IX).



                                                       13
slot for a student with test score s with a random draw from the state-race's population of college
students with test score s. In this "income-neutral" student allocation regime, colleges continue to
enroll students based on both test scores and other credentials (e.g., recommendations, extracurric-
ulars), but eliminate variation in enrollment rates by parental income ­ whether due to differences
in application, admissions, or matriculation ­ among students with comparable test scores in the
same state and racial group.
   Figure IIa shows how segregation across colleges would change under this counterfactual. The
left side of the figure examines the extent to which students from low-income families are exposed
to students from high-income families by plotting the fraction of college peers from the top quintile
among college students with parents in the bottom quintile. The right side analogously examines
segregation among high-income students by plotting the fraction of top-quintile peers for students
from the top quintile (see Appendix Table VIII for additional statistics). In each case, we plot three
statistics: the actual rates in the data, the rates under the income-neutral allocation counterfactual,
and the rates under need-affirmative student allocations (which we discuss below).
   Segregation across colleges would fall substantially if college enrollment were income neutral
conditional on test scores: for example, the top-quintile peer share of students from low-income
families would rise from 22.5% to 27.8%. Since 30.8% of college students come from the top
quintile (shown by the horizontal line on the figure), a random allocation of students to colleges
among the current pool of college students would yield a top-quintile peer share of 30.8%. Hence,
income-neutral allocations would close 63.9% of the gap between the current degree of exposure that
students from low-income families have to high-income students and the exposure they would have if
colleges were perfectly integrated by income (conditional on the set of students who currently attend
college). Put differently, only 36.1% of the income segregation across colleges can be attributed
to differences in students' test scores, racial backgrounds, or geographic origins. The remaining
63.9% is driven by a combination of differences in student application choices, college admissions,
and matriculation decisions by parental income conditional on these factors.
   Although the income-neutral allocation reduces segregation overall, it largely reshuffles students
within selectivity tiers and thus has smaller impacts on parental income distributions at more selec-
tive colleges. Figure IIb illustrates this result by plotting the fraction of students from the bottom
parental income quintile at Ivy-Plus, selective colleges (top six tiers), and unselective colleges (bot-
tom six tiers) in actuality and under the counterfactual (see Table III for statistics for each tier
separately). The bottom-quintile share of students at selective colleges overall rises from 7.3% to


                                                  14
8.6%, closing 38% of the gap in their underrepresentation relative to their 10.7% share of college
goers overall. This 38% reduction in segregation at selective colleges is substantial, but it is much
smaller than the 64% reduction overall.
       Impacts at Ivy-Plus Colleges. The impacts of income-neutral allocations at the most selective
colleges differ from those in the broader population. At Ivy-Plus colleges, the fraction of students
from the bottom quintile remains essentially unchanged under income-neutral allocations in abso-
lute terms (rising from 3.8% to 4.4%), but the fraction of students from the middle class (the second,
third, and fourth income quintiles) rises sharply, from 27.8% to 37.9%, as shown in Table III. Figure
Ia shows why we see the biggest impacts on the representation of the middle class by plotting the
parental income distribution of high SAT/ACT (>=1300) scorers alongside the parental income
distribution of actual Ivy-Plus enrollees. Children from the bottom-quintile are represented at
nearly the same rate as one would expect given their test scores; children from the middle-class are
under-represented at these colleges; and those from the top quintile are over-represented.
       Figure Ib presents a more granular depiction of the degree of over/under-representation by
parental income. It plots the share of students with an SAT/ACT score of 1400 ­ the modal and
median test score among actual Ivy-Plus students ­ who attend an Ivy-Plus college. Rather than
a flat line, which would have indicated that 1400-scorers from each parent income bin attend an
Ivy-Plus college at the same rate, we observe an asymmetric U-shape, with higher attendance rates
in the tails. In particular, 1400-scorers with parents from the top and bottom quintiles attend
Ivy-Plus colleges at 2.4 and 1.6 times the rate of middle-quintile children with comparable test
scores, respectively. We find similar patterns at other test score levels; see Appendix Table VII.
       The upshot of this analysis is that there is a "missing middle" at Ivy-Plus institutions ­ an
under-representation of students with high test scores from middle class families relative to students
from low-income and especially high-income families. Changes in application or admissions policies
that eliminate existing differences in attendance rates conditional on test scores across parental
income groups could therefore significantly increase the representation of the middle class (though
not low-income) families at the nation's most selective private colleges.23
  23
    This conclusion differs from that of Carnevale et al. (2019), who report that high-socioeconomic-status (a com-
posite of parent income, education, and occupation prestige) shares at highly selective colleges would barely change
under a system in which students with the highest test scores are admitted to the most selective colleges, without re-
gard to other credentials. This is because the students with the very highest SAT/ACT scores tend to come from the
highest-income families. Although Carnevale et al.'s pure test-score-admissions counterfactual also achieves income
neutrality conditional on test scores, it increases the selectivity of elite colleges, because elite colleges currently admit
many students who have SAT scores well below 1600. Our point is that shifting to a system that is income-neutral
conditional on the current distribution of test scores at elite colleges (thereby preserving current levels of selectivity)
would substantially reduce top income shares.


                                                             15
       Of course, test scores are an imperfect proxy for academic credentials, and colleges weigh many
factors (e.g., extracurriculars, overall fit) beyond academic qualifications in admissions decisions.
Therefore, one cannot interpret the counterfactual estimates as representing income segregation
under a "meritocracy." Nevertheless, we view this counterfactual as a natural benchmark to gauge
the extent to which student bodies are representative of the underlying population of academically
qualified students. If one's objective is to have income-neutral enrollment conditional on merit,
deviations from this benchmark can be justified at current selectivity levels only if other non-test-
score determinants of merit are correlated with parent income.24
       Need-Affirmative Student Allocations. Although a system of applications and admissions that is
income neutral conditional on academic credentials would reduce income segregation significantly,
the fraction of students from the bottom income quintile would remain about 50 percent higher at
unselective colleges than selective colleges. We therefore now turn to ask how much of a preference
one would need to give children from lower-income backgrounds in the student allocation process ­
or, equivalently, how much lower-income students' test scores would have to rise ­ to fully eliminate
segregation across colleges.
       We simulate need-affirmative student allocations by adding sq points to the SAT/ACT scores
of children with parents from income quintile q < 5. We vary the values of {sq }, leaving SAT/ACT
scores for children from the top quintile unchanged (s5 = 0), in order to identify a profile of test-
score increases that results in a constant parental income distribution across all college selectivity
tiers. We then re-norm test scores to match the actual distribution and replicate the income-neutral
allocation above with these adjusted scores (see Appendix F for details).
       Iterating over linearly-declining profiles of {sq }, we find that that adding 160 SAT points for
those from the bottom quintile (s1 = 160) and sq = (1 - q- 1
                                                         5 )160 for q = 2, 3, 4 ­ i.e., increments

of 80%, 60%, and 40% of the bottom-quintile increment ­ produces roughly equal parental income
shares across tiers.25 To understand the practical implications of such an increment, note that
7.3% of children from the bottom parental income quintile with an SAT score of 1400 attend an
  24
     It may be useful to consider an analogy to the principle of "disparate impact" in anti-discrimination law. Any
hiring practice (e.g., requiring candidates to excel at squash) that has a disparate (differential) impact by gender or
race is prima facie evidence of unlawful discrimination and shifts the burden of proof to the employer to show that
the practice is consistent with business necessity and has no practical and more neutral alternative. Disparate impact
by parental income is not a legal concern, but would be of analogous interest to those seeking a system of college
admissions that is income-neutral conditional on merit.
  25
     That is, the following groups are treated identically within state-race groups: (s+160)-scorers with bottom-20%
parents, (s+128)-scorers with second-quintile parents, (s+96)-scorers with middle-quintile parents, (s+64)-scorers
with fourth-quintile parents, and s-scorers with top-quintile parents. Changes in admission probabilities can change
applicant pools (e.g., Yagan 2016); our linear gradient reflects the combined effect of application, admission, and
matriculation.


                                                          16
Ivy-plus college in our data. Such students would attend Ivy-plus schools at a rate of 25.8% in
our need-affirmative 160 point SAT increment scenario. More generally, among students with SAT
scores above 1300, the 160 point increment increases the likelihood of attending an Ivy-plus college
for a bottom-income-quintile student conditional on their SAT score by a factor of 3.54 on average.
       It is instructive to gauge the magnitude of these increments in SAT scores and attendance
rates for low-income students by comparing them to admissions preferences currently granted to
other groups. Espenshade, Chung and Walling (2004) use admissions data from three elite private
colleges to evaluate the extent to which legacies, athletes, and underrepresented minorities are
more likely to be admitted, controlling for their credentials at the point of application. They
find that the increase in admissions probability for these groups is roughly equivalent to the effect
of a 160 point increase in SAT scores.26 Similarly, Arcidiacono, Kinsler and Ransom (2019) use
data from Harvard to estimate that students who are recruited athletes, legacies, those on the
Dean's interest list, or children of faculty and staff (ALDCs) have admissions rates 3.4 times higher
than non-ALDC students with otherwise similar characteristics.27 Hence, one way to implement
our need-affirmative counterfactual could be to grant a preference in admissions for lower-income
students similar to that currently given to other groups. Another approach may be to increase
application or matriculation rates for lower-income students relative to high-income students by an
equivalent amount.
       Figure IIa shows that this degree of need-affirmative student reallocation essentially desegre-
gates the higher education system fully, with exposure rates to students from different income
groups similar to what one would obtain under a random allocation benchmark.28 Moreover, need-
affirmative allocations would essentially eliminate differences in parental income distributions across
all selectivity tiers. The fraction of students from bottom-quintile families is close to the overall
mean across all colleges of 10.7% in all college tiers (Figure IIb, Table IIIc). Indeed, the Ivy-Plus
colleges would have a higher fraction of children from low-income families than almost all other
tiers in this scenario.29 Each tier still has more students from high-income families than low-income
  26
     More precisely, Espenshade, Chung and Walling estimate that legacy status is equivalent to 160 SAT/ACT points,
recruited athlete status 200 points, African-American status 230 points, and Hispanic status 185 points. Hurwitz
(2011) also finds large observed admissions advantages for legacy applicants.
  27
     Table 10 of Arcidiacono, Kinsler and Ransom (2019) reports counterfactual admissions rates for admitted ALDC
students, removing the ALDC preferences, separately for students of each race. Averaging these counterfactual
admissions rates across racial groups using the number of admitted ALDCs from each race (reported in the same
table) yields 29.4%, implying admissions rather that are 1 / 29.4% = 3.4 times higher for ALDCs than otherwise
similar non-ALDCs.
  28
     We present results with alternative increments to SAT/ACT scores in Appendix Figure IV.
  29
     Bowen, Kurzweil and Tobin (2006, Chapter 7) also examine the effects of need-affirmative allocations on parental
income distributions at 18 elite colleges. Our findings are qualitatively consistent with their results at these 18


                                                         17
families even with need-affirmative allocations because college attendance rates rise sharply with
parental income (Chetty et al. 2017) and our counterfactual does not change who attends college.
However, among the current pool of college students, treating those from low-income families like
legacy students would make parental income distributions similar across all colleges.

IV.B      Intergenerational Mobility

Estimating Colleges' Value-Added. To quantify how changes in the allocation of students to colleges
would affect intergenerational mobility, we first need estimates of how children's earnings outcomes
would change if they were to attend different colleges (i.e., colleges' causal effects or "value-added").
Directly estimating each college's value-added would require a source of quasi-experimental varia-
tion at each college and is outside the scope of this paper. Instead, we build on the prior literature
and use estimates that are consistent with that work as an input into our simulations.
    We begin from our estimates of children's mean earning ranks conditional on their parental
income, race, and SAT/ACT scores estimated above.30 We then estimate the fraction  of these
conditional earnings differences across colleges that is due to causal effects vs. selection by control-
ling for observable characteristics and for the set of colleges to which a student applied to capture
selection on unobservables, following Dale and Krueger (2002).
    Formally, consider the regression model

                              yiqc =  + Xiqc + f (Si ) + f (pq ) + r + c + iqc                                       (1)

where yiqc is the earnings rank of student i from parent income rank q who attended college c; Xiqc
is a vector of observed student-specific characteristics; f (Si ) is a quintic in the student's SAT or
ACT equivalent score, an indicator for taking the SAT, and an indicator for taking the ACT (note
that some students took both tests); f (pq ) is a quintic in the student's parent income rank; r is a
race fixed effect, and c is a college fixed effect. We can estimate the vector of college fixed effects
c = {c } using a variety of control vectors Xiqc . First consider estimates where Xiqc is empty and
thus the only controls are SAT/ACT scores, parent income, and race; denote these estimates by
S,p,r
c     . We can then assess the relationship between these test-score-and-parent-income-and-race
controlled estimates of colleges' effects with estimates that include additional controls by running
colleges, although our quantitative results differ because their self-reported parent income measures yield low-income
shares at elite colleges that are twice as large as ours.
   30
      We do not condition on children's pre-college state because of small samples; in particular, under need-affirmative
allocations, cells can be small when counterfactually high or low SAT/ACT scorers are assigned to a given college.




                                                           18
the regression
                                           S,p,r,X
                                           c       =  + S,p,r
                                                        c     + c .                                                   (2)

The parameter  gives an estimate of the fraction of the baseline test-score-and-parent-income-
and-race-controlled difference between any two colleges that would remain, on average, with the
addition of further controls. If latent student quality is not correlated with the college he or she
attends conditional on the observed characteristics X , the parameter  can be interpreted as the
fraction of the differences between colleges' earnings estimates S,p,r
                                                                 c     that reflects their causal effects
(value-added).
       Table IV reports estimates of  using a range of control vectors X .31 Columns 1-3 control
successively for the following observable student characteristics: interactions between gender, race,
and the test score quintic; high school fixed effects; and high-school fixed effects interacted with
race. These specifications all yield estimates of  > 0.9, i.e. more that 90% of the baseline earnings
variation (conditional on parental income, race, and test scores) reflects a causal effect if these
observables capture selection.
       To assess whether selection on other unobservable dimensions might confound our estimates,
we use the set of colleges to which students apply as controls for their latent ability, as in Dale and
Krueger (2002, 2014).32 In Column 4 of Table IV, we follow Dale and Krueger (2014) and control
for mean SAT score of the colleges to which students send their SAT/ACT scores (a proxy for
college application) and the total number of colleges to which they send their scores in addition to
the observable characteristics used in Column 2. Column 5 adds high-school fixed effects interacted
with race to Column 4, while Column 6 limits the sample to students in the bottom quintile of
the income distribution.33 These specifications all yield point estimates of   0.85, with a lower
bound on the 95% confidence interval of around 0.82.34
  31
     We exclude students who do not attend any college and omit students with imputed test scores from these
regressions.
  32
     Controlling for the set of colleges to which students apply is what Dale and Krueger (2002) call a "self-revelation"
approach to adjusting for selection; they show that this approach yields estimates that are very similar to specifications
that control for the set of colleges to which students are admitted. Dale and Krueger (2014) simply control for the
application set rather than the admittance set to maximize power in light of this result, and we follow that approach
here (since we do not have data on admissions).
  33
     As the estimate in Column 6 indicates, we do not find significant heterogeneity in  across parental income
groups. However, the baseline conditional earnings differences from attending a more selective college are larger for
students from low-income families. In particular, we replicate Dale and Krueger's result that the return to attending
a college with higher average SAT scores is small on average, but larger for low-income students in Appendix Table
X.
  34
     In their College and Beyond sample, Dale and Krueger find that controlling for the application set reduces the
coefficient on mean SAT scores substantially even after controlling for student's own SAT scores and other observables.
We believe our findings differ because we have more precise controls for student background (e.g., a precise measure of



                                                           19
    Given these estimates, we assume that  = 80% of the conditional earnings differences observed
across colleges are due to causal effects (value-added) and the remaining 20% is due to selection in
our baseline simulations.35 Importantly, we also assume that these estimated causal effects do not
change under our counterfactual student reallocations, in particular ignoring potential changes in
value-added that may arise from having a different group of students (peer effects).
    Income-Neutral Student Allocations. We construct a counterfactual earnings distribution for
children at each college based on the observed distribution of earnings for children in each parent
income quintile, SAT/ACT score level, race, and college. Mechanically, children are randomly as-
signed the earnings of another child who is observed as attending their counterfactually assigned
college and who has the same parent income quintile, race, and SAT/ACT score with 80% proba-
bility and are assigned their actual earnings with 20% probability (reflecting our 80% causal effect
assumption). Because this reallocation changes the aggregate distribution of children's earnings in
adulthood, we then recompute quintile earnings thresholds based on the new aggregate earnings
distribution when computing mobility rates.36
    Table V shows how the intergenerational transition matrix for college students would change
under this counterfactual. Panel A shows the actual transition matrix. For example, the chance
of reaching the top earnings quintile ranges from 18.2% for children with parents in the bottom
quintile to 40.2% for children with parents in the top quintile, as shown in the fifth column of Table
Va. This difference of 22 percentage points is plotted in the first bar in Figure IIc.
    The second bar of Figure IIc shows how this gap would change under the income-neutral al-
location counterfactual. The chance of reaching the top quintile now ranges from 19.5% to 38.3%
across parent income quintiles (Table Vb), a gap that is 14.6% smaller than the empirically ob-
served gap. The gap in children's chances of reaching the top 1% between children from low-income
and high-income families falls from 2.8pp to 2.3pp, a similar reduction in percentage terms (Table
V). Likewise, the correlation between parents' and children's income ranks among college students
falls by 15% under the counterfactual. In sum, the intergenerational persistence of income would
parental income rather than a proxy) and because students' own SAT scores may be a stronger predictor of outcomes
today than for students who attended college in the 1970-80s.
  35
     To further validate this approach, we compare our estimates to the regression discontinuity estimates of Zim-
merman (2014), who essentially estimates the causal effect of attending Florida International University vs. Miami
Dade College. Our estimates based on the approach outlined above are similar to Zimmerman's quasi-experimental
estimates.
  36
     We take non-college-goers earnings as fixed, ignoring the possibility of equilibrium effects on their earnings. We
obtain nearly identical results if we do not recompute the thresholds.




                                                          20
fall by about 15% if students were allocated to colleges based purely on their qualifications at the
point of application (as proxied for by SAT/ACT scores).
   Need-Affirmative Student Allocations. To compute students' earnings distributions under need-
affirmative allocations, we follow the same approach as above, using students' actual SAT/ACT
scores (rather than their adjusted SAT/ACT scores) in the earnings rank reallocation. This ap-
proach means that the test score increment granted in the admissions process does not affect
students' earnings outcomes aside from the college that they attend.
   Under need-affirmative allocations, the chance of reaching the top quintile ranges from 20.8%
to 37.0% across parent income quintiles (Table Vc), 26.5% smaller than the empirically observed
gap (Figure IIc). The correlation between parents' and children's income ranks falls by 25%. The
gap in children's chances of reaching the top 1% between children from low-income and high-
income families falls from 2.8pp to 1.9pp, a 32.6% reduction. The impact on children's chances of
reaching the upper tail is particularly large because need-affirmative allocations sharply change the
distribution of parental incomes at the most selective private colleges, whose students are especially
likely to reach the upper tail, as shown in Chetty et al. (2017).
   Need-affirmative reallocation has nearly twice as large an effect on mobility rates as income-
neutral reallocation because it enables low-income students to attend the highest value-added col-
leges. The value-added of the colleges that students from low- vs. high-income families attend
is essentially equalized under need-affirmative allocations. The difference in the value-added of
the colleges attended by students from the top vs. bottom parent income quintile (estimated as
described above) falls by 89% relative to the empirically observed difference of 4.5 percentiles.
By contrast, income-neutral allocations reduce the gap in college value-added by parental income
much less, by only 47% relative to the empirically observed difference. Intuitively, this is because
income-neutral allocations tend to reshuffle low-income students across colleges in the same tier as
shown above, whereas need-affirmative allocations enable low-income students to get into higher
value-added colleges in higher selectivity tiers.
   Alternative Assumptions About Causal Effects. In Appendix Table XI, we vary our assumption
about the fraction of the difference in earnings across colleges conditional on parental income, race,
and SAT/ACT scores that is due to causal effects from  = 100% (pure causal effects, no selection)
to  = 0% (pure selection, no causal effects). At the upper bound ( = 100%), need-affirmative
allocations would reduce the intergenerational persistence of income by 33%. The simulated impact
mechanically decreases to 0% at the lower bound of  = 0%. Assuming that  > 50% ­ roughly the


                                                    21
lower bound of the 95% confidence interval implied by comparing Zimmerman's (2014) estimate to
ours ­ one could reduce the intergenerational persistence of income by at least 17% (among children
who attend college) purely by changing the allocation of students to colleges, without attempting
to change any college's production function.37 These are substantial effects given that gaps in
intergenerational mobility emerge from an accumulation of exposure to different environments and
schools throughout childhood (Chetty and Hendren 2018). Since colleges account for less than a
quarter of the time most children spend in formal education, one would not expect impacts on
mobility much larger than 25% purely from changes in higher education.


V      Conclusion

In this paper, we showed that allocating students to colleges in an income-neutral manner con-
ditional on their SAT/ACT scores would increase the representation of students from low- and
middle-income families at selective colleges substantially, holding fixed the racial composition and
geographic origins of their students. At the most selective (Ivy-Plus) colleges, the fraction of stu-
dents from the middle class would rise substantially, although there would be little absolute change
in the fraction of students from the bottom income quintile because so few of them currently have
sufficiently high SAT/ACT scores. Under the assumption that 80% of the difference in earnings
premia (conditional on parental income, race, and state) are causal, our simulations imply that
income-neutral allocations of students to colleges (conditional on test scores) would itself reduce
the intergenerational persistence of income by 15%.
    To go further, we simulate the consequences of raising lower-income students' test scores or
granting them a preference in the application and admissions process similar to that currently given
to legacy or minority students at elite private colleges. Such a change would essentially eliminate
income segregation across all college tiers and reduce the intergenerational persistence of income by
about 25%. We conclude that feasible changes in the allocation of students to colleges could increase
intergenerational mobility substantially without any changes to existing educational programs,
suggesting value in further efforts to enable students from low- and middle-income families to
attend colleges that offer better earnings outcomes.
  37
     An alternative possibility is that the ratio of selection effects vs. causal effects is heterogeneous by parent income,
with larger causal effects of attending an elite college for children from lower-income families. In Appendix Table
XII, we consider a scenario in which causal effects are 0 for reallocations within selective colleges (the top six tiers)
for students with parents in the top four quintiles, 40% for reallocations within selective colleges for students with
parents in the bottom quintile, and 80% for all other reallocations. In this scenario, need-affirmative allocations
would reduce the intergenerational persistence of income by 21.3%.



                                                            22
                                         References
Andrews, R., S. Imberman, and M. Lovenheim (2016). Recruiting and Supporting Low-Income,
 High-Achieving Students at Flagship Universities. NBER Working Paper No. 22260 .

Arcidiacono, P. (2005). Affirmative Action in Higher Education: How do Admission and Financial
  Aid Rules Affect Future Earnings? Econometrica 73 (5), 1477­1524.

Arcidiacono, P., J. Kinsler, and T. Ransom (2019). Legacy and Athlete Preferences at Harvard.
  NBER Working Paper No. 26316 .

Avery, C., C. Hoxby, C. Jackson, K. Burek, G. Pope, and M. Raman (2006). Cost Should Be No
  Barrier: An Evaluation of the First Year of Harvard's Financial Aid Initiative. NBER Working
  Paper No. 12029 .

Barron's Educational Series, College Division (Ed.) (2008). Barron's Profiles of American Colleges
  2009. Hauppage, NY: Barron's Educational Series, Inc.

Bastedo, M. N. and O. Jaquette (2011). Running in Place: Low-Income Students and the Dynamics
  of Higher Education Stratification. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis 33 (3), 318­339.

Black, D. and J. A. Smith (2004). How Robust is the Evidence on the Effects of College Quality?
  Evidence from Matching. Journal of Econometrics 121 (1-2), 99­124.

Bowen, W. G., M. M. Chingos, and M. S. McPherson (2009, September). Crossing the Finish Line:
  Completing College at America's Public Universities. Princeton University Press. Google-Books-
  ID: LIdcVVxZb6gC.

Bowen, W. G., M. A. Kurzweil, and E. M. Tobin (2006). Equity and Excellence in American Higher
  Education. University of Virginia Press.

Carnevale, A. P. and S. J. Rose (2004). Socioeconomic Status, Race/Ethnicity, and Selective College
  Admissions, pp. 101­156. New York: The Century Foundation Press.

Carnevale, A. P. and J. Strohl (2010). How Increasing College Access is Increasing Inequality,
  and What to do about It. In R. D. Kahlenburg (Ed.), Rewarding Strivers: Helping Low-Income
  Students Succeed in College, Chapter 3, pp. 71­190. New York: The Century Foundation Press.

Carnevale, A. P., J. Strohl, M. Van Der Werf, M. C. Quinn, and K. P. Campbell (2019). SAT-
  Only Admission: How Would It Change College Campuses. Georgetown University Center on
  Education and the Workforce Working Paper .

Cellini, S. R. and N. Turner (2019). Gainfully Employed? Assessing the Employment and Earnings
  of For-Profit College Students using Administrative Data. Journal of Human Resources 54 (2),
  342­370.

Chetty, R., J. N. Friedman, N. Turner, and D. Yagan (2017). Mobility Report Cards: The Role of
  Colleges in Intergenerational Mobility. NBER Working Paper No. 23618 .

Chetty, R. and N. Hendren (2018). The Impacts of Neighborhoods on Intergenerational Mobility
  I: Childhood Exposure Effects. The Quarterly Journal of Economics 133 (3), 1107­1162.




                                                23
Chetty, R., N. Hendren, P. Kline, and E. Saez (2014). Where is the Land of Opportunity? The Geog-
  raphy of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States. Quarterly Journal of Economics 129 (4),
 1553­1623.

Cilke, J. (1998). A Profile of Non-Filers. U.S. Department of the Treasury, Office of Tax Analysis
  Working Paper No. 78.

Dale, S. B. and A. B. Krueger (2002). Estimating the Payoff to Attending a More Selective College.
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (4), 1491­1527.

Dale, S. B. and A. B. Krueger (2014). Estimating the Effects of College Characteristics over the
 Career using Administrative Earnings Data. Journal of human resources 49 (2), 323­358.

Deming, D. and S. Dynarski (2010). Into College, Out of Poverty? Policies to Increase the Post-
  secondary Attainment of the Poor, pp. 283­302. University of Chicago Press.

Deming, D. J., C. Goldin, L. F. Katz, and N. Yuchtman (2015). Can Online Learning Bend the
  Higher Education Cost Curve? American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 105 (5),
  496­501.

Epple, D., R. Romano, and H. Sieg (2006). Admission, Tuition, and Financial Aid Policies in the
  Market for Higher Education. Econometrica 74 (4), 885­928.

Espenshade, T. J., C. Y. Chung, and J. L. Walling (2004). Admission Preferences for Minority
  Students, Athletes, and Legacies at Elite Universities. Social Science Quarterly 85 (5), 1422­1446.

Fryer, R. G. and S. D. Levitt (2013). Testing for Racial Differences in the Mental Ability of Young
  Children. American Economic Review 103 (2), 981­1005.

Goodman, J. (2008). Who Merits Financial Aid? Massachusetts' Adams Scholarship. Journal of
 Public Economics 92 (10), 2121­2131.

Haider, S. and G. Solon (2006). Life-Cycle Variation in the Association between Current and
  Lifetime Earnings. American Economic Review 96 (4), 1308­1320.

Hastings, J., C. Neilson, and S. Zimmerman (2013). Are Some Degrees Worth More than Others?
  Evidence from College Admission Cutoffs in Chile. NBER Working Paper No. 19241 .

Heckman, J. J. and A. B. Krueger (2005). Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital
  Policies? MIT Press Books 1.

Hill, C. B. and G. C. Winston (2006). How Scarce are High-Ability Low-Income Students? In
  M. S. McPherson and M. O. Schapiro (Eds.), College Access: Opportunity or Privilege?

Hoekstra, M. (2009). The Effect of Attending the Flagship State University on Earnings: a
 Discontinuity-Based Approach. Review of Economics and Statistics 91 (4), 717­724.

Howell, J. S. (2010). Assessing the Impact of Eliminating Affirmative Action in Higher Education.
  Journal of Labor Economics 28 (1), 113­166.

Hoxby, C. and C. Avery (2013). The Missing "One-Offs": The Hidden Supply of High-Achieving,
  Low-Income Students. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2013 (1), 1­65.



                                                 24
Hoxby, C. and S. Turner (2013). Expanding College Opportunities for High-Achieving, Low-Income
  Students. Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper No. 12-014 .

Hoxby, C. M. (2015). Computing the Value-Added of American Postsecondary Institutions. Internal
  Revenue Service Statistics of Income Working Paper .

Hurwitz, M. (2011). The Impact of Legacy Status on Undergraduate Admissions at Elite Colleges
 and Universities. Economics of Education Review 30 (3), 480­492.

James, E., N. Alsalam, J. C. Conaty, and D.-L. To (1989). College Quality and Future Earnings:
  Where should you Send your Child to College? American Economic Review 79 (2), 247­252.

Kirkeboen, L. J., E. Leuven, and M. Mogstad (2016). Field of Study, Earnings, and Self-Selection.
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 131 (3), 1057­1111.

Krueger, A., J. Rothstein, and S. Turner (2006). Race, Income, and College in 25 years: Evaluating
  Justice O'Connor's conjecture. American Law and Economics Review 8 (2), 282­311.

Kurlaender, M. and K. Cohen (2019). Predicting College Success: How Do Different High School
 Assessments Measure Up?. Policy Analysis for California Education, PACE .

Manoli, D. and N. Turner (2018). Cash-on-Hand and College Enrollment: Evidence from Popu-
 lation Tax Data and the Earned Income Tax Credit. American Economic Journal: Economic
 Policy 10 (2), 242­71.

Marx, B. and L. Turner (2015). Borrowing Trouble? Student Loans, the Cost of Borrowing, and
 Implications for the Effectiveness of Need-Based Grant Aid. NBER Working Paper No. 20850 .

Rampell, C. (2019). Colleges have Been under Pressure to Admit Needier Kids. It's Backfiring.
  The Washington Post .

Reardon, S. F. (2019). Educational Opportunity in Early and Middle Childhood: Using Full
  Population Administrative Data to Study Variation by Place and Age. RSF: The Russell Sage
  Foundation Journal of the Social Sciences 5 (2), 40­68.

Rothstein, J. M. (2004). College Performance Predictions and the SAT. Journal of Economet-
  rics 121 (1-2), 297­317.

Sackett, P. R., N. R. Kuncel, A. S. Beatty, J. L. Rigdon, W. Shen, and T. B. Kiger (2012). The
  Role of Socioeconomic Status in SAT-Grade Relationships and in College Admissions Decisions.
  Psychological science 23 (9), 1000­1007.

Solon, G. (1992). Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States. American Economic
  Review 82 (3), 393­408.

Solon, G. (1999). Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market. In O. Ashenfelter and D. Card
  (Eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume 3, pp. 1761­1800.

Summit, E. G. (2016).          ACT-SAT concordance tables.            https://mytutor.com/wp-
  content/uploads/2018/06/sat-act-concordance-chart-2016-v-2018-rev.pdf .

Todd, R. (1976). The Missing Middle. Accessed February 2, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/
  1976/02/01/archives/the-missing-middle-on-campus-students-are-clamoring-to-go-to.html.


                                               25
Yagan, D. (2016). Supply vs. Demand under an Affirmative Action Ban: Estimates from UC Law
  Schools. Journal of Public Economics 137, 38­50.

Zimmerman, S. D. (2014). The Returns to College Admission for Academically Marginal Students.
  Journal of Labor Economics 32 (4), 711­754.




                                             26
                                                 Appendices

A. Sample Construction and Income Definitions

     Sample Definition. Our primary sample is very similar to the "extended sample" analyzed in
Chetty et al. 2014, and much of this appendix is therefore taken directly from Chetty et al. (2014,
Online Appendix A).
     We begin with the universe of individuals in the Death Master (also known as the Data Master-
1) file produced by the Social Security Administration and housed alongside tax records. This file
includes information on year of birth and gender for all persons in the United States with a Social
Security Number or Individual Taxpayer Identification Number (ITIN).38 To construct our sample
of children, we begin from the set of individuals born in the 1980-1991 cohorts. We measure parent
and child income, college attendance, and all other variables using data from the IRS Databank, a
balanced panel covering all individuals in the Death Master file who were not deceased as of 1996.
     For each child, we define the parent(s) as the person(s) who claim the child as a dependent
on a 1040 tax form in the year the child turns 17. Note that the parent(s) of the child are not
necessarily biological parents, as it is possible for custodians (regardless of family status) to claim
a child if the child resides with them.39 If parents are married but filing separately, we assign the
child both parents. We identify children's parents at age 17 because our goal is to measure the
economic resources of the child's family around the time he or she attends college. We do not
match children to parents at later ages (e.g., 18 or 19) because many children leave home after age
17 (at differential rates across income groups), creating scope for selection bias.
     If the child is not claimed at age 17 on any 1040 tax form, we go back one year (to the year in
which the child turns 16) to identify parents. We repeat this process until we find a year when the
child is claimed, up to the year in which the child turns 12. Since the tax data start in 1996, for
the 1980 cohort, we only match children up to age 16; for the 1981 cohort, up to age 15, etc. In
short, we use up to 6 years (from ages 12-17) to find a parental match. If no such parental match
is found, then the child's record is discarded.40
     Importantly, once we match a child to parent(s), we hold this definition of parents fixed regard-
less of changes in parents' marital status or who claims the child in other years. For example, a
child matched to married parents at age 17 but who had a single parent at age 16 is always matched
to the two married parents at age 17. Conversely, a child matched to a single parent at age 17 who
had married parents at age 16 will be considered matched to a single parent.
     Finally, we discard the small set of children whose parents have negative family income (as
defined in Section II.A) on average over the 5 year time window when they are aged 15-19. Negative
income is generally due to business losses and denotes high potential earnings ability so that ranking
such parents at the very bottom is actually misleading.
  38
     ITINs are issued by the IRS to individuals who do not have a social security number, for example because they
are undocumented immigrants.
  39
     Children can be claimed as a dependent only if they are aged less than 19 at the end of the year (less than 24 if
enrolled as a student) or are disabled. A dependent child is a biological child, step child, adopted child, foster child,
brother or sister, or a descendant of one of these (for example, a grandchild or nephew). Children must be claimed by
their custodial parent, i.e. the parent with whom they live for over half the year. Furthermore, the custodial parent
must provide more than 50% of the support to the child. Hence, working children who provide more than 50% of
their own support cannot be claimed as dependents. See IRS Publication 501 for further details.
  40
     Very few children are unclaimed on tax returns (Chetty et al. 2014) because claiming children yields substantial
refundable tax credits. Therefore, the children we exclude are almost all non US-residents when they were aged 12-17.




                                                           27
    Details on Income Definitions. As discussed in Section II, in our baseline analysis, we measure
children's earnings as the sum of individual wage income and net self-employment income (if pos-
itive) for year 2014. Here we provide further details regarding those definitions, which are more
complex than our parent income definitions because we must apportion total income reported on
the tax return across individuals to measure income at the individual level.
    For a child who is a non-filer (neither a primary nor a secondary filer on any 1040 return),
individual earnings are defined simply as the sum of wage income from the individual's own W-2
forms. For a child who is a single filer, individual earnings are defined as the sum of wage income
on the form 1040 and self-employment income from Schedule SE on the 1040 form.41 We use wage
income as reported on Form 1040 (instead of what is reported on W-2 forms) for filers because
wage income on Form 1040 includes wages earned abroad, which can be significant particularly for
children at the top of the income distribution. In particular, children who move abroad (but are
U.S. citizens) are required to file standard tax returns and report their worldwide income, including
any foreign earnings, but those earnings do not show up on W-2s.
    For a child who is a married filer, individual earnings are defined as the sum of individual
self-employment income from Schedule SE form 1040, and individual wage income defined as W-2
wage income plus one half of non-W-2 wage income from Form 1040.42 Since we do not restrict
the sample to children who are alive at the point at which we measure their income, children who
are deceased are assigned zero earnings.

B. College Attendance: Data Sources and Methods

    In this appendix, we describe the data sources and methods we use to assign students to
colleges. The appendix is divided into five subsections. First, we describe our two sources of college
attendance records and the differences in how they define colleges and annual attendance. Second,
we describe how we homogenize their college definitions. Third, we discuss how we homogenize their
annual attendance definitions and compile annual attendance records from the two data sources.
Fourth, we describe how we identify and remove a small set of colleges who have incomplete 1098-T
data. Finally, we summarize annual enrollment counts for our college attendance definitions.
    Data Sources. We combine two data sources to measure student-level college attendance: Form
1098-T records and National Student Loan Data System (NSLDS) Pell grant recipient records.43
Note that neither data source relies on the student or the student's family to file a tax return, and
neither data source contains information on course of study or degree attainment.
    Form 1098-T is an information return that is submitted by colleges to the U.S. Treasury Depart-
ment. Each calendar year, higher education institutions eligible for federal financial aid (Title IV
institutions) are required to file a 1098-T form for every student whose tuition has not been waived
by the college (i.e. any student who pays or is billed tuition, or who has any non-governmental
third party paying tuition or receiving tuition bills on his or her behalf). The form reports tuition
  41
     Self-employment income is the amount for total tentative net earnings from self-employment. It is reported on
Form 1040, Schedule SE, Section A or B, Line 3. We recode negative self-employment income as zero because negative
self-employment income is generally due to business losses and is thus generally correlated with having a high level
of latent income or wealth. We multiply self-employment income by 0.9235 to align treatment with wage earnings
(as wage earnings are net of the 7.65% employer social security payroll tax).
  42
     It is not possible to attribute to each specific spouse 1040 wage income that is not reported on the W2 forms.
Hence, our decision to split such wage income equally across spouses.
  43
     The full NSLDS data include data on recipients of Pell grants and federally subsidized loans. We use only the
Pell grant data in our main attendance measures because almost all non-Pell students in the NSLDS data already
appear in the 1098-T data, and using the non-Pell NSLDS records would likely generate more erroneous assignments
due to timing inconsistencies across the two types of data (see below) than it would correct missing data.


                                                        28
payments or scholarships received for the student during the calendar year. Title IV institutions
include all colleges and universities as well as many vocational colleges and other postsecondary
institutions, all of which we refer to as "colleges." Colleges are indexed in the 1098-T data by the
college's Employer Identification Number (EIN) and its ZIP code. We use 1098-T data for students
during calendar years 1999-2013.
    Most colleges file a 1098-T for every student, regardless of whether the student's tuition has
been waived. However, some colleges do not file a 1098-T for students who pay no tuition. Almost
all such students with American parents are from low-income families, are eligible for a Pell grant
from the federal government, and are required by their colleges to acquire a Pell grant in order to
receive their tuition waiver.44
    We therefore supplement the 1098-T records with records from the administrative NSLDS Pell
records. The NSLDS contains information on every Pell grant awarded, including the college
receiving the Pell payment (Pell grant payments are remitted directly from the federal government
to the college the student attended). The NSLDS Pell data are indexed by award years, defined
as the spring of the academic year beginning on July 1. We use NSLDS Pell data for all students
in award years 1999-2014, comprising Pell awards for enrollment spells that began between the
dates July 1, 1999, and June 30, 2014 (roughly academic years beginning in calendar years 1999-
2013). Colleges are indexed in the NSLDS Pell data by the six-digit federal OPEID (Office of
Postsecondary Education Identification) identifier.
    We use the NSLDS Pell data to impute missing 1098-T data and thereby construct comprehen-
sive student-college-year attendance records 1999-2013.45 Doing so requires homogeneous college
and time-period definitions across the two data sources, but the two data sources differ in these
definitions. The next two subsections detail our methods for homogenizing those definitions and
constructing comprehensive student-college-year attendance records.
    Combining 1098-T and NSLDS Pell Records. Empirical work on higher education is frequently
conducted at the level of the six-digit OPEID (hereafter "OPEID"). We therefore use the NSLDS
Pell and loan data to construct a crosswalk between EIN-ZIP pairs from the 1098-T data (i.e. the
EIN and the ZIP code of the college) and OPEIDs from the NSLDS Pell data. In almost all cases,
each EIN-ZIP pair maps to a single OPEID. In the rare cases in which a single EIN-ZIP pair maps
to multiple OPEIDs, we cluster the OPEIDs together and conduct our analysis as if the cluster were
a single college. We refer to this unit of analysis--either an OPEID or a cluster of OPEIDs--as a
"Super OPEID."
    Our procedure for mapping EIN-ZIP pairs to OPEIDs relies on the fact that almost all students
who receive a federally subsidized loan (and most students who receive a Pell grant) for attending
a given college x in academic year t to t+1 will also have a 1098-T from college x in calendar
year t or t+1 or both. Thus by merging students in the NSLDS to students in the 1098-T data
within narrow time-period bands, we can infer the NSLDS OPEID that corresponds to each 1098-T
EIN-ZIP pair.
    Specifically, we first merge the full NSLDS data to the 1098-T data at the student level (without
using any college identifiers), in order to identify records with both an OPEID (from the NSLDS
  44
     The vast majority of students appear in the 1098-T database. When we measure college attendance between the
ages of 19 and 22 (as in our baseline analysis), 95.9% of the students in our analysis sample appear in the 1098-T
records. A larger share of observations come from the NSLDS Pell records for lower income families (Appendix Figure
V), but even in the bottom parent income quintile, 87.1% of students appear in the 1098-T records.
  45
     Our approach misses students who attend a college that does not file 1098-T's for all students and who have
their tuition entirely waived despite having parental income above the Pell grant eligibility threshold. Such students
could include top athletic recruits. We believe that such cases are rare, as shown by the high correlation between the
counts of students in our data and total counts from IPEDS.



                                                         29
data) and an EIN-ZIP (from the 1098-T data). We conduct the merge requiring that the NSLDS
student's masked taxpayer identification number (TIN, i.e. her masked Social Security Number)
equals the 1098-T student's masked TIN, as well as requiring the NSLDS award year equals either
the 1098-T calendar year or the 1098-T calendar year plus one. Merging by year and year-plus-one
is appropriate given the award year definition (see above subsection on data sources). Only rows
that are successfully merged are retained.
    The resulting merged dataset contains many correct matches between OPEIDs and EIN-ZIP
pairs and some incorrect matches. For example, a student who uses a federally subsidized loan
at UC-Berkeley and was billed tuition at both Berkeley (during the school year) and Stanford
(for summer school) will have two rows in the merged data: one with Berkeley's OPEID and
Berkeley's EIN-ZIP pair and another with Berkeley's OPEID and Stanford's EIN-ZIP pair. In
order to correctly map Berkeley's OPEID and EIN-ZIP pair, we rely on the fact that most Berkeley
students do not also attend Stanford.
    To algorithmically identify the correct link between OPEIDs and EIN-ZIPs, we construct counts
by OPEID, EIN-ZIP, and calendar year in the merged dataset. The distribution of counts exhibits
very clear mass points and almost always stable across years: nearly all the counts of each OPEID
appear in a single OPEID-EIN-ZIP cell, and almost all the counts of each EIN-ZIP appear in a
single OPEID-EIN-ZIP cell. Using this algorithm, we construct a mapping of EIN-ZIP pairs to
OPEIDs by identifying the OPEID(s) that appear most frequently for each EIN-ZIP pair and thus
likely correspond to the same college. In the final step, OPEID-EIN-ZIP triads were confirmed to
correspond to the same college via manual comparison of NSLDS college names and 1098-T college
names, and the small number of discrepancies were addressed using manual adjustments to the
crosswalk.
    Finally, we cluster OPEIDs as follows in order to produce our final Super OPEID crosswalk,
which maps every OPEID to a single Super OPEID and maps every EIN-ZIP pair to at most one
Super OPEID. If an OPEID's matched EIN-ZIP pair(s) matched only to that given OPEID, then
we map the OPEID and all of the OPEID's matched EIN-ZIP pairs to a Super OPEID equal to
the OPEID.46 If instead an OPEID's matched EIN-ZIP pair(s) match to multiple OPEIDs, then
we map all of the matched OPEIDs and their matched EIN-ZIP pairs to a Super OPEID equal to
a unique number that is smaller than the smallest OPEID so that there are no conflicts.47 OPEIDs
that did not credibly match at least one EIN-ZIP pair and EIN-ZIP pairs that did not credibly
match to any OPEID are assigned Super OPEID -1 (colleges with insufficient or incomplete data).
We treat Super OPEID -1 as a separate "college" and include it in our publicly released statistics,
but omit it from most analyses unless otherwise specified.
    We use the Super OPEID crosswalk to assign a Super OPEID to every record in the NSLDS
data and every record in the 1098-T data. The crosswalk comprises 5,327 Super OPEIDs: 5,208
unaltered OPEIDs (values ranging from 1002 to 42346) and 119 newly created clusters of OPEIDs
  46
      For example, Cornell (OPEID 190415) may submit 1098-T forms from the same EIN but from two ZIPs--one
ZIP corresponding to its Ithaca campus and another ZIP corresponding to its New York City campus. In this case,
we map Cornell's OPEID and its two EIN-ZIP pairs to Super OPEID 190415.
   47
      For example, the University of Massachusetts system comprises four undergraduate campuses, each with its own
OPEID. However, all University of Massachusetts 1098-Ts are submitted from the same centralized EIN-ZIP. We
therefore map all four of University of Massachusetts's OPEIDs and the University of Massachusetts EIN-ZIP to a
new Super OPEID value that is smaller than 1000 (125 in the case of the University of Massachusetts). Note that
all OPEIDs are larger than 1000.




                                                       30
(positive values below 1002). 2.7% of NSLDS Pell records and 1.1% of 1098-T records from 1999-
2013 are assigned Super OPEID -1.48
    Imputing Calendar Year Attendance Records for Pell Recipients. The vast majority of student-
college-year attendance observations appear in the 1098-T data, which measure attendance by
calendar year. Therefore, after using our Super OPEID crosswalk to assign a consistent college
definition to every NSLDS Pell record and ever 1098-T record, we use information from the NSLDS
on dates of attendance to impute missing 1098-T data, thereby yielding comprehensive attendance
records by calendar year from 1999-2013.
    We map the NSLDS data to calendar years as follows. For every NSLDS Pell student at a Super
OPEID x and a Pell award enrollment start date lying in calendar year t, we impute a 1098-T for
the student at Super OPEID x in calendar year t. Then, for every NSLDS Pell student at a Super
OPEID x and a Pell enrollment start date in the second half of calendar year t and with a Pell grant
amount equal to more than 50% the student's maximum eligible Pell amount in the award year,
we additionally impute a 1098-T for the student at Super OPEID x in calendar year t + 1. Finally,
we remove duplicate records. The remainder of this subsection explains the logic underlying this
imputation strategy further.
    The NSLDS Pell data contain the start date of the enrollment period covered by the Pell grant.
If the college had submitted 1098-Ts on behalf of a given Pell student whose enrollment period
began in calendar year t, the college would likely have submitted a 1098-T for the student in
calendar year t (had it been required to do so). Thus, for every NSLDS Pell student with Super
OPEID x and an enrollment start date in calendar year t, we impute a 1098-T for the student with
Super OPEID x and calendar year t.
    If the college had submitted 1098-Ts on behalf of a given Pell student, and if that student's
enrollment period straddled a fall and spring term, the college would likely have submitted a 1098-T
in calendar year t + 1 as well as in calendar year t. The NSLDS Pell data do not contain the end
date of the enrollment period covered by the Pell grant. However, they do contain the share of the
student's maximum eligible Pell amount in the award year that was allocated to the grant. Pell
grants for a single semester typically have an amount equal to only half of the student's annual Pell
maximum grant amount, even if tuition is very expensive. Hence for every NSLDS Pell student
with Super OPEID x who has an enrollment start date between July and December of year t and
has strictly greater than 50% of the student's maximum Pell eligibility amount allocated to the
grant, we impute a 1098-T for the student with Super OPEID x and calendar year t + 1.
    After these imputations, we drop observations that are duplicates in terms of student, Super
OPEID, and calendar year. This allows students to be recorded as having attended any number of
Super OPEIDs in a calendar year, but ensures that they are not recorded as having attended any
Super OPEID more than once in a calendar year.
    There are no public measures of calendar-year Pell attendance that can be used to directly
validate the imputation procedure described above. However, indirect validation methods sug-
gest a high degree of fidelity. The share of our students on a Pell grant in the average calendar
year is very highly correlated with, and similar in levels to, approximations to annual Pell stu-
dent shares based on publicly available data. Moreover, at colleges with substantial numbers of
students on Pell grants, the imputation algorithm adds almost no net students to 1098-T atten-
dance records--consistent with these colleges issuing 1098-T forms for all students regardless of
their tuition billing status and with our algorithm only imputing 1098-Ts in calendar years that
the student was in fact enrolled.
  48
     The rate of 1098-T assignment to Super OPEID -1 is 11.2% in 1999 and is between 0.04% and 2.2% from 2000-
2013. The 1999 1098-T data lack the ZIP code of the college, so in that year only, we assign Super OPEID using the
subset of EINs from the Super OPEID crosswalk that map to a single Super OPEID regardless of ZIP code.


                                                       31
    Removing College-Years with Incomplete 1098-T Data. A small number of college-year observa-
tions have incomplete 1098-T data, either because of errors in administrative records or because of
changes in EIN's and reporting procedures.49 We discard these defective college-years by flagging
them using two methods based on counts of total students. The counts described below are con-
structed using the total counts of forms 1098-T and Pell grants for all children born in 1980-1991,
regardless of a successful link to parents and regardless of whether the student attends several
institutions.
    First, for each college-year, we compare the count of individuals receiving a 1098-T form but
excluding Pell grants (what we call the 1098-T-only count) versus the count of individuals receiving
either a 1098-T form or a Pell grant (what we call the full count). When the 1098-T-only count is
less than 10% of the full count, we conclude that there are too few 1098-T forms for the data to
be complete and flag the college-year. In the vast majority of these cases, the 1098-T counts are
exactly zero, implying that the college did not report any 1098-T form (most likely because the
information was not transmitted correctly to the IRS or because the institution used a different
EIN-ZIP in that specific year). We use the 10% threshold as a way to capture rare situations where
the 1098-T counts are not exactly zero, but are clearly too small relative to the number of Pell
grants to be plausibly complete.
    Second, we also flag college-years when full counts are too low (less than 75%) or too high (over
125%) relative to both the preceding and subsequent years. Such abnormal changes in counts likely
reflect a data reporting issue rather than true changes in enrollments, which tend to be very smooth
across years.
    In total, these two flags account for 2.4% of (enrollment-weighted) college-year observations
and 21.9% of college-year observations when not weighing by enrollment. The rate is much higher
unweighted because the data at very small colleges is much less complete.
    We discard college-year records that are flagged as incomplete before assigning students to
their "most-attended" college or the first college, in order to ensure that our sample accurately
represents attendance at each college. Our baseline measure of a child's most-attended college uses
four years of data (the years when the child turns 19, 20, 21, and 22).50 A college which has
defective (and hence discarded) data for more than 1 year out of the 4 relevant years is re-assigned
to super opeid=-1, the pool of colleges with "incomplete or insufficient data." As a result, a college
is retained in our cohort-level data only if we have valid data for at least 3 years (out of the 4
years).
    Enrollment Counts for Attendance Measures. The steps described above yield a student-college-
year level dataset that provides a complete record of college attendance in the U.S. during calendar
years 1999-2013 for children born between 1980-1991. This dataset contains 207.6 million observa-
tions.
    Using this dataset, we construct the three measures of college attendance--the most-attended
college (our primary measure), age-20 college, and first-attended college--following the definitions
given in Section II.B. In what follows, we document the impact of the restrictions imposed in each
  49
     Most of these cases are college-year cells with zero 1098-Ts in the database. For example, in the years when
the 1098-T first began to be collected (1999-2002), a number of small universities do not have any records at all in
the database. In addition, some universities switch from reporting data separately for each campus to using a single
EIN-ZIP for all their campuses, which creates inconsistencies in their data across years.
  50
     For example, we measure college attendance using data from 1999 to 2002 for children born in the 1980 cohort.
We measure college attendance starting with the year the student turns 19 because the 1098-T data are only available
starting in 1999, making 19 the first observed age for the 1980 birth cohort. Omitting the year in which children
turn 18 is not consequential because very few children attend college only in the calendar year in which they turn
18; for instance, only 1.6% of the children in the 1982 birth cohort attended college in the year they turn 18 but not
between the ages of 19-22.


                                                         32
definition on sample sizes and report the share of observations obtained from the 1098-T vs. NSLDS
datasets.
    To construct the most-attended definition, we first restrict the full dataset to attendance between
ages 19-22, which leaves 114.6 million records. Condensing the student-college-year data to the
student level using the most-attended definition (see Section II.B) leaves 33.1 million student-level
records. Eliminating students we cannot match to parents or whose parents had negative income
leaves 31.0 million records. Finally, restricting to birth cohorts 1980-1982 (as we do in our main
analysis) leaves 6.7 million records; including non-college-goers in this sample yields a sample size
of 10.8 million children.
    As described in Section II.D of Chetty et al. (2017), we impute income statistics and attendance
for colleges with missing data for the 1980-82 cohorts using data from the 1983 and 1984 cohorts.
Specifically, if a college is missing one or more years of data for the 1980-82 cohorts--either because
of incomplete reporting of 1098-T forms or because the college opened more recently--we impute
values for the missing cohorts using data from the 1983-84 cohorts. To impute a missing income
                                                                                            y
statistic yct for college c in cohort t, we first estimate an OLS regression yct =  + 1983     yc,1983 +
  y
1984  yc,1984 +  using the sample of all colleges with non-missing data in cohort t as well as 1983
and 1984, weighting by enrollment. We then impute values for missing cohorts with the predicted
values from this regression, based on each college's actual data in 1983 and 1984 (omitting colleges
with missing data for 1983 or 1984). Such imputations account for 9.0% of enrollment-weighted
observations in the analysis sample (1980-82 birth cohorts).51
    We use this imputation procedure to impute data for 596 (27%), 520 (24%), and 406 (18%)
colleges in cohorts 1980-1982, respectively, accounting for 570,000 additional students (9.0% of
college attendees and 5.0% of all children). For the remaining 264 colleges that are missing data
for either the 1983 or 1984 cohorts, we do not impute any values. This leaves us with 11.3 million
children in our core sample underlying our main analysis.
    9.2% of our annual attendance records for students aged 19-22 were not in the 1098-T data and
appeared only in the NSLDS Pell data. Using our most-attended college attendance measure, 4.1%
of the students in our analysis sample were not in the 1098-T data and originally appeared only
in the NSLDS Pell data. The NSLDS Pell data has a smaller impact at the student level than the
student-year level because many students attend a given college for multiple years and receive a
1098-T form in at least one of those years.
    We define a child's age 20 college as the college the child attends in the calendar year that she
turns 20.52 To construct the age-20 definition, we restrict the full dataset to attendance at age
20, which leaves 30.5 million records. If a student attends multiple colleges at age 20, we weight
the student-college-level records such that each student carries a total weight of one, leaving 27.3
million effective records for 26.1 million students. After bringing in non-college-goers under this
definition, restricting to birth cohorts 1980-1982, and restricting to students matched to parents
  51
     This imputation procedure helps increase the coverage of colleges in the analysis sample because a number of
small colleges began reporting 1098-T data only in 2002. However, all of the main findings of the paper hold if
we restrict attention to the set of colleges with no imputed data. The imputation leads us to slightly overstate
the aggregate college attendance rate in the analysis sample, as some of the students for whom we impute college
attendance from later data may already have been assigned to another college that they also attended or to the
"colleges with insufficient data" category. Such double-counting turns out to be very small in practice (see later in
this appendix for further details).
  52
     If a student attends multiple colleges at age 20, we break ties by assigning the college that the student attended
in the subsequent year, if any. For observations where ties remain (e.g., because the student attended the same
multiple colleges the following year as well), we retain all colleges and weight each student-college observation by
the reciprocal of the number of colleges attended (so that the total weight of each student in the analysis remains
constant).



                                                          33
with weakly positive income, we have 11.0 million records for 10.8 million children. Finally, we
impute income statistics and attendance for colleges with missing data for the 1980-82 cohorts as
described above, leaving us with a 11.3 million person sample underlying our age-20 analysis.
    We define a child's first-attended college as the college that a child attends first between the
calendar years in which she turns 19 and 28 (inclusive), breaking ties using the same method as
in the age 20 definition. To construct the first-attended definition, we restrict the full dataset
to attendance between the ages of 19 and 28, which leaves 175.4 million records. If a student
begins multiple "first-attended" colleges in the same year, we assign the student a college based on
the method described in Section II.B, leaving 37.0 million records. Bringing in non-college-goers
under this definition, restricting to birth cohorts 1980-1982, and restricting to students matched to
parents with weakly positive income leaves 10.9 million records for 10.8 million children. Finally,
we impute income statistics and attendance for colleges with missing data for the 1980-82 cohorts,
leaving us with a 10.8 million person sample underlying our first-attended analysis. The reason
that the first-attended definition yields slightly fewer records than the others is that we do not
double-count students assigned to Super OPEID -1 (insufficient or incomplete data) in the final
imputation step under this definition.
    Comparisons to IPEDS Counts. We assess how well our methodology approximates the set of
undergraduate degree seekers we seek to identify by comparing the count of students in our data
to enrollment data from IPEDS. IPEDS does not have enrollment counts that exactly match our
cohort-based definitions and age ranges, making direct comparisons difficult for many colleges, es-
pecially those where students enter at various ages. However, at highly selective colleges (defined as
176 colleges in the top two tiers of the Barron's 2009 selectivity index), the vast majority of students
enter at age 18 and graduate in four years, making the number of first-time, full-time undergradu-
ate students recorded in IPEDS a good approximation to our definition. Among these colleges, the
correlation between our enrollment counts and the number of first-time, full-time undergraduates
in IPEDS is 0.99.53 In addition, IPEDS data show that 98.0% of full-time undergraduate students
are degree seekers, suggesting that the number of summer school or extension school students in
our sample is likely to be very small.54

C. Comparison of Incomes in Tax Data vs. American Community Survey Data

    In this appendix, we compare the income distribution of parents in the tax data to incomes
reported in the American Community Survey. Most prior work on the income distribution of
families in the United States focuses on money income (defined as pre-tax market income plus cash
transfers from the government) and uses the household unit (defined as all individuals living in the
same dwelling). In contrast, in the tax data, we define income as Adjusted Gross Income (pre-tax
income excluding government cash transfers) and define the unit of observation as the tax filing
unit (either a single person or a married couple, excluding other household members).
    We show that income distributions in the ACS are very similar to those in the tax data if we use
the same household unit and income definitions. We focus on the annual family income of children
aged 15 in 2000 (Panel A of Appendix Table II) and children aged 15 in 2006 (Panel B). We begin
by describing how we define income and family units in the two datasets.
    Tax Data. The unit of observation for family income is the tax unit. As described in Appendix
A, the tax unit, i.e. the child's parents, are defined as the person(s) who claim the child as a
  53
      The IPEDS counts are 3% larger than our counts on average, which likely reflects international students not
included in our sample.
   54
      Our methodology could be further tested and refined by linking external data on college attendance--for instance,
from the National Student Clearinghouse--to the tax records, as in Hoxby (2015).


                                                          34
dependent on a 1040 form in the year the child turns 17. Children are either assigned to married
parents or a single parent, and income is defined as Adjusted Gross Income (AGI), which is pre-
tax and pre-transfer cash income when the child is 15.55 AGI is rounded to the nearest $250 for
disclosure purposes.
    ACS Data. To illustrate how family and income definitions affect the results, in the ACS
data, we consider both standard household definitions and construct a concept analogous to tax
units. Similarly, we also consider both the traditional total money income measure and a concept
analogous to AGI.
    To define households, we simply use the household ID that uniquely identifies each household
in our ACS sample. We then restrict the sample to children aged 15, excluding a small number of
individuals aged 15 who are listed as the head of the household. To create the tax unit claiming
the child, we determine who claims the child for tax purposes as follows. A child is assigned to
married parents if the child lives in the same household with parents who are married and one of
the parents has non-zero income. If both parents' incomes are zero, we use instead the income of
the head of household as the head would most likely claim the child for tax purposes in this case.
For children not living with married parents, we assign the mother as the parent if she is present in
the household and has non-zero income. We assign the father as the parent if the mother is absent
or has zero income. Finally, if both father and mother are absent, we define the parent as the head
of household.
    We obtain total money income for each household member directly from the ACS. We define
AGI starting from total money income and subtracting social security income (retirement and
disability benefits), veterans benefits, supplementary security income, welfare (public assistance)
income, and other non-taxable cash transfers. AGI for the tax unit is defined as the income earned
by each of the parent(s), summing across the two parents when the child is assigned to married
parents.
    Results. Column 1 of Appendix Table II presents statistics on the income distribution in the
tax data. Column 2-4 present analogous statistics using the ACS data. Column 2 presents ACS
statistics using the tax unit and adjusted gross income, which replicates the concepts we use in the
tax data. The statistics in columns 1 and 2 are very similar. Notably, the quantiles of the earnings
distribution (P10, P25, P50, P75, P90) are very similar across the two datasets. Mean incomes are
higher in the tax data by about 15% because the ACS data are top-coded whereas the tax data
are not. The fraction of children with zero tax unit income is slightly higher in the ACS (5.0%)
than in the tax data (3.4%), perhaps because survey respondents fail to report very small income
amounts.
    Column 3 replicates the ACS income statistics at the household level instead of the tax unit
level. Because a household can be larger than a tax unit (e.g., a child living with both a parent
and a grandparent), adjusted gross incomes at the household level are substantially higher than
incomes at the tax unit level. Column 4 then expands the income definition to total money income.
This further increases income, particularly in the lower percentiles. The fraction with zero incomes
falls to 0.4% and the bottom percentiles (P10, P25, P50) are now substantially higher than in the
tax data because of cash transfers.
    In sum, a naive comparison between survey data using typical money income and household
definitions and tax data using the tax unit and adjusted gross income definitions would mistakenly
suggest that tax data incomes are substantially lower than survey income. However, this discrep-
ancy is entirely due to the differences in household unit and income definition. Once one uses the
  55
    This is different from our main income concept used throughout the paper, which averages the parent's income
when the child is 15-19. We use annual income here for comparison with the ACS data, where we only observe annual
income.


                                                       35
same definitions, the distribution of incomes reported in the tax data are well aligned with those
in standard surveys.

D. Stability of Children's Earnings Ranks

    In our analysis sample comprising the 1980-1982 birth cohorts, we measure earnings at ages
32-34. Measuring children's earnings ranks when they are too young can potentially yield mislead-
ing estimates of lifetime earnings ranks because children with high lifetime earnings have steeper
earnings profiles (e.g., Haider and Solon 2006; Solon 1999). This issue may be especially acute
for analyses of earnings outcomes at elite colleges, where many students go on to pursue advanced
degrees. In this appendix, we show that ages 32-34 are sufficiently late in a child's life to obtain a
reliable measure of children's ranks at all colleges. Of course, individuals' earnings levels continue
to rise sharply during their thirties, but a rank-preserving fanning out of the earnings distribution
does not affect the rank-based analysis of Section IV.
    To evaluate when children's earnings stabilize, we examine how the earnings of children evolve
by age at each college. In order to examine the profile of earnings over the broadest range of ages,
we go back to the 1978 birth cohort for this analysis. For children born in 1978, we can observe
college attendance starting at age 21 in 1999 and earnings up to age 36 in 2014.56 We assign each
child a college based on the college he or she attends most frequently in 1999 and 2000, following
the same approach as we use in our baseline college definition described in Section II.B. We assign
children percentile ranks at each age by ranking them relative to other children in the 1978 cohort
in each calendar year.
    Appendix Figure Ia plots the mean earnings ranks of children from ages 25 to 36 for children
who attended colleges in four mutually exclusive tiers: Ivy-Plus, Other Elite (Barron's Tier 1
colleges, excluding the Ivy-Plus group), other 4-year colleges, and 2-year colleges. For individuals
who attended elite colleges, and especially Ivy-Plus colleges, earnings ranks rise sharply from age 25
to 30. If we were to measure children's earnings at age 25, we would find that children at Ivy-Plus
colleges have lower income ranks than those who attend less selective 4-year colleges. Mean ranks
at elite colleges stabilize at approximately the 80th percentile after age 30, with very little change
starting at age 32. In contrast, the age profiles at lower-tier colleges are virtually constant from
ages 25 to 36, at approximately the 60th percentile for 2-year colleges and the 70th percentile for
non-elite 4-year colleges.
    The stabilization of mean earnings ranks once children reach their early thirties holds not just
across college tiers, but also across individual colleges. To characterize the college-level patterns,
we examine the mean ranks of students who attend each college at each age from 25-36. Appendix
Figure Ib plots the (enrollment-weighted) correlation of the mean ranks at each age with the mean
ranks at age 36 across colleges. Consistent with the patterns in Appendix Figure Ia, this correlation
rises sharply between ages 25 and 30, when it reaches 0.98 and stabilizes. We find analogous
stabilization across all quantiles of the distribution by the early 30s, including the probability that
children reach the top quintile or the top 1% of their age-specific income distribution (Appendix
Figure Ic-d).57
  56
      We do not use the 1978 cohort for our primary analysis of intergenerational mobility because we cannot link
children in the 1978 cohort to their parents based on dependent claiming. However, linking children to their parents
is not necessary to analyze the unconditional distribution of children's earnings as we do here.
   57
      At the vast majority of colleges, earnings ranks stabilize by age 25, implying that one can reliably analyze earnings
outcomes for the 1980-89 cohorts with our publicly available data for most colleges.




                                                            36
E. SAT/ACT Data

    For individuals who took either test multiple times, we use the individual's maximum composite
score. The mean SAT and ACT scores for children in our sample for whom we observe a score
is 989 and 21.8, which are each roughly comparable to the mean scores of 1026 (reported by the
College Board) and 20.9 (reported by ACT) for the high school graduating class of 2004.
    We combine the SAT and ACT data as follows into a single test score, which lies on the SAT's
400-1600-point scale. For the 47.6% of college students with an SAT score, their SAT/ACT score
equals their SAT score ­ including for the 14.3% of college students with both an SAT score and
an ACT score. To facilitate non-parametric matching, we coarsen SAT scores into 20-point bins
throughout our analysis. For the 26.2% of college students with an ACT score but not an SAT
score, we convert ACT scores to SAT using the 2016 ACT/SAT concordance table (Summit, 2016)
in which each ACT score is mapped to a range of SAT scores. For each person with an ACT score,
we randomly select a 20-point SAT score bin from the range of possible scores.

F. Methods for Counterfactuals

    This appendix provides further details on how we implement the counterfactual allocations of
students to colleges and construct counterfactual earnings distributions in Section IV.
    For the income-neutral allocations counterfactual, we first rank all college students by their
SAT/ACT scores, breaking ties with idiosyncratic noise, and record the ranks of the students
actually enrolled at each college c,   -
                                       r c . We then re-rank students by their original test scores,
breaking ties with new idiosyncratic noise, and allocate ranks      -
                                                                    r c to college c. By breaking ties
with new idiosyncratic noise, we randomly assign students to each college c within test score bins,
including students who were not admitted to or did not apply to college c.
    The need-affirmative allocations counterfactual employs the same procedure with one change:
students are re-ranked by their original SAT/ACT scores plus the increment corresponding to their
parent income quintile, as defined in Section IV.A. By applying each college's actual test score
ranks  -
       r c to the post-test-score-bonus distribution, we effectively re-norm the post-test-score-bonus
distribution to align with the actual SAT distribution.
    We construct a counterfactual earnings distribution for children at each college based on the
observed distribution of earnings for children in each parent income quintile, SAT/ACT score level,
and college. Children are randomly assigned the earnings of another child who is observed as
attending their counterfactually assigned college and who has the same parent income quintile and
SAT/ACT score. For example, suppose that Harvard actually enrolled 10 bottom-quintile children
with a 1400 SAT/ACT score and that the counterfactual assigned 30 bottom-quintile children with
a 1400 SAT/ACT score to Harvard. Each of those 30 students would be randomly assigned the
earnings of one of the 10 actual enrollees. In 1.1% of observations in income-neutral allocations and
1.4% in need-affirmative allocations below, a student is allocated to a college in which no student
of the same parent income quintile and same SAT/ACT score actually enrolled (e.g., a bottom-
quintile 1400 student is allocated to Harvard but Harvard enrolled no bottom-quintile 1400-scorer in
actuality). In those cases, we assign those students a earnings rank of an actually enrolled student
from the same parent income quintile with the nearest SAT/ACT score, which is on average 31
points away.




                                                 37
G. Replication of Dale and Krueger (2014)

    In this appendix, we show that our data yield estimates of the return to attending a highly
selective college that are similar to those estimated by Dale and Krueger (2014), and in particular
exhibit higher rates of return to attending more selective colleges for students from lower-income
families.
    We replicate the key specifications estimated by Dale and Krueger in Appendix Table X. We
focus on a set of 31 highly selective colleges in the College and Beyond sample and estimate a set
of specifications that parallel those in Columns 3 and 4 in Table 2 of Dale and Krueger (2014).58
The dependent variable is log earnings, excluding observations with earnings below $13,822 in 2007
dollars ($15,800 in 2015 dollars), as in Dale and Krueger's analysis. The key independent variable
is the mean SAT score (divided by 100) of the college in 2001, a proxy for the college's selectivity.
    Column 1 presents OLS regression estimates controlling only for f (Si ) and f (pq ), the quintics
in test scores and parent income rank. The coefficient of 0.016 implies that a 100 point increase
in SAT score increases earnings by 1.6% on average. In Column 2, we add fixed effects for the
set of colleges to which students sent their test scores (among the 30 colleges in the sample). The
coefficient on mean SAT scores remains similar at 1.2% in this specification, with 1.6% lying in the
95% confidence interval. For comparison, Dale and Krueger (2014, Table 2, Column 2) report an
estimate of -0.001 (s.e. 0.012) in an analogous specification in their data. Our estimates ­ both in
the baseline specification and the specification that controls for college fixed effects thus lie within
one standard error of their point estimate and hence are not statistically distinguishable from it.
    This result should not be taken to mean that colleges have no causal effects: as Dale and Krueger
emphasize, there are substantial differences in earnings across colleges that are orthogonal to mean
SAT scores within the small set of highly selective colleges they study, even after controlling for
selection on observables and unobservables. Moreover, we find much larger differences in earnings
outcomes when we consider all colleges, looking beyond the highly selective institutions in the
College and Beyond sample.
    In Columns 3-7 of Appendix Table X, we investigate how the return to attending a more selective
college varies with parental income by replicating the specification in Column 1 by parent income
quintile. The coefficients on mean SAT scores decline across the columns as we examine higher
income groups: attending a college with 100 point higher average SAT scores is associated with a
4% increase in earnings for students from the bottom quintile, but only a 1% increase in earnings
for students from the top quintile. Again, we find similar results using specifications that control for
the college application set (not shown). These findings match Dale and Krueger's conclusions that
the returns to attending a more selective college are larger for students from low-income families.

H. Relationship between ACT/SAT Scores and Earnings

    We follow Dale and Krueger (2002), Hoxby and Avery (2013), and many others in using stan-
dardized test scores as a proxy for academic credentials. Test scores are widely used as proxies for
academic qualifications because they are widely available and because previous work has shown
that they are predictive of later outcomes (e.g., Sackett et al. 2012, Kurlaender and Cohen 2019),
although the extent to which that predictive power comes simply from correlations with demograph-
ics such as parental income and race is debated (Rothstein 2004). In this appendix, we re-evaluate
the relationship between SAT scores and earnings using our longitudinal data. We use our baseline
 58
    The original College and Beyond sample includes 34 colleges; we do not have data for Morehouse, Tulane, and
Williams.


                                                      38
1980-1982 cohorts sample for this analysis, omitting students who do not take either the SAT or
ACT, and rescale ACT to SAT scores as discussed in Appendix E.
    The series in circles in Appendix Figure V presents a binned scatter plot of the relationship
between earnings ranks in adulthood (measured at ages 32-34) and test scores. There is a strong
positive, linear relationship across the distribution. Column 1 of Appendix Table XIII presents
an OLS regression corresponding to this binned scatter plot. We estimate that a 100-point higher
SAT score (out of 1600) is associated with earning $6,744 more annually at agess 32-34, or 2.73
percentile ranks higher in the income distribution.
    In subsequent columns of Appendix Table XIII, we assess how this relationship changes as
we add additional controls for demographic factors. We find that the relationship between SAT
scores and earnings falls by about 20% when we control for parental income, race, gender, and high
school. The series in triangles in Appendix Figure VI present a binned scatter plot analogous to the
specification in Column 4 by replacing the linear SAT score term with 20 bins for SAT scores. It
confirms that there is a strong relationship between SAT scores and later earnings even conditional
on demographics throughout the test score distribution.
    Columns 5-9 examine this relationship within individual colleges. These coefficients must be
interpreted with caution, since the college a student attends is endogenous to their SAT scores.
Nevertheless, a 100-point difference in SAT scores between students at the same college, and of the
same demographic background, still predicts substantial differences in earnings. This relationship
holds within each of the selective tiers of colleges.
    We conclude that SAT scores provide an informative proxy for qualifications at the point of
college application for our purposes in the sense that it predicts earnings above and beyond de-
mographics. We note, however, that our analysis provides no evidence on how standardize test
scores compare to other potential proxies for academic credentials, such as high school grades or
other forms of assessment, and hence does not speak to the question of whether standardized tests
provide good measures of qualifications more broadly.




                                                39
                                                       TABLE I
                                         Summary Statistics for Analysis Sample

                                                                                                 Sample
                                                                           All Children in
                                                                                           Analyzed college- Non-Goers in
                                                                               1980-82
                                                                                                goers       1980-82 Cohorts
                                                                               cohorts
                                                                                 (1)               (2)                (3)
A. College Attendance Rates
% Attending College Between Age 19-22                                          61.83                -                  -
% Attending a College in Data Release (based on 80-82 cohorts)                 53.07                -                  -
% Not Attending any College by Age 28                                          26.65                -                69.81

B. Parents' Household Income (When Child is Aged 15-19)
Mean Income ($)                                                                87,335           114,306             50,377
Median Income ($)                                                              59,100             N/A               37,400
20th Percentile Income ($)                                                    24,633
40th Percentile Income ($)                                                    45,767
60th Percentile Income ($)                                                    73,500
80th Percentile Income ($)                                                    111,067
99th Percentile Income ($)                                                    532,267

C. Children's Individual Earnings (in 2014, Ages 32-34)
Mean Earnings ($)                                                              35,526            46,179             20,256
Median Earnings ($)                                                            26,900             N/A               13,600
20th Percentile Earnings ($)                                                    900
40th Percentile Earnings ($)                                                  18,500
60th Percentile Earnings ($)                                                  35,200
80th Percentile Earnings ($)                                                  55,800
99th Percentile Earnings ($)                                                  182,467
% Employed                                                                     81.68             88.60               70.96

Number of Children                                                          10,757,269         6,244,162          4,106,026
Percentage of College Students Covered                                           -               93.9%                -

Notes: The table presents summary statistics for the analysis sample defined in Section II. Column 1 includes all children in
the 1980-82 birth cohorts. Column 2 limits this sample to students who attend a college (between the ages of 19-22) that is
included in the public data release, using imputed data from the 1983-84 birth cohorts for colleges with insufficient data in the
1980-82 birth cohorts (see Appendix B, and Section II for details). This is the sample used for most of our analyses. Column 3
includes children in the 1980-82 birth cohorts who did not attend college between the ages of 19-22. Children are assigned to
colleges using the college that they attended for the most years between ages 19 and 22, breaking ties by choosing the
college the child attends first. Ivy-Plus colleges are defined as the eight Ivy-League colleges as well as the University of
Chicago, Stanford University, MIT, and Duke University. Elite colleges are defined as those in categories 1 or 2 in Barron's
Profiles of American Colleges (2009). 4-year Colleges are defined using the highest degree offered by the institution as
recorded in IPEDS (2013). Parent income is defined as mean pre-tax Adjusted Gross Income during the five-year period when
the child was aged 15-19. Parent income percentiles are constructed by ranking parents relative to other parents with children
in the same birth cohort. Children's earnings are measured as the sum of individual wage earnings and self-employment
income in the year 2014. At each age, children are assigned percentile ranks based on their rank relative to children born in
the same birth cohort. Children are defined as employed if they have positive earnings. In Column 2, the number of children is
computed as the average number of children in the cohorts available for a given college multiplied by 3. Medians are not
reported in Column 2 because the imputations are implemented at the college rather than individual level. We report dollar
values corresponding to other key quantiles in Column 1 because those are the thresholds used to define the income groups
we use in our analysis (bottom 20%, top 20%, etc.). All monetary values are measured in 2015 dollars. Statistics in Column 1
are constructed based on Online Data Tables 6 and 9; in Column 2 based on Online Data Table 2; and in Column 3 based on
Online Data Table 6, with the exception of median income and earnings, which are constructed directly from the individual-
level microdata.
                                                             TABLE II
                       Parent Income Segregation and Children's Earnings Outcomes: Statistics by College Tier
                                                                                               Top
                                                                                             Outcome
                                                          Median     Median   Within-                                     Num. of    Num. of
                                Share of Parents   From                                       Rate        Mobility Rate
                                                           Parent     Child   College                                     Colleges   Students
                                Bottom Bottom      Top
                                                          Income    Earnings Rank-Rank Top          Top    Top    Top      (80-82     (80-82
                                 20%     60%        1%      ($)        ($)     Slope   20%          1%     20%    1%      cohorts)   cohorts)
                                 (%)      (%)       (%)                                 (%)         (%)     (%)   (%)
College Tier:                     (1)    (2)       (3)      (4)        (5)         (6)       (7)    (8)     (9)   (10)      (11)       (12)
Ivy-Plus                          3.8   18.2       14.5   171,000   82,500       0.086      58.0 12.78 2.18       0.48      12        52,724
Other elite colleges              4.3   21.4       10.0   141,900   65,400       0.060      50.6 5.80 2.20        0.25      62        183,973
Highly selective public           5.5   29.0        2.5   107,300   53,600       0.099      40.7 2.67 2.22        0.15      26        393,548
Highly selective private          4.1   23.9        7.0   124,700   56,500       0.057      42.3 3.33 1.73        0.14      66        134,098
Selective public                  8.4   39.8        1.3    87,100   41,600       0.102      23.3 0.70 1.95        0.06      364      1,944,082
Selective private                 7.1   37.4        2.4    90,700   44,400       0.080      27.0 1.00 1.91        0.07      446       486,852
Nonsel. 4-year public            17.0   59.5        0.6    61,200   29,800       0.085      13.5 0.19 2.30        0.03      71        257,854
Nonsel. 4-yr. priv. non-prof.    10.7   45.2        2.0    80,500   29,000       0.079      13.6 0.42 1.45        0.04      50        55,947
2-year public and non-prof.      14.6   55.4        0.5    66,900   29,800       0.110      12.3 0.18 1.80        0.03      604      2,021,451
4-year for-profit                21.1   66.8        0.5    51,500   28,900       0.095      12.2 0.15 2.57        0.03      56        126,025
2-year for-profit                20.6   67.3        0.3    51,500   31,300       0.092      13.1 0.17 2.71        0.04       34        42,313
Less than two-year colleges      20.9   65.7       N/A     53,000   18,800       0.096       7.7  0.19 1.60       0.04       13        10,032
All colleges                     10.8   45.0        1.7    80,500   38,100       0.090      18.0 0.59 1.95        0.06     1,804     5,708,899

Notes: This table presents statistics on parental income segregation and children's earnings outcomes by college tier; see Section II of this
paper and Appendix D of Chetty et al. (2017) for definitions of these tiers. All statistics reported are for children in the 1980-82 birth
cohorts. All distributional statistics are enrollment-weighted means of the exact values for each college, except for median parent income
and child earnings, which are the mean incomes for the percentile of the overall income or earnings distribution which contains the within-
tier median. For example, the median Ivy-Plus parent falls in the 92nd percentile of the overall income distribution and the mean income for
Ivy-Plus parents in the 92nd percentile of the overall distribution is $171,000. The exact fraction of students from less than two-year
colleges with parents in the Top 1% is not available due to small sample sizes in the publicly available data. The trend statistics are
coefficients from enrollment-weighted univariate regressions of the share of parents from the bottom 20% or 60% on student cohort,
multiplied by 11; the statistics can therefore be interpreted as the trend change in lower-parent-income shares over the 1980-1991 cohorts.
Rank-rank slopes are coefficients from a regression of child income rank on parent income rank with college fixed effects, as in Panels E-G
of Table III of Chetty et al. (2017); see notes to that table for further details. Top-quintile outcome rates are the fractions of children who
reach the top 20% or 1% conditional on having parents in the bottom quintile. Mobility rates are the fractions of children who have parents
in the bottom income quintile and whose own earnings place them in either the top 20% or top 1% of their own age-specific income
distribution. Parents' incomes are measured at the household level when children are between the ages of 15 and 19, while children's
incomes are measured at the individual level in 2014. See notes to Table I for further details on income definitions and how children are
assigned to colleges. Statistics in Columns 1-4, 7-10, and 12 are constructed based on Online Data Table 6; in Column 5 based on Online
Data Table 7; in Column 11 based on Online Data Table 3; and in Column 6 directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                                   TABLE III
                          Parental Income Distributions by College Tier Under Counterfactual Student Allocation Rules

                                                                               Parent Income Quintile
                                                                                                                                              Share of all
                                                      1                  2               3                    4                 5
                                                                                                                                             college goers
                                               (Bottom 20%)                                                                 (Top 20%)
                                                     (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)              (5)                 (6)

A. Actual Distributions
Ivy-Plus                                           3.8%               5.7%               8.7%               13.4%             68.4%               0.9%
Other elite colleges                               4.3%               6.8%               10.2%              15.8%             62.8%               3.3%
Highly selective public                            5.5%               9.2%               14.3%              23.4%             47.6%               7.0%
Highly selective private                           4.1%               7.6%               12.2%              19.7%             56.5%               2.4%
Selective public                                   8.4%               12.9%              18.6%              26.1%             34.1%              34.4%
Selective private                                  7.1%               12.0%              18.2%              25.5%             37.2%               8.6%
Nonselective 4-year public                         17.0%              20.4%              22.1%              22.7%             17.7%               4.6%
Nonselective 4-year private non-profit             10.7%              14.7%              19.8%              24.6%             30.2%               1.0%
2-year public and non-profit                       14.6%              18.6%              22.2%              24.7%             19.9%              35.5%
4-year for-profit                                  17.8%              22.3%              22.5%              21.1%             16.3%               1.7%
2-year for-profit                                  21.5%              23.9%              23.1%              19.5%             12.0%               0.7%
Less than two-year colleges                        20.7%              23.2%              21.3%              21.0%             13.8%               0.2%
All colleges                                       10.7%              14.8%              19.3%              24.4%             30.8%              100.0%
Underrepresentation in selective tiers             31.3%              21.6%              11.4%              -0.6%             -27.9%

B. Counterfactual Distributions Under Income-Neutral Student Allocations
Ivy-Plus                                     4.4%            7.3%                        12.1%              18.5%             57.8%               0.9%
Other elite colleges                         5.5%            9.2%                        14.0%              21.3%             50.0%               3.3%
Highly selective public                      6.8%            11.1%                       17.0%              24.6%             40.6%               7.0%
Highly selective private                     6.1%            10.3%                       16.3%              24.1%             43.3%               2.4%
Selective public                             9.7%            14.2%                       19.6%              25.5%             30.9%              34.4%
Selective private                            8.4%            13.0%                       18.7%              25.7%             34.3%               8.6%
Nonselective 4-year public                  14.5%            18.5%                       20.5%              22.8%             23.7%               4.6%
Nonselective 4-year private non-profit       9.1%            13.8%                       19.6%              25.9%             31.6%               1.0%
2-year public and non-profit                13.1%            16.8%                       20.2%              23.8%             26.1%              35.5%
4-year for-profit                           14.9%            18.4%                       20.1%              23.0%             23.5%               1.7%
2-year for-profit                           17.1%            20.0%                       20.9%              21.5%             20.5%               0.7%
Less than two-year colleges                 15.0%            18.4%                       21.0%              23.3%             22.3%               0.2%
All colleges                                10.7%            14.8%                       19.3%              24.4%             30.8%              100.0%
Underrepresentation in selective tiers             18.9%              11.7%              3.8%               -2.4%             -12.6%
C. Counterfactual Distributions Under Need-Affirmative Student Allocations
Ivy-Plus                                    11.8%            15.5%                       17.2%              21.2%             34.3%               0.9%
Other elite colleges                        10.1%            14.1%                       17.4%              22.4%             36.0%               3.3%
Highly selective public                      9.4%            13.7%                       18.5%              24.7%             33.7%               7.0%
Highly selective private                     9.0%            13.4%                       18.2%              24.3%             35.1%               2.4%
Selective public                            10.4%            14.8%                       19.8%              25.4%             29.6%              34.4%
Selective private                            9.4%            14.0%                       19.3%              25.5%             31.9%               8.6%
Nonselective 4-year public                  12.7%            16.9%                       19.8%              23.0%             27.7%               4.6%
Nonselective 4-year private non-profit       8.7%            12.9%                       19.1%              25.6%             33.6%               1.0%
2-year public and non-profit                11.2%            15.0%                       19.2%              23.8%             30.8%              35.5%
4-year for-profit                           13.1%            17.0%                       19.6%              22.9%             27.4%               1.7%
2-year for-profit                           13.9%            17.5%                       20.0%              22.0%             26.7%               0.7%
Less than two-year colleges                 10.9%            16.0%                       19.7%              23.1%             30.2%               0.2%
All colleges                                10.7%            14.8%                       19.3%              24.4%             30.8%              100.0%
Underrepresentation in selective tiers              5.3%               2.5%              -0.1%              -2.3%              -1.2%

Notes: This table reports parental income distributions by quintile by college tier. Panel A reports actual parent income shares in the analysis sample (1980-
1982 birth cohorts). Each cell reports the share of the specified group of colleges that comes from a given parent income quintile. The
"Underrepresentation in selective tiers" row reports the percentage difference between the number of students from the relevant parent income quintile
pooling the first six tiers and the percentage of students from that quintile pooling all colleges. For example in Panel A, 31.3% = 1-7.3%/10.7%. Panel B
repeats Panel A under our income-neutral student allocation counterfactual, allocating students to colleges randomly based on their SAT/ACT scores while
holding fixed the distribution of SAT/ACT scores, pre-college states, and race to match the actual distributions at each college. Panel C repeats Panel B
after adding 160 points to the SAT/ACT scores of all college goers from the bottom parent income quintile, 128 points to second quintile college goers, 96
points to middle quintile college goers, and 64 points to fourth quintile college goers. See Section IV.A for more details on these counterfactuals. Statistics
in this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                         TABLE IV
                        Fraction of Differences in Earnings Across Colleges Due to Causal Effects

Dep. Var.: College fixed effect, conditional on parent income, race, SAT/ACT, and additional controls
                                (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)               (6)
                                 Race,                                                  Control for
                                                           High School    Control for
                                Gender,                                                 Application
                                            High School        FE's       Application                   Bottom
                               Interacted                                               Set and HS
                                               FE's         Interacted     Set and                    Quintile Only
                                   w/                                                    Interacted
                                                             w/ Race         HS
                               SAT/ACT                                                    w/ Race

College fixed effect,
conditional on parent            1.003         0.907          0.903         0.857          0.850         0.850
income, race, and
SAT/ACT
                                (0.006)        (0.010)       (0.010)        (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.015)


Adj. R-squared                   0.968         0.886          0.883         0.889          0.886         0.750

Additional Controls Used to Construct Dependent Variable

Interactions of race,
                                   X              X             X              X             X             X
gender w/ SAT/ACT
High school FE's                                  X             X              X             X             X
High school FE's
                                                                X                            X             X
interacted with race

Mean SAT of schools to                                                         X             X             X
which scores were sent

Notes: This table reports estimates of the fraction of the differences in mean earnings observed across colleges
conditional on parental income, race, and SAT/ACT scores that are due to causal effects, corresponding to the
parameter  in equation (2). The sample comprises all college-goers in our 1980-1982 cohorts who are matched to
College Board or ACT data. Each column presents coefficients from univariate OLS regressions run at the college
level, weighted by child count, following equation (2). The independent variable in all columns is the college fixed
effect obtained from a regression of child earnings rank on college fixed effects, a quintic in parent income
percentile, a quintic in SAT/ACT score, an indicator for taking the SAT, an indicator for taking the ACT (as some
took both tests), and race/ethnicity indicators, as in equation (1). The dependent variable in each column is the
child's college's fixed effect from the same regression, including additional controls. In Column 1, we add a gender
indicator, and we fully interact the race, gender, and SAT-quintic. Column 2 adds fixed effects for the child's high
school. Column 3 interacts the high school and race indicators. Column 4 replicates Column 2 and controls for the
mean SAT score of the colleges to which students sent scores and also the total number of colleges to which the
students sent scores, as in Dale and Krueger (2014). Column 5 replicates Column 3, adding the same controls as
in Column 4. Column 6 replicates Column 5, restricting attention to children with parents from the bottom quintile.
Statistics in this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                           TABLE V
                                Actual vs. Counterfactual Intergenerational Transition Matrices
                                                 Fraction of Children with Earnings in Each Group
                        Bottom 20%         Quintile 2        Quintile 3        Quintile 4       Top 20%            Top 1%
                             (1)              (2)                (3)              (4)             (5)                (6)
A. Actual Outcomes
..for children with parents from
Bottom 20%                   16.0%           21.1%             23.1%             21.7%             18.2%             0.6%
Quintile 2                   14.0%           18.1%             22.4%             24.1%             21.4%             0.7%
Quintile 3                   12.8%           15.7%             21.0%             25.6%             24.9%             0.9%
Quintile 4                   11.5%           13.7%             18.9%             26.3%             29.6%             1.2%
Top 20%                      11.1%           11.6%             14.3%             22.8%             40.2%             3.4%

B. Income-Neutral Student Allocations
..for children with parents from
Bottom 20%                   15.6%           20.3%             22.7%             21.9%             19.5%             0.7%
Quintile 2                   13.7%           17.6%             22.1%             24.2%             22.5%             0.9%
Quintile 3                   12.7%           15.4%             20.6%             25.4%             25.8%             1.1%
Quintile 4                   11.5%           13.7%             18.8%             26.1%             29.9%             1.3%
Top 20%                      11.4%           12.2%             15.0%             23.1%             38.3%             3.1%

Share of rich-poor
top-quintile
                           14.6%
outcome gap
narrowed

C. Need-Affirmative Student Allocations
..for children with parents from
Bottom 20%                   15.2%           19.7%             22.2%             22.1%             20.8%             0.9%
Quintile 2                   13.5%           17.2%             21.7%             24.2%             23.3%             1.0%
Quintile 3                   12.6%           15.4%             20.4%             25.4%             26.2%             1.2%
Quintile 4                   11.5%           13.7%             18.7%             26.1%             30.0%             1.4%
Top 20%                      11.6%           12.6%             15.6%             23.2%             37.0%             2.9%

Share of rich-poor
top-quintile
                           26.5%
outcome gap
narrowed

Notes: Panel A shows the actual intergenerational income transition matrix for college students in our analysis sample (1980-
1982 birth cohorts). Each cell of Panel A reports the percentage of college goers with earnings outcomes in the quintile given
by the column conditional on having parents with income in the quintile given by the row for the analysis sample. Panels B
and C repeat Panel A under the income-neutral student allocation and need-affirmative student allocation counterfactuals,
defined in the notes to Table III. Panels B and C assume that 80% of children's earnings differences across colleges reflect
causal effects conditional on SAT/ACT scores, race, and parental income. Mechanically, children are randomly assigned the
earnings of another child who is observed as attending their counterfactually assigned college and who has the same parent
income quintile, race, and SAT/ACT score. After that counterfactual earnings level is calculated, with 80% probability, children
are assigned that randomly assigned earning, and with 20% probability, children are assigned their actual earnings. See
Appendix F for details. The share of the rich-poor top-quintile outcome gap narrowed equals ((40.2%-18.2%)-(38.3%-
19.5%))/(40.2%-18.2%) = 14.6% in Panel B. The corresponding statistic in Panel C is computed similarly. Statistics in this
table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                             APPENDIX TABLE I
                            Counts in Administrative vs. Survey Data by Birth Cohort
            Size of Birth          Number of       Number of 20 Number of 20  CPS    College Attendees
 Birth     Cohort Based            Citizens in     Year Olds in Year Olds in College  at Age 20 in Our
 Cohort    on Vital Stats.         Our Sample         CPS       Our Sample Attendees      Sample
                 (1)                    (2)            (3)          (4)        (5)           (6)
 1980          3,612                  3,189           3,840        3,385      1,839         1,526
 1981          3,629                  3,403           3,829        3,482      1,845         1,601
 1982          3,681                  3,493           3,938        3,545      1,998         1,689
 1983          3,639                  3,470           3,926        3,575      2,009         1,794
 1984          3,669                  3,664           3,981        3,835      2,030         1,952
 1985          3,761                  3,776           4,222        3,939      2,187         1,987
 1986          3,757                  3,764           4,057        3,922      2,022         1,986
 1987          3,809                  3,836           4,006        4,061      2,078         2,080
 1988          3,910                  3,960           4,007        4,212      2,147         2,175
 1989          4,041                  4,103           4,087        4,361      2,254         2,316
 1990          4,158                  4,227           4,399        4,498      2,389         2,415
 1991          4,111                  4,178           4,281        4,484      2,433         2,402
 1980-1991     45,776                45,062          48,573       47,298     25,231        23,922

Notes: This table compares aggregate counts in our administrative data sample to aggregate counts from the National
Vital Statistics System and the Current Population Survey (CPS). All counts are reported in thousands. Column 1
reports the size of the birth cohort according to Vital Statistics in each birth cohort. Column 2 lists the number of
citizens in the given birth cohort in our administrative data sample. Values in Column 2 can be larger than values in
Column 1 because Column 1 excludes naturalized citizens. Column 3 reports the number of people in the CPS who are
age 20 in each birth cohort. Column 4 reports analogous counts of 20 year olds in our sample of children linked to
parents in the tax data. Column 5 reports the number of people enrolled in college at age 20 in each cohort. Column 6
reports analogous counts in our sample. Statistics in Columns 2, 4, and 6 of this table are constructed directly from the
individual-level microdata.
                                       APPENDIX TABLE II
            Income Distributions in the Tax Data vs. the American Community Survey
                                          (1)             (2)         (3)          (4)

Data source                               Tax Data           ACS               ACS              ACS
Family Unit                               Tax unit          Tax unit       Household        Household

                                         Adjusted     Adjusted     Adjusted                Total money
Income definition
                                       gross income gross income gross income                income

Panel A. Families of Children aged 15 in 2000
Count                               4,006,698             4,083,218         4,083,218        4,083,218
Mean                                   93,041               78,456            86,989           91,254
Fraction with zero income               3.4%                 5.0%              3.4%             0.4%
10th Percentile                       $12,000               $9,634           $15,140          $21,265
25th Percentile                       $26,500              $28,903           $35,785          $40,602
Median                                $56,750              $59,183           $68,817          $72,809
75th Percentile                      $100,500              $99,097          $108,731         $112,860
90th Percentile                      $156,750             $151,398          $163,372         $165,161
Fraction with married parents          64.0%                64.9%             64.9%            64.9%

Panel B. Families of Children aged 15 in 2006
Count                               4,531,577             4,347,184         4,347,184        4,347,184
Mean                                   92,635               80,219            86,662           90,779
Fraction with zero income               4.7%                 6.3%              4.7%             1.1%
10th Percentile                        $9,500               $7,055           $11,758          $18,225
25th Percentile                       $23,250              $27,161           $32,923          $37,626
Median                                $50,000              $58,791           $66,434          $70,549
75th Percentile                       $96,750             $104,130          $111,702         $114,642
90th Percentile                      $158,250             $160,499          $168,141         $170,493
Fraction with married parents          59.5%                62.5%             62.5%            62.5%

Notes: This table compares the parental income distributions of children aged 15 in 2000 (Panel A) and
in 2006 (Panel B) in the tax data vs. American Community Survey (ACS) data. Column 1 presents
statistics from the tax data, where the unit of observation for family income is the tax unit (married
parents or single parent) and income is defined as Adjusted Gross Income, which is pre-tax and pre-
transfer cash income. Column 2 replicates this in the ACS data, excluding the few children who are
heads of household or spouses of heads of household. For children living with married parents, we sum
the income of the two parents (if both parents' incomes are zero, we use instead the income of the head
of household as the head would most likely claim the child for tax purposes in this case). For children
not living with two married parents, we take the income of the mother if present and non-zero and father
if the mother's income is zero or the mother is absent. If both father and mother have zero income or
are absent, we define the child's parent as the head of household. Column 3 considers adjusted gross
income summed across all household members aged 15 or older (instead of just parents). Column 4
considers total household money income (instead of adjusted gross income). Total money income is the
standard income definition used in the ACS and is broader than adjusted gross income, as it includes
cash government transfers, retirement and disability benefits. All dollar values are expressed in 2015
dollars, adjusting for inflation using the CPI-U. The counts in the first row are actual counts for the tax
data and implied population counts corresponding to the ACS sample based on the sampling weights.
Statistics in Column 1 of this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                               APPENDIX TABLE III
                                 Additional Summary Statistics for Analysis Sample

                                                                                                Sample
                                                                                            College-Goers in Data Release
                                                                            All Children in
                                                                                1980-82                    Including data
                                                                                               80-82
                                                                                cohorts                  imputed   from 83-
                                                                                            cohorts only
                                                                                                             84 cohorts
                                                                                  (1)            (2)              (3)
A. College Attendance Rates
% Attending College Between Age 19-22                                           61.83             -                 -
% Attending a College in Data Release (based on 80-82 cohorts)                  53.07             -                 -
% Attending an Ivy-Plus College                                                  0.49           0.95              0.84
% Attending an Other Elite College                                               1.71           3.31              3.02
% Attending an Other 4-year College                                             31.59          59.63             58.08
% Attending a 2-Year or Less College                                            19.28          36.11             38.06
% Not Attending any College by Age 28                                           26.65             -                 -

B. Parents' Household Income (When Child is Aged 15-19)
Mean Income ($)                                                                 87,335        117,080          114,306
Median Income ($)                                                               59,100        77,100             N/A
% with Parents in Bottom 20%                                                    20.00          10.63            11.12
% with Parents in Top 20%                                                       20.00          30.93            29.92
% with Parents in Top 1%                                                         1.00          1.70             1.62

C. Children's Individual Earnings (in 2014, Ages 32-34)
Mean Earnings ($)                                                               35,526         47,048           46,179
Median Earnings ($)                                                             26,900         35,800            N/A
% Employed                                                                      81.68          88.72            88.60
% in Top 20%                                                                    20.00          29.66            28.87
% in Top 1%                                                                      1.00           1.73             1.63
% in Top 20% | Parents in Bottom 20%                                             8.65          18.33            17.44
% in Top 1% | Parents in Bottom 20%                                              0.22           1.00             0.92
% in Top 20% and Parents in Bottom 20%                                           1.73           1.95             1.94
% in Top 1% and Parents in Bottom 20%                                            0.04           0.07             0.06

Number of Children                                                           10,757,269      5,535,694        6,244,162
Percentage of College Students Covered                                            -            83.2%            93.9%

Notes: The table presents additional summary statistics. Column 1 includes all children in the 1980-82 birth cohorts and
replicates Column 1 of Table I. Column 2 limits this sample to students who attend a college (between the ages of 19-22)
that is included in the public data release using data purely from the 1980-82 birth cohorts. This is the set of colleges for
which we observe a sufficient number of students and have complete attendance records for the 1980-82 cohorts, as
described in Section II and Appendix B. Column 3 adds imputed data from the 1983-84 birth cohorts for colleges with
insufficient data in the 1980-82 birth cohorts (see Section II.D of Chetty et al. (2017) for details), replicating Column 2 of
Table I. This is the sample used for most of our analyses. See notes to Table I for definitions. Statistics in Column 1 are
constructed based on Online Data Table 6 and statistics in Columns 2 and 3 are based on Online Data Table 2, with the
exception of median income and earnings, which are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                      APPENDIX TABLE IV
               Parent Income Distributions by SAT/ACT Score for College Students
                                    Parent Income Quintile                        Share of all
                  1            2               3            4            5       college goers
                 (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)            (6)
A. Share of SAT/ACT Bin from Each Parent Income Quintile
1500-1600       2.5%         4.7%            8.8%         16.9%       67.2%           0.6%
1400-1490       3.2%         6.4%           12.4%         21.1%       56.8%           2.3%
1300-1390       4.0%         7.7%           14.2%         23.3%       50.9%           5.3%
1200-1290       5.0%         9.4%           16.3%         25.1%       44.2%          10.4%
1100-1190       6.4%         11.4%          18.5%         26.4%       37.4%          16.7%
1000-1090       8.5%         13.4%          19.9%         26.6%       31.7%          19.8%
900-990         11.3%        16.1%          21.0%         25.7%       25.8%          19.2%
800-890         15.4%        19.3%          21.6%         23.4%       20.2%          13.7%
700-790         21.0%        23.1%          21.1%         20.0%       14.8%           7.7%
600-690         25.8%        26.1%          20.3%         16.8%       11.1%           3.1%
500-590         30.8%        28.0%          18.9%         13.9%        8.5%           1.1%
400-490         34.5%        28.3%          18.7%         11.1%        7.4%           0.2%
B. Share of Cumulative SAT/ACT Bin from Each Parent Income Quintile
1500            2.5%         4.7%          8.8%        16.9%                           67.2%               0.6%
1400            3.1%         6.1%         11.7%        20.3%                           58.9%               2.9%
1300            3.7%         7.1%         13.3%        22.2%                           53.7%               8.2%
1200            4.4%         8.4%         15.0%        23.8%                           48.4%              18.5%
1100            5.3%         9.8%         16.6%        25.0%                           43.2%              35.3%
1000            6.5%        11.1%         17.8%        25.6%                           39.0%              55.0%
900             7.7%        12.4%         18.6%        25.6%                           35.6%              74.2%
800             8.9%        13.5%         19.1%        25.3%                           33.2%              87.9%
700             9.9%        14.3%         19.3%        24.8%                           31.7%              95.6%
600            10.4%        14.6%         19.3%        24.6%                           31.1%              98.7%
500            10.6%        14.8%         19.3%        24.5%                           30.8%              99.8%
400            10.7%        14.8%         19.3%        24.4%                           30.8%             100.0%
Notes: Panel A reports the parent income distribution by SAT/ACT score bin among college goers in our analysis
sample. SAT scores for 47.6% of college goers are obtained directly from the College Board; ACT scores for another
26.2% of college goers are obtained from ACT and converted to an SAT score. We impute an SAT/ACT score for the
other 26.2% of college-goers using the SAT/ACT score of the student from the same parent income quintile, same pre-
college state, and same college tier with the nearest child earnings and non-missing race. Each cell of Columns 1-5
reports the share of students in a given SAT/ACT bin who have parents in the parent income quintile defined in the
column heading. The sixth column reports the total share of college goers who fall into the corresponding SAT/ACT bin.
Panel B weights the distributional statistics in Columns 1-5 by the overall college-goer shares reported in Column 6 to
compute the joint cumulative distribution function of SAT/ACT scores and parent income. For example, Panel B reports
that 3.6% of college goers with an SAT/ACT score of at least 1300 have bottom-quintile parents. Appendix Table V
shows that similar results are obtained when excluding college goers with an imputed SAT/ACT score, while Appendix
Table VI shows that similar results are obtained using data from the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study.
Statistics in this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                       APPENDIX TABLE V
 Parent Income Distributions by SAT/ACT Score, Excluding Students with Imputed SAT/ACT Scores
                                     Parent Income Quintile                       Share of all
                   1              2             3            4           5       college  goers
                  (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)         (5)            (6)
A. Share of SAT/ACT Bin from Each Parent Income Quintile
1500-1600        2.2%           4.4%          8.4%         16.8%      68.1%           0.8%
1400-1490        2.8%           5.9%         11.8%         20.9%      58.6%           2.9%
1300-1390        3.3%           6.9%         13.5%         23.1%      53.2%           6.5%
1200-1290       4.0%            8.2%         15.3%         25.1%      47.4%          12.1%
1100-1190       5.0%            9.9%         17.3%         26.7%      41.1%          18.4%
1000-1090       6.6%           11.6%         18.8%         27.2%      35.8%          20.3%
900-990         8.8%           14.1%         20.2%         26.9%      30.0%          18.2%
800-890         12.2%          17.2%         21.1%         25.2%      24.2%          11.8%
700-790         16.8%          21.1%         21.3%         22.3%      18.6%           6.0%
600-690         20.7%          24.2%         20.9%         19.5%      14.8%           2.2%
500-590         25.2%          26.3%         20.0%         16.8%      11.8%           0.7%
400-490         27.7%          27.8%         19.8%         13.9%      10.8%           0.1%
B. Share of Cumulative SAT/ACT Bin from Each Parent Income Quintile
1500            2.2%          4.4%         8.4%        16.8%                         68.1%              0.8%
1400            2.7%          5.6%        11.1%        20.1%                         60.5%              3.6%
1300            3.1%          6.4%        12.6%        22.0%                         55.9%             10.2%
1200            3.6%          7.4%        14.1%        23.7%                         51.2%             22.3%
1100            4.2%          8.5%        15.5%        25.1%                         46.6%             40.6%
1000            5.0%          9.6%        16.6%        25.8%                         43.0%             60.9%
900             5.9%         10.6%        17.4%        26.0%                         40.0%             79.2%
800             6.7%         11.5%        17.9%        25.9%                         38.0%             91.0%
700             7.3%         12.1%        18.1%        25.7%                         36.8%             97.0%
600             7.6%         12.3%        18.2%        25.6%                         36.3%             99.2%
500             7.8%         12.4%        18.2%        25.5%                         36.1%             99.9%
400             7.8%         12.4%        18.2%        25.5%                         36.1%            100.0%
Notes: The table replicates Appendix Table IV, omitting college goers with an imputed SAT/ACT score. See the notes to
that table for details. Statistics in this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                      APPENDIX TABLE VI
                Parent Income Distributions by SAT/ACT Score Using NPSAS Data
                                     Parent Income Quintile                                              Share of all
                   1            2               3            4          5                               college goers
                  (1)          (2)             (3)          (4)        (5)                                    (6)
A. Share of SAT/ACT Bin from Each Parent Income Quintile
1500-1600        2.6%         6.8%           16.1%         20.4%     54.0%                                  0.9%
1400-1490        5.1%         7.2%           12.9%         27.0%     47.9%                                  3.1%
1300-1390        3.7%         7.1%           14.5%         25.2%     49.4%                                  7.2%
1200-1290        5.9%         11.1%          16.1%         25.7%     41.2%                                  12.2%
1100-1190        7.1%         13.1%          18.1%         26.1%     35.6%                                  18.4%
1000-1090        8.3%         13.1%          22.0%         26.4%     30.2%                                  20.3%
900-990          15.8%        19.6%          20.2%         21.9%     22.4%                                  19.8%
800-890          18.0%        19.8%          22.8%         23.1%     16.3%                                  11.5%
700-790          20.1%        22.6%          19.6%         19.5%     18.1%                                   5.2%
600-690          18.8%        18.7%          23.2%         20.2%     19.0%                                   1.2%
500-590          22.4%        21.7%          11.7%         24.2%     20.0%                                   0.3%
400-490          44.8%        17.4%           4.7%         33.1%      0.0%                                   0.0%
B. Share of Cumulative SAT/ACT Bin from Each Parent Income Quintile
1500             2.6%         6.8%         16.1%        20.4%                             54.0%              0.9%
1400             4.5%         7.1%         13.6%        25.6%                             49.2%              4.0%
1300             4.0%         7.1%         14.2%        25.4%                             49.4%             11.2%
1200             5.0%         9.2%         15.2%        25.5%                             45.1%             23.4%
1100             5.9%        10.9%         16.5%        25.8%                             40.9%             41.8%
1000             6.7%        11.6%         18.3%        26.0%                             37.4%             62.1%
900              8.9%        13.6%         18.7%        25.0%                             33.8%             81.9%
800             10.0%        14.3%         19.2%        24.8%                             31.7%             93.4%
700             10.6%        14.8%         19.3%        24.5%                             30.9%             98.5%
600             10.7%        14.8%         19.3%        24.4%                             30.8%             99.7%
500             10.7%        14.8%         19.3%        24.4%                             30.8%             100.0%
400             10.7%        14.8%         19.3%        24.4%                             30.8%             100.0%
Notes: This table replicates Appendix Table IV using data from the National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS)
instead of the tax data. The NPSAS contains coarse information on college-goers' parent income and SAT or ACT score.
To overcome this problem, we norm NPSAS parent income to match the true distribution of college-goers' parent income
quintiles from our analysis sample in the tax data, convert ACT scores to SAT scores, and use parent income and tier to
impute missing SAT/ACT scores. Specifically, we use information gleaned from FAFSA AGI and survey questions to
generate an observed distribution of parent income within tier and SAT/ACT quartile or missing SAT/ACT score. We then
randomly assign incomes to students with unobserved parent income to match the observed distribution within these
cells. Next, we assign parental income quintiles to this NPSAS income variable such that the quintile distribution matches
that from our main analysis sample. Finally, we impute missing SAT/ACT scores such that the distribution of observed
SAT/ACT scores within parent income quintile and tier is preserved. See the notes to Appendix Table IV for details on the
statistics reported in this table. Statistics in this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                    APPENDIX TABLE VII
             Ivy-Plus Attendance Rate by Parent Income Group and SAT/ACT Score

A. Share attending an Ivy-Plus college with SAT/ACT score...
                   1200              1300          1400                      1500              1600
Bottom 20%         0.8%             2.8%          7.3%                      21.4%             60.0%
Quintile 2         0.7%             2.2%          4.7%                      19.3%             43.9%
Quintile 3         0.7%             2.0%          4.5%                      14.5%             54.3%
Quintile 4         0.5%             1.7%          4.4%                      15.6%             41.7%
Top 20%            1.0%             3.8%          10.8%                     30.9%             60.5%
P80-P90            0.6%             2.0%          5.5%                      17.0%             46.0%
P90-P95            0.9%             2.9%          8.4%                      24.9%             50.0%
P95-P99            1.4%             5.0%          14.6%                     38.8%             71.0%
P99-P100           2.6%             10.0%         26.2%                     53.8%             76.7%
B. Share attending an Ivy-Plus college within SAT/ACT score range...
                1200-1290        1300-1390       1400-1490      1500-1590                      1600
Bottom 20%         1.3%             3.9%           11.3%          29.7%                       60.0%
Quintile 2         1.1%             3.2%           8.6%           27.3%                       43.9%
Quintile 3         1.0%             2.8%           7.6%           22.1%                       54.3%
Quintile 4         0.8%             2.6%           7.2%           23.5%                       41.7%
Top 20%            1.7%             5.9%           16.4%          38.8%                       60.5%
P80-P90            0.9%             3.1%           8.7%           24.6%                       46.0%
P90-P95            1.3%             4.5%           12.6%          32.4%                       50.0%
P95-P99            2.4%             8.0%           21.5%          45.3%                       71.0%
P99-P100           4.8%             14.6%          34.4%          60.7%                       76.7%
C. Share attending an Ivy-Plus college with at least SAT/ACT score...
                  1200+             1300+            1400+        1500+                        1600
Bottom 20%         3.4%             7.0%             14.5%        31.0%                       60.0%
Quintile 2         2.9%             5.7%             11.7%        27.9%                       43.9%
Quintile 3         2.6%             5.0%             10.0%        23.5%                       54.3%
Quintile 4         2.5%             5.0%             10.1%        24.4%                       41.7%
Top 20%            6.7%             12.0%            21.9%        40.0%                       60.5%
P80-P90            3.3%             6.2%             12.0%        25.7%                       46.0%
P90-P95            5.2%             9.3%             17.3%        33.4%                       50.0%
P95-P99            9.8%             16.3%            28.0%        46.8%                       71.0%
P99-P100          17.4%             26.8%            42.0%        61.6%                       76.7%

Notes: This table shows the Ivy-Plus attendance rate for college-goers in our analysis sample by parent
income group and SAT/ACT score. In addition to parent income quintiles, the top 20% is broken down
further into 80-90th percentiles, 90-95th percentiles, 95-99th percentiles, and the top 1%. Panel A reports
the Ivy-Plus attendance rate for individual SAT/ACT scores. For example, of all college-goers with
parents in the bottom 20% and with a 1600 SAT/ACT score, 60.0% attended an Ivy-Plus college. Panel B
repeats Panel A for 100-point SAT/ACT score ranges. Panel C reports the Ivy-Plus attendance rate for
those with at least a certain SAT/ACT score. See notes to Appendix Table IV for details about SAT/ACT
scores and imputation. See Table I for a definition of Ivy-Plus colleges. Statistics in this table are
constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                 APPENDIX TABLE VIII
           Counterfactual Income Segregation across Colleges for College-Goers

A. Actual Income Segregation across Colleges
                         (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)
                             Fraction of college peers from each income group..
                    Bottom 20%    Quintile 2     Quintile 3    Quintile 4    Top 20%
..for children from
Bottom 20%            15.7%         18.6%          20.6%        22.6%          22.5%
Quintile 2            13.5%         17.3%          20.6%        23.8%          24.8%
Quintile 3            11.5%         15.9%          20.5%        24.9%          27.2%
Quintile 4            10.0%         14.5%          19.7%        25.6%          30.2%
Top 20%                7.9%         12.1%          17.1%        24.0%          38.8%
B. Income-Neutral Student Allocations
                             Fraction of college peers from each income group..
                    Bottom 20%    Quintile 2     Quintile 3    Quintile 4    Top 20%
..for children from
Bottom 20%            12.8%         16.5%          19.5%        23.3%          27.8%
Quintile 2            11.9%         15.8%          19.6%        23.9%          28.8%
Quintile 3            10.8%         15.0%          19.6%        24.6%          30.0%
Quintile 4            10.2%         14.5%          19.4%        25.0%          30.9%
Top 20%                9.6%         13.9%          18.8%        24.6%          33.2%
C. Need-Affirmative Student Allocations
                             Fraction of college peers from each income group..
                    Bottom 20%    Quintile 2     Quintile 3    Quintile 4    Top 20%
..for children from
Bottom 20%            12.2%         15.9%          19.2%        23.3%          29.3%
Quintile 2            11.4%         15.4%          19.4%        23.9%          29.8%
Quintile 3            10.6%         14.9%          19.5%        24.6%          30.4%
Quintile 4            10.2%         14.5%          19.4%        24.9%          31.0%
Top 20%               10.1%         14.4%          19.1%        24.6%          31.8%
Notes: Panel A presents parental income segregation measures across colleges. The sample
includes all children in our analysis sample (1980-1982 birth cohorts). Each row corresponds to a
group of children based on their own parents' incomes. For each row, each column reports the
average composition of peers in the 1980-1982 birth cohorts in the same college using the same
parent income quintile groups. Peer composition is computed using leave-out means. Panels B and C
replicate Panel A under the two counterfactuals discussed in the notes to Table III. Statistics in this
table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                          APPENDIX TABLE IX
           Parental Income Distributions Under Counterfactual Student Allocation Rules without Racial and Geographic Constraints

                                                                                  Parent Income Quintile
                                                                                                                                                   Share of all
                                                        1                  2                3                     4                 5
                                                                                                                                                  college goers
                                                 (Bottom 20%)                                                                   (Top 20%)
                                                       (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)              (5)                   (6)

A. Actual Distributions
Ivy-Plus                                             3.8%                5.7%               8.7%                13.4%              68.4%               0.9%
Other elite colleges                                 4.3%                6.8%               10.2%               15.8%              62.8%               3.3%
Highly selective public                              5.5%                9.2%               14.3%               23.4%              47.6%               7.0%
Highly selective private                             4.1%                7.6%               12.2%               19.7%              56.5%               2.4%
Selective public                                     8.4%                12.9%              18.6%               26.1%              34.1%              34.4%
Selective private                                    7.1%                12.0%              18.2%               25.5%              37.2%               8.6%
Nonselective 4-year public                           17.0%               20.4%              22.1%               22.7%              17.7%               4.6%
Nonselective 4-year private non-profit               10.7%               14.7%              19.8%               24.6%              30.2%               1.0%
2-year public and non-profit                         14.6%               18.6%              22.2%               24.7%              19.9%              35.5%
4-year for-profit                                    17.8%               22.3%              22.5%               21.1%              16.3%               1.7%
2-year for-profit                                    21.5%               23.9%              23.1%               19.5%              12.0%               0.7%
Less than two-year colleges                          20.7%               23.2%              21.3%               21.0%              13.8%               0.2%
All colleges                                         10.7%               14.8%              19.3%               24.4%              30.8%              100.0%
Underrepresentation in selective tiers               31.3%               21.6%              11.4%               -0.6%              -27.9%

B. Counterfactual Distributions Under Income-Neutral Student Allocations
Ivy-Plus                                     3.8%            7.1%                           12.6%               21.6%              54.9%               0.9%
Other elite colleges                         5.1%            9.2%                           15.4%               24.2%              46.1%               3.3%
Highly selective public                      7.1%            11.4%                          17.6%               25.0%              38.9%               7.0%
Highly selective private                     6.6%            11.0%                          17.7%               25.1%              39.6%               2.4%
Selective public                             9.5%            14.0%                          19.2%               25.0%              32.3%              34.4%
Selective private                            9.2%            13.5%                          18.9%               24.9%              33.5%               8.6%
Nonselective 4-year public                  13.1%            16.9%                          20.4%               23.9%              25.7%               4.6%
Nonselective 4-year private non-profit      10.5%            14.9%                          19.4%               24.8%              30.3%               1.0%
2-year public and non-profit                13.2%            17.1%                          20.2%               23.9%              25.6%              35.5%
4-year for-profit                           13.2%            17.2%                          20.0%               23.9%              25.6%               1.7%
2-year for-profit                           16.0%            19.1%                          20.4%               22.5%              21.9%               0.7%
Less than two-year colleges                 14.2%            18.3%                          20.2%               23.1%              24.1%               0.2%
All colleges                                10.7%            14.8%                          19.3%               24.4%              30.8%              100.0%
Underrepresentation in selective tiers               18.5%               11.7%               3.7%               -1.9%              -12.9%
C. Counterfactual Distributions Under Need-Affirmative Student Allocations
Ivy-Plus                                    11.3%            16.8%                          19.9%               23.9%              28.0%               0.9%
Other elite colleges                        10.3%            14.7%                          19.6%               24.0%              31.4%               3.3%
Highly selective public                     10.1%            14.5%                          19.3%               24.9%              31.2%               7.0%
Highly selective private                     9.9%            14.5%                          19.3%               24.9%              31.4%               2.4%
Selective public                            10.4%            14.6%                          19.3%               24.8%              30.8%              34.4%
Selective private                           10.4%            14.6%                          19.3%               24.7%              31.0%               8.6%
Nonselective 4-year public                  11.1%            15.1%                          19.2%               24.1%              30.6%               4.6%
Nonselective 4-year private non-profit      10.7%            14.7%                          18.8%               24.8%              31.0%               1.0%
2-year public and non-profit                11.0%            15.0%                          19.2%               24.1%              30.7%              35.5%
4-year for-profit                           10.9%            15.3%                          19.0%               24.0%              30.7%               1.7%
2-year for-profit                           11.4%            15.3%                          19.0%               23.5%              30.8%               0.7%
Less than two-year colleges                 11.5%            14.9%                          18.8%               24.2%              30.6%               0.2%
All colleges                                10.7%            14.8%                          19.3%               24.4%              30.8%              100.0%
Underrepresentation in selective tiers                2.7%               1.0%               -0.3%               -1.2%              -0.3%

Notes: This table replicates Table III, but reallocates students to colleges randomly conditional on their SAT/ACT scores (or adjusted SAT/ACT scores),
without holding fixed the racial composition or pre-college-state distribution of the student body. See notes to Table III for details. Statistics in this table are
constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                       APPENDIX TABLE X
                                      Replication of Specifications in Dale and Krueger (2014)

Dep. Var.: Log earnings
                                                All
                                             Quintiles,     Bottom
                               All                                       Quintile 2    Quintile 3   Quintile 4    Top Quintile
                                              College       Quintile
                             Quintiles                                     Only          Only         Only           Only
                                            Application      Only
                                             Set FEs
                                (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)             (7)
Average SAT of College
                              0.016            0.012         0.038         0.032         0.025        0.016          0.010
Attended
                             (0.002)          (0.003)       (0.009)       (0.007)       (0.005)      (0.004)        (0.003)


Adj. R-squared                0.060            0.099         0.079         0.072         0.062        0.052          0.025


Notes: This table replicates specifications in Dale and Krueger (2014) estimating the relationship between students' earnings
outcomes and college selectivity, as measured by students' average SAT scores. It uses the sample of students attending
one of the 31 colleges for which we have data in the College and Beyond Survey used in Dale and Krueger (2002, 2014),
restricting to students with earnings that exceed $13,822 in 2007 dollars ($15,800 in 2015 dollars). Column 1 reports
estimates from a regression of log earnings on the average SAT score of college attended, controlling for a quintic in parent
income rank and a quintic in SAT. Column 2 adds fixed effects for the exact set of these 31 schools that each student sent
scores to. Columns 3-7 replicate Column 1 using only children from the parent income quintile specified in the column title.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Statistics in this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
See Appendix G for further details.
                                             APPENDIX TABLE XI
        Counterfactual Gaps in Mobility Rates: Sensitivity to Assumptions about Colleges' Causal Effects
 Assumed causal share of
  differences in earnings
across colleges, conditional
                                            Increment to the SAT Scores of Bottom-Quintile College-Goers
 on SAT/ACT scores and
     parent income (%)                   0                 100               160               200                300
             100                      18.2%              26.7%              33.1%             37.6%              46.2%
             90                       16.4%              24.1%              29.8%             33.8%              41.7%
        80 (baseline)                 14.6%              21.4%              26.5%             30.1%              37.1%
              70                      12.8%              18.8%              23.2%             26.4%              32.5%
              60                      11.0%              16.1%              20.0%             22.7%              27.9%
              50                       9.3%              13.5%              16.7%             18.9%              23.3%
              40                       7.5%              10.9%              13.4%             15.2%              18.7%
              30                       5.7%               8.2%              10.1%             11.5%              14.1%
              20                       3.9%               5.6%               6.9%              7.8%               9.5%
              10                       2.1%               3.0%               3.6%              4.0%               4.9%
               0                       0.3%               0.3%               0.3%              0.3%               0.3%

Notes: Consider the difference between the fraction of college students with parents in the bottom vs. top quintile who
reach the top earnings quintile. Each cell reports the fraction of this gap that is closed under alternative assumptions about
colleges' student allocations rules (columns) and colleges' causal effects (rows). The columns vary the increment to the
SAT/ACT scores of bottom-quintile college-goers, with smaller proportional increments to second-quintile (80% of the
bottom-quintile constant), third-quintile (60%), and fourth-quintile (40%) college-goers. The first column (0 addition)
corresponds to the income-neutral student allocations counterfactual reported in Table V; the third column (160 points)
corresponds to the need-affirmative student allocations counterfactual. The rows vary the share of the differences in
earnings ranks across colleges conditional on SAT/ACT scores and parental income quintile that are assumed to be
causal ( ). The estimates in the third row assume that  =80% and replicate the analysis in Table V. In the remaining rows,
for each assumed causal share  , we report a weighted average with  weight on the counterfactual earnings distribution
that assumes 100%-causality and 1-  weight on the actual (0%-causal) distribution of child earnings. We then recompute
quintile earnings thresholds so that each child earnings quintile has 20% of children, taking as given the outcomes of non-
college-goers. Statistics in this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                    APPENDIX TABLE XII
               Actual vs. Counterfactual Intergenerational Transition Matrices with Heterogeneous Causal Effects
                                                      Fraction of Children with Earnings in Each Group
                          Bottom 20%            Quintile 2        Quintile 3        Quintile 4       Top 20%                     Top 1%
                               (1)                 (2)                (3)              (4)             (5)                         (6)
A. Actual Outcomes
..for children with parents from
Bottom 20%                   16.0%                21.1%               23.1%               21.7%                18.2%              0.6%
Quintile 2                   14.0%                18.1%               22.4%               24.1%                21.4%              0.7%
Quintile 3                   12.8%                15.7%               21.0%               25.6%                24.9%              0.9%
Quintile 4                   11.5%                13.7%               18.9%               26.3%                29.6%              1.2%
Top 20%                      11.1%                11.6%               14.3%               22.8%                40.2%              3.4%

B. Income-Neutral Student Allocations
..for children with parents from
Bottom 20%                   15.6%                20.4%               22.7%               22.0%                19.4%              0.7%
Quintile 2                   13.8%                17.7%               22.2%               24.2%                22.2%              0.8%
Quintile 3                   12.7%                15.5%               20.7%               25.6%                25.5%              1.0%
Quintile 4                   11.4%                13.7%               18.9%               26.2%                29.8%              1.3%
Top 20%                      11.4%                12.1%               14.9%               22.9%                38.8%              3.3%

Share of rich-poor
top-quintile
                              11.7%
outcome gap
narrowed

C. Need-Affirmative Student Allocations
..for children with parents from
Bottom 20%                   15.3%                19.8%               22.3%               22.1%                20.5%              0.9%
Quintile 2                   13.6%                17.3%               21.9%               24.3%                22.8%              0.9%
Quintile 3                   12.6%                15.5%               20.6%               25.6%                25.7%              1.1%
Quintile 4                   11.5%                13.7%               18.8%               26.2%                29.8%              1.3%
Top 20%                      11.6%                12.4%               15.3%               22.9%                37.9%              3.1%

Share of rich-poor
top-quintile
                              21.3%
outcome gap
narrowed

Notes: This table replicates Table V, but varies the causal effect of colleges on children's earnings based on parental income quintile, tier
attended, and counterfactually assigned tier so that children from lower-income families gain more from attending more selective colleges.
The counterfactual allocation of students to colleges is the same as in Table V. Children's earnings, however, are assigned differently.
Mechanically, children are first randomly assigned the earnings of another child who is observed as attending their counterfactually
assigned college and who has the same parent income quintile, race, and SAT/ACT score. After that counterfactual earnings level is
calculated, children whose parents are in the bottom 20%, attend a school in one of the six most selective tiers (first six rows of Table II),
and are counterfactually assigned to a school in one of the six most selective tiers have a causal share of 40%. This means the earnings
outcome is with 40% probability their counterfactually assigned earnings and with 60% probability it is their empirically observed earnings.
Children whose parents are not in the bottom 20%, attend a school in one of the six most selective tiers, and are counterfactually assigned
to a school in one of the six most selective tiers have a causal share of 0%. This means that those children's counterfactual earnings is the
same as their observed earnings. All other children--regardless of parental income quintile and observed and counterfactual tier--have a
causal share of 80%. See the notes to Table V and Section IV.B for more details on the counterfactuals and earnings allocation. Statistics
in this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                                  APPENDIX TABLE XIII
                                            Relationship between SAT/ACT Scores and Earnings at Ages 32-34
                                        (1)           (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)          (6)                (7)           (8)           (9)
A. Dep. Var.: Individual Earnings in 2014 ($)
    SAT/ACT Score (100 points)        6,744         5,941       5,617      5,307       2,732        5,414               3,944         4,437        3,015
                                       (21)          (20)        (21)       (21)        (20)        (709)               (214)          (89)         (29)

B. Dep. Var.: Individual Income Rank (Percentiles)
    SAT/ACT Score (100 points)        2.73          2.41          2.24          2.23         1.27          1.26          1.23         1.45          1.44
                                     (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)        (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.12)        (0.06)       (0.03)        (0.01)

                                 N 4,180,853     4,180,853     4,180,853    4,127,173     4,180,853      51,843        179,723      379,202      1,767,357

  Indicator for SAT, ACT, or both
                                        X            X             X             X             X            X             X             X            X
                              taken
     Cubic in Parent Income Rank                     X             X             X             X            X             X             X            X
    Interactions of cubic in Parent
                                                                   X             X             X            X             X             X            X
         Rank, Race, and Gender
                 High School FE's                                                X
                      College FE's                                                             X            X             X             X            X
     Restricted to Colleges in Tier                                                                         1             2             3            5

Notes: This table reports estimates from OLS regressions of students' earnings in 2014 on standardized test scores (SAT and ACT). The sample includes
all college-goers in our 1980-1982 cohorts for whom we have either SAT or ACT scores. We convert ACT scores to the SAT 1600-point scale. Coefficients
reported are multiplied by 100 so that they can be interpreted as the effect of a 100 point increase in the SAT score on the outcome. In Panel A, the left-
hand side variable is individual wage earnings (2015 dollars), winsorized at $0 and $1 million; in Panel B, the left-side variable is individual income rank.
Each column in each panel reports the coefficient on test scores from a different regression. In Column 1, we regress the outcome on only test scores and
an indicator for whether the student took the SAT, the ACT, or both. Column 2 adds a cubic polynomial in parent income rank. Column 3 adds interactions
between the parent income cubic, race, and gender. Columns 4 and 5 add high school and college fixed effects respectively. Columns 6, 7, 8, and 9
replicate column 5, restricting the sample to students attending colleges in tiers 1 (Ivy-Plus), 2 (other elite colleges), 3 (highly selective public), and 5
(selective public) respectively. Statistics in this table are constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
             FIGURE I: Ivy-Plus Attendance Rates and SAT Scores by Parental Income

                                                                A. Parental Income among High-SAT Scorers vs. Ivy-Plus Colleges




                                                     70
                                                     60
                                Share of Students (%)
                                            40    50
                                                                                                                               Top 1%


                                 20 30               10
                                                     0




                                                                                  1              2               3                4             5
                                                                                                      Parent Income Quintile

                                                                                                      Nationwide 1300+ SAT-scorers
                                                                                                      Ivy-Plus actual


                       B. Ivy-Plus Attendance Rates by Parental Income for Students with an SAT/ACT Score of 1400


                                                                                                                                  Top 20%: 1.36x the mean
                                                                        25
                                Share attending an Ivy-Plus college (%)
                                                                20




                                                                             Bottom 20%: 0.92x the mean
                                                      15




                                                                                                     Middle 20%: 0.56x the mean
                                     5       10     0




                                                                             0            20            40            60                80            100
                                                                                                     Parent Income Percentile


Notes : Panel A plots two series: the parent income distribution of college students nationwide with an SAT/ACT
score of at least 1300 (the 93rd percentile), and the parent income distribution of students attending any of the 12 Ivy-
Plus colleges, which include the eight Ivy-League colleges as well as the University of Chicago, Stanford University,
MIT, and Duke University. See Appendix Table IV for analogous statistics at other SAT/ACT thresholds. See Table
III for the parent income distributions of tiers other than the Ivy-Plus. Panel B plots Ivy-Plus college attendance
rates by parental income percentile for students with a 1400 SAT/ACT score, the modal and median test score
among Ivy-Plus students. The plotted line is an unweighted lowess curve fit through the 100 plotted data points.
The dashed horizontal line is the average Ivy-Plus attendance rate for college students with a 1400 SAT/ACT score.
See Appendix Table VII and Appendix Figure III for analogous statistics on attendance rates at other test score
thresholds. SAT scores for 47.6% of college goers are obtained directly from the College Board; composite test
scores for another 26.2% of college goers are obtained from ACT and converted to an SAT score. We impute an
SAT/ACT score to the other 26.2% of college-goers using the SAT/ACT score of the student from the same parent
income quintile and same college tier with the nearest child earnings. This figure is constructed directly from the
individual-level microdata.
  FIGURE II: Impacts of Counterfactuals on Income Segregation and Intergenerational Mobility


     A. Fraction of Peers from Top-Quintile for Students from Bottom vs.                                                                                                             B. Fraction of Students with Low-Income Parents in Selected Tiers
                                Top Quintiles
                                               40




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        15
       Share of College Peers with Top-Quintile




                                                                                                                                                                                 Share of Students with Bottom-Quintile
                                                    Random allocation benchmark
                                    30




                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                     Parents (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                              Parents (%)
                         20




                                                                                                                                                                                            5
               10




                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
     0




                                                        Children from Bottom Quintile                Children from Top Quintile                                                                                                   Ivy Plus                       Selective Tiers                   Unselective Tiers

                                                             Actual                                                                                                                                                                     Actual
                                                             Income-Neutral Student Allocations counterfactual (0-point SAT increment)                                                                                                  Income-Neutral Student Allocations counterfactual (0-point SAT increment)
                                                             Need-Affirmative Student Allocations counterfactual (160-point SAT increment)                                                                                              Need-Affirmative Student Allocations counterfactual (160-point SAT increment)




                                                                                                                                             C. Gaps in Chance of Reaching Top Earnings Quintile
                                                                                                                                                22
                                                                                                     Rich-Poor Gap in Top Quintile Outcome Rate




                                                                                                                                                                     14.6% reduction
                                                                                                                                                                     in gap
                                                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   26.5% reduction
                                                                                                             among College-Goers (pp)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   in gap
                                                                                                          12     14      16       18
                                                                                                                                  10




                                                                                                                                                     Actual       Income-Neutral                                             Need-Affirmative
                                                                                                                                                                Student Allocations                                          Student Allocations
                                                                                                                                                                   counterfactual           counterfactual
                                                                                                                                                              (0-point SAT increment) (160-point SAT increment)


Notes : This figure shows how the income-neutral and need-affirmative student allocation counterfactuals affect income
segregation across colleges and intergenerational mobility. The income-neutral counterfactual allocates students to
colleges randomly based on their SAT/ACT scores while holding fixed the distribution of SAT/ACT scores, race,
and pre-college states to match the empirical distribution at each college. The need-affirmative student allocations
counterfactual replicates the income-neutral counterfactual after adding 160 points to the SAT/ACT scores of all
college goers from the bottom parent income quintile, 128 points to second quintile college goers, 96 points to
third quintile college goers, and 64 points to fourth quintile college goers. See Section IV.A for details on these
counterfactuals. Panel A plots the fraction of college peers from the top quintile among college students with parents
in the bottom quintile (left triplet of bars) and the top quintile (right triplet of bars) as observed in our data
and under the two counterfactuals. These statistics are based on the subset of students who attend college in our
analysis sample (i.e., excluding those who do not attend college). The dashed horizontal line shows the fraction of
college students who come from the top quintile, which is the fraction of top-quintile peers one would observe if
students were randomly allocated to colleges. See Appendix Table VIII for additional statistics on peer exposure
across colleges. Panel B plots the fraction of students from the bottom parental income quintile in actuality and
under the two counterfactuals at Ivy-Plus colleges, all Selective colleges, and all Unselective colleges. Selective tiers
comprise the top six tiers listed in Table II, while Unselective tiers comprise the remaining six tiers. Panel C plots the
gap (percentage-point difference) in the fraction of children who reach the top quintile between top-parent-income-
quintile college-goers and bottom-parent-income-quintile college-goers in actuality and under the two counterfactuals.
Brackets denote the share of the gap narrowed under each counterfactual. The calculations in Panel C assume that
80% of children's earnings differences across colleges reflect causal effects conditional on SAT/ACT scores, parental
income, and race; see section IV.B for details. In Appendix Table XI, we report results under alternative assumptions
about the causal share. This figure is constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                                       APPENDIX FIGURE I
                                                     Children's Earnings Ranks by Age of Earnings Measurement

      A. Mean Earnings Rank by Age and College Tier                                          B. Correlation of College Mean Earnings Rank across Ages




                                                                                                 Correlation of Mean Rank at Age x with Mean Rank at Age 36
                                                                                                                                                   1.00
                      90




                                            Ivy-Plus
                                            Other Elite
                                            Other Four-Year
                                            Two-Year




                                                                                                                                         0.95
      Mean Child Earnings Rank
                 70         80




                                                                                                                             0.90
      60




                                                                                                                  0.85
                      50




                                                                                                      0.80
                                       25      27          29           31         33   35
                                                         Age of Income Measurement                                                                            25     27               29         31        33   35
                                                                                                                                                                                           Age


                                       C. Fraction of Children in Top Quintile               D. Fraction of Children in Top 1% by Age and College Tier
                      80




                                                                                                                                                    25
                                            Ivy-Plus                                                                                                                Ivy-Plus
                                            Other Elite                                                                                                             Other Elite
                                            Other Four-Year                                                                                   20                    Other Four-Year
      Percent of Students in Top 20%




                                                                                                                  Percent of Students in Top 1%

                                            Two-Year                                                                                                                Two-Year
                             60




                                                                                                                           10       15
            40




                                                                                                                  5
                      20




                                                                                                                                                    0




                                       25      27          29           31         33   35                                                                     25      27          29           31         33   35
                                                         Age of Income Measurement                                                                                               Age of Income Measurement




Notes: Panel A plots the mean income rank by age for students who attended colleges in various tiers. Children's
incomes are defined as the sum of individual wage earnings and self-employment income. We measure children's
incomes at each age from 25 to 36 and assign them percentile ranks at each age based on their positions in the age-
specific distribution of incomes for children born in the same birth cohort. Elite colleges are split into Ivy-Plus (the
eight Ivy-League colleges as well as the University of Chicago, Stanford University, MIT, and Duke University) and
Other Elite (all other elite colleges). Panel B plots the (enrollment-weighted) correlation between the college-level
mean income rank of students at age 36 with the college-level mean income rank at ages 25-36. Panels C and D
replicate Panel A, changing the outcome variable to the percentage of children who reach the top quintile (Panel C)
or top 1% (Panel D) of their age- and cohort-specific earnings distribution. To maximize the age range at which
incomes are observed, we use data for children in the 1978 birth cohort in this figure, with individuals assigned to
the college they attended at age 22 (in 2000). Because children cannot be linked to parents before the 1980 birth
cohort, we use data starting with the 1980 cohort and only observe income up to age 34 in our main analysis. This
figure is constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                                  APPENDIX FIGURE II
                                                             Validation of SAT/ACT Imputation


                            300
           Imputed SAT/ACT score (de-meaned)
           -200   -100    0 -300  100    200




                                               -300   -200         -100        0          100      200   300
                                                                Actual SAT/ACT score (de-meaned)



Notes: As noted in Section IV, we impute an SAT/ACT score to the 26.2% of college goers missing an SAT and ACT
score using the SAT/ACT score of the college student from the same parent income quintile, same college selectivity
tier, and same state who has the closest level of earnings in adulthood. This figure presents a quantile-quantile plot of
imputed SAT/ACT score versus actual SAT/ACT score, within college-parent income quintile, using data from five
states where the SAT or ACT is administered to essentially all students. We construct the graph as follows. First,
we set actual SAT/ACT scores to missing for college goers in the five states (measured using the college-goer's parent
ZIP code) with the highest SAT/ACT coverage rates in our data (which range from 89% to 91% of college goers). We
then run the imputation procedure described above by parent income quintile and tier (not state). Then, within each
college-parent income quintile cell and restricting to students whose actual SAT/ACT scores were set to missing, we
de-mean imputed SAT/ACT scores and compute ventile thresholds (i.e., the 5th percentile, 10th percentile,..., 95th
percentile). We similarly compute de-meaned ventile thresholds for these students' actual SAT/ACT scores. Finally,
we restrict attention to the ten colleges with the highest enrollment of these students and plot unweighted mean
imputed quantiles versus unweighted mean actual quantiles (e.g., the bottom-left dot is mean imputed 5th percentile
versus mean actual 5th percentile). The slope of the best-fit line (1.15) is near one with a constant (0.20) near zero.
Hence, within college by parent income quintile cells, the distribution of imputed SAT/ACT scores nearly matches
the distribution of actual SAT/ACT scores. Recall that the graph pools across college-parent income quintiles. When
repeating the analysis separately for each parent income quintile, the slopes range from 1.12 to 1.20 and constants
range from -0.8 to 1.1. When repeating the analysis using the top-10 selective colleges and separately using the
top-10 unselective colleges, the slopes range from 1.14 to 1.23 and the constants range from 0.2 to 0.4. This figure
is constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                    APPENDIX FIGURE III
          Ivy-Plus Attendance Rates by Parental Income Conditional on SAT/ACT Scores

                                                                     A. Students with Scores of 1400 or 1500 on SAT/ACT




                                                            50
                          Share attending an Ivy-Plus college
                             10      20     30 0    40




                                                                 0        20            40            60             80   100
                                                                                     Parent Income Percentile
                                                                                   Children with a 1500 SAT/ACT
                                                                                   Children with a 1400 SAT/ACT




                                B. All SAT/ACT Scores, Reweighted to Match Ivy-Plus SAT/ACT Score Distribution
                                               30
                          Share attending an Ivy-Plus college
                            10       15        20
                                               5        25




                                                                 0        20            40            60             80   100
                                                                                     Parent Income Percentile



Notes: Panel A plots Ivy-Plus college attendance rates by parental income percentile for students with a 1400 or
1500 SAT/ACT score. The 1400 series exactly replicates Figure Ib. Because relatively few low-income students have
a 1500 test score, the 1500 series pools students with an SAT/ACT score between 1480-1520. Panel B replicates
Figure Ib pooling all SAT/ACT scores, weighted by the SAT/ACT score distribution of actual Ivy-Plus attendees.
That is, Panel B plots the share of students who would attend an Ivy-Plus college by parent income percentile if
each percentile's test score distribution matched the test score distribution of Ivy-Plus students. See notes to Figure
Ib for additional details. This figure is constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                                             APPENDIX FIGURE IV
                                                                 Counterfactual Low-Income Shares at the Ivy-Plus

            Share of Ivy-Plus Students from Bottom 20%




                                                                                                                                   Share of Ivy-Plus Students from Bottom 60%
                                                    20




                                                                                                                                                                           60
                                                           Income-Neutral            Need-Affirmative
                                                                  Student          Student Allocations
                                                               Allocations
                                                                                       Counterfactual




                                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                            Counterfactual
                                          15




                                                                                                                                                          40
                               10




                                                                                                                                                  30
                     5




                                                                                                            Actual Bottom-20%




                                                                                                                                         20
                                                                                                            Actual Bottom-60%




                                                                                                                                 10
          0




                                                         -100   -50          0      50     100     150      200    250     300
                                                                                 Increment to SAT Scores
                                                                 Share from Bottom 20%                   Share from Bottom 60%



Notes: This figure plots the share of students from the bottom-20% (left y-axis scale) and bottom-60% (right y-
axis scale) in the Ivy-Plus tier, varying the constant added to bottom-20% college-goers' SAT/ACT on the x-axis.
Second, third, and fourth quintile college goers' SAT/ACT scores are incremented upward by 80%, 60%, and 40% of
the bottom-20%'s upward bonus, respectively. These shares are computed following the method used to construct
the need-affirmative student allocations counterfactual described in Section IV.A. The vertical lines show the shares
that result from our baseline income-neutral student allocations counterfactual (0 point increment for low-income
students) and baseline need-affirmative student allocations counterfactual (160 point increment). The horizontal
lines show the actual shares of students from the bottom 20% and bottom 60% at Ivy-Plus colleges in our analysis
sample. This figure is constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                                     APPENDIX FIGURE V
                               College Attendance Rates in 1098-T and Pell Records by Parent Income


                         100     80
            Percentage in College
          20     40      60
                         0




                                      0       20            40                 60       80               100
                                                                 Parent Rank
                                               IRS Data                             Pell Grant Data
                                               Combined IRS + Pell Data



Notes: This figure plots the fraction of students in the 1980-82 birth cohorts in our analysis sample who attend college
at any time during the years in which they turn 19-22 by parental income percentile. The series in open circles plots
the fraction of students in each parental income percentile with a college attendance record in the NSLDS data only.
The series in triangles plots the fraction of students in each parental income percentile with a college attendance
record in the 1098-T data only. The series in solid circles plots the fraction who attend college based on the union of
the NSLDS and 1098-T data, the measure of attendance we use in our empirical analysis. This figure is constructed
directly from the individual-level microdata.
                                              APPENDIX FIGURE VI
                             Relationship Between SAT Scores and Earnings in Adulthood


              75
             70
          Child Rank
          60  55
             50  65




                       600              800            1000                  1200                 1400
                                                     SAT/ACT Score

                                       No Controls             Controlling for race x sex x cubic
                                                               in parent rank and HS FE's




Notes: This figure shows the association between students' earnings ranks in 2014 and their standardized test scores
(SAT and ACT). The sample includes all college-goers in our 1980-1982 cohorts for whom we have either SAT or ACT
scores. We convert ACT scores to the SAT 1600-point scale. We construct binned scatter plots by first regressing
children's ranks on twenty indicators (5 percentile point bins) for their test scores and a set of controls. In the
series in blue circles, the only control is an indicator for whether the student took the SAT, the ACT, or both tests;
in the series in red triangles, we additionally control for a cubic in parental income rank interacted with race and
sex as well as high school fixed effects. We then plot the estimated child ranks and mean SAT scores within each
of the twenty bins, recentering both variables so that their means match the overall sample means. This figure is
constructed directly from the individual-level microdata.
