                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




A FISCAL THEORY OF MONETARY POLICY WITH PARTIALLY-REPAID LONG-TERM
                               DEBT

                                      John H. Cochrane

                                     Working Paper 26745
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26745


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




I thank editors and reviewers of previous drafts for many useful comments. Code and updates are
at http://johnhcochrane.com. The views expressed herein are those of the author and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by John H. Cochrane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
A Fiscal Theory of Monetary Policy with Partially-Repaid Long-Term Debt
John H. Cochrane
NBER Working Paper No. 26745
February 2020, Revised in October 2020
JEL No. E3,E31,E32,E4,E5,E6,E62,E63

                                          ABSTRACT

I construct a simple model with sticky prices and interest rate targets, closed by fiscal theory of
the price level with long-term debt and fiscal and monetary policy rules. Fiscal surpluses rise
following periods of deficit, to repay accumulated debt, but surpluses do not respond to arbitrary
unexpected inflation and deflation, so fiscal policy remains active. This specification avoids
many puzzles and counterfactual predictions of standard active-fiscal specifications. The model
produces reasonable responses to fiscal and monetary policy shocks, including smooth and
protracted disinflation following monetary or fiscal tightening.


John H. Cochrane
Hoover Institution
434 Galvez Mall
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
and NBER
john.cochrane@stanford.edu
                                           FTMP                                           1


1   Introduction

This paper advances the fiscal theory of monetary policy, bringing us closer to a realistic
model useful for policy analysis.
       A "fiscal theory of monetary policy" substitutes active fiscal policy for active mon-
etary policy to complete the determination of inflation and output in standard monetary
policy models, in particular models in the new-Keynesian/DSGE tradition that include
intertemporal optimization, potentially rational expectations, market clearing, price stick-
iness or other nominal frictions, and a central bank that follows an interest rate target.
Under "active" fiscal policy (Leeper (1991)), the government debt valuation equation de-
termines unexpected inflation, and provides the extra condition needed to uniquely de-
termine equilibria under an interest rate target. This condition replaces the active mon-
etary policy assumption that the central bank sends the economy to an explosively infla-
tionary or deflationary path for all but one value of the inflation rate. I develop the model
and I analyze of the effects of fiscal and monetary policy shocks.
       The central innovation of this paper is a fiscal policy process in which the govern-
ment repays deficits with subsequent surpluses, partly or in full, yet fiscal policy remains
active. Fiscal surpluses respond to changes in the value of debt that result from accumu-
lated deficits or changes in real interest rates, but surpluses do not respond to changes
in the value of debt that result from arbitrary unexpected inflation or deflation. Equiv-
alently, fiscal surpluses follow an s-shaped moving average process, in which a shock to
deficits leads to eventual surpluses.
       This specification resolves a conundrum of current models, surveyed below, that
allow active fiscal policy. In an active-fiscal regime, these models require surpluses to be
positively correlated. The government cannot promise fully or even substantially to re-
pay deficits by subsequent surpluses. As a result, in an active-fiscal regime, these models
make several related and counterfactual predictions. They predict that inflation is large
and volatile; that inflation and deficits are strongly correlated; that higher surpluses raise
rather than reduce the debt; that deficits are financed entirely by inflating away out-
standing debt and not by borrowing; and that that government bond real returns have
stock-like volatility and cyclical variation and therefore stock-like average returns.
       In this literature, these pathologies are not present in passive-fiscal specifications.
In that case, the surplus responds to the value of debt, and therefore deficits are at least
 2                                       COCHRANE



partially repaid by subsequent surpluses. But since the surplus responds to all variation
in the value of debt, including that brought on by arbitrary unexpected inflation, the
regime that can repay debts must have passive fiscal policy.
       For this reason, typical models that measure or test regimes find an active-fiscal
regime, if at all, only for short periods, usually with high inflation such as the 1970s, in
which the counterfactual puzzles are dominated by even more counterfactual predic-
tions of their active-money specifications. To avoid the puzzles, they typically estimate
that most of the sample, especially the post-1980 period, is in a passive fiscal regime. By
generalizing the active-fiscal regime to allow partial or full repayment of debts, the fiscal
specification of this paper can expand the applicability of the active-fiscal regime.
       Indeed, I write the model in a form that reflects the observational equivalence be-
tween active-fiscal and active-money regimes. Any data that this model can fit by active
money, it can fit by active fiscal policy. One can fit the entire sample by an active-fiscal
regime.
       The remaining ingredients are well known. I choose minimal additional ingredi-
ents that exhibit a plausible model, to examine the effect of the fiscal policy specification
in a transparent and well-understood environment.
       I specify long-term nominal government debt with a geometric maturity struc-
ture. Long-term debt helps the model to produce a negative response of inflation to
unexpectedly higher nominal interest rates, without specifying a negative fiscal shock
contemporaneous to the monetary policy shock as happens in standard passive-fiscal
new-Keynesian models. (Long-expected and persistent interest rate rises still uniformly
raise inflation, as they do in the standard models.) Higher nominal interest rates lower
the nominal value of long-term debt. If there is no change the present value of surpluses,
debt is undervalued at the original price level. People try to buy more debt, and thereby
demand fewer goods and services. The price level declines until debt regains its real
market value. Variation in the real interest rate and endogenous surpluses alter this un-
derlying mechanism in interesting ways, but the basic mechanism remains. (This insight
is due to Sims (2011).)
       I use the standard textbook new-Keynesian IS and Phillips curves, despite their
well-known empirical shortcomings. This specification allows me to focus on the effects
of the novel fiscal specification, in a familiar playground, but limits the model's direct
                                            FTMP                                            3


empirical applicability.
         Sticky prices mean that real interest rates vary, even with (as here) no shocks to
preferences or technology. Discount rate variation is important to this model's predic-
tions of the effects of fiscal and monetary policy. For example, a rise in nominal interest
rates with sticky prices raises real interest rates. Higher real interest rates raise the dis-
count rate for government debt, lowering its present value, and providing an inflationary
force.
         Other than the central innovation described above, I specify standard fiscal and
monetary policy rules. The interest rate target and the surplus respond to inflation and
output.
         The main results of this paper are model responses to persistent fiscal and mone-
tary policy shocks. A fiscal shock is a shock to deficits, with no contemporaneous change
in the monetary policy disturbance. A monetary policy shock is a shock to the interest
rate target, with no contemporaneous change to the fiscal policy disturbance.
         An unexpected deficit shock leads to a protracted inflation, and via the Phillips
curve it leads to an output expansion. When monetary policy endogenously reacts to
inflation, monetary policy moderates the initial inflation, by spreading inflation further
forward. In this way, monetary policy rules that react to inflation and output have a novel
and useful stabilizing role in an active-fiscal regime. The deficit shock does not just lead
to a one-period price level jump, as in flexible price models with one-period debt. The
smooth inflation response, modulated by monetary policy, is an important step to a re-
alistic description of a fiscal inflation. Today's deficits also lead to a long string of future
surpluses which partially repay the accumulated debts, and the surplus responds to debt
in equilibrium. Both mechanisms naturally help to buffer the inflationary effect of fiscal
shocks, but both observations could lead one to falsely infer a passive fiscal regime.
         An unexpected monetary policy shock leads to a protracted disinflation, and an
output decline. The protracted disinflation comes largely from the long-term debt effect.
It overcomes the "Fisherian" prediction of related models that higher interest rates raise
inflation. Endogenous surplus variation amplifies the deflationary impact of monetary
policy: Higher interest rates raise future inflation. Higher future inflation induces higher
future surpluses, and hence lower current inflation. Endogenous discount rate variation
buffers the deflationary effect, however. The rise in nominal rates raises real rates and
 4                                       COCHRANE



discount rates, which lowers the present value of debt, an inflationary force.
       The results are novel in part because the question is different. The interesting
monetary policy shock in an active-fiscal model holds fiscal policy constant in some way
­ here, the residual in the surplus rule. Conventional new-Keynesian models specify (im-
plicitly) a contemporaneous "passive" fiscal contraction, which produces disinflation.
Conventional estimates do not try to orthogonalize monetary and fiscal policy actions.
       This paper's point is also methodological. You may have recognized problems with
standard new-Keynesian active-money model and you may have seen how fiscal theory
can repair such model's pathologies in a simple way. (My list features Cochrane (2011a),
and Cochrane (2017a), Cochrane (2018) on zero bound issues.) But you may have been
daunted by theoretical controversies that pervade the literature, by the impression that
the model would make immediately silly predictions, by estimates in the literature that
reject fiscal regimes or find them only in very limited subsamples, or by the impression
that you would have to do something fundamentally hard and different. Additional iden-
tifying restrictions, Bayesian estimation, and Markov-switching may have put you off.
       This paper shows by contrast that a completely active-fiscal theory of monetary
policy model can be easily built, can surmount classic criticisms, and produces rea-
sonable responses, avoiding pathological predictions such as price level jumps and sur-
pluses that raise rather than lower the value of debt. Indeed, this paper shows by example
that constructing a completely fiscal theory of monetary policy models is a nearly trivial
modification of active-money new-Keynesian DSGE models.
       Observational equivalence, and to transparently make this methodological point,
are additional reasons that I keep the model simple, using textbook IS and Phillips curves
and simple policy rules that do not well describe the data, and therefore I do not proceed
to identification (the hard part), estimation and testing, or even comparing impulse re-
sponses to my own atheoretical VAR estimates in Cochrane (2019). Via observational
equivalence, one can rewrite any active-money model as active-fiscal, and quickly incor-
porate any empirical success of the entire literature. Adding a sensible fiscal specification
and active fiscal policy is unrelated, really, to the complexities which deliver better em-
pirical performance of the IS, Phillips, and other parts of the conventional model.
       Models may be observationally equivalent, but the questions one is led to ask, and
the answers one will find, are potentially quite different. Adding the fiscal theory begs a
                                            FTMP                                             5


reasonable description of fiscal policy, usually neglected or shoved off to footnotes about
lump-sum taxes, and adding fiscal variables to the model's evaluation. The main con-
tribution of this paper is aimed squarely at repairing the damage that a standard form
of fiscal elaboration does to this project. A fiscal perspective leads one to ask different
questions. For example, one is led to ask for the response of monetary policy shocks
holding fiscal policy constant in some sense, whereas an active-money passive-fiscal per-
spective wants correlated monetary and fiscal policy shocks. Similarly, just which model
one should solve ­ which IS and Phillips curves, and which currently popular ingredi-
ents such as financial frictions and heterogeneous constrained agents help the model to
fit various phenomena ­ remains a large, open, and fertile field of investigation, and the
answers are likely to change when a detailed fiscal side of the model, and interactions
between fiscal affairs and the rest of the model are built in.
       This paper is organized to get quickly to the main contribution, but adds ingre-
dients one by one so the reader can understand their role in the final model. Section
2 sets out linearized identities involving debt and inflation. They also allow us to see
some mechanisms directly. Section 3 lays out the basic idea of a fiscal theory of mone-
tary policy in a flexible price model, and its shortcomings that motivate more elaborate
ingredients. Section 4 explains the fiscal policy process in this simple environment, Sec-
tion 5 adds long-term debt. Section 6 lays out the full model with price stickiness, long-
term debt, and policy rules that respond to endogenous variables. Section 7 presents
responses to fiscal and monetary policy shocks. Section 8 explains how the fiscal policy
specification resolves, and is necessitated by, a variety of puzzles. Finally, Section 9 re-
views the literature in detail, establishing that this fiscal specification is novel, useful, and
relating this paper to others in the literature. Though this is not the usual organization, it
is easier to understand the motivation of this model and its results, and to compare those
to other work, once the reader knows what this model and its results are.




2    Linearized debt identities

I use a set of linearized identities to express the fiscal side of the model including long-
term debt and time-varying bond returns. These identities are derived in the Appendix
to Cochrane (2019).
  6                                                        COCHRANE



         Start with the linearized evolution of the real market value of nominal government
debt,
                                                    n
                                       vt+1 = vt + rt +1 - t+1 - st+1 .                     (1)

Log debt at period t + 1, vt+1 , is equal to its value at period t, vt , increased by the log
                                                     n
nominal return on the portfolio of government bonds rt +1 less log inflation t+1 , and

less the real primary surplus st+1 . The parameter  = e-r is a constant describing the
linearization point. I take  = 1 in the numerical calculation below. We can use this value
if we rule out unit roots as well as explosive roots in the solution.
         Precisely, st+1 is  times the real primary surplus scaled by steady state debt. The
other terms of (1) are logarithms. I derive (1) by Taylor-expanding the nonlinear exact
debt accumulation equation in the level of the surplus, rather than the log, because sur-
pluses are often negative. For brevity, I refer to st+1 as simply the "surplus." Cochrane
(2019) defines the variables as ratios to GDP, and includes a GDP growth term in (1). For
simplicity I abstract from stochastic growth here, but it is an important transformation
for empirical work.
         In the case of one-period debt, the ex-post nominal return equals the interest rate,
 n
rt      = it . Long-term debt shows up in this accounting by the presence of an ex-post
   +1
                n
nominal return rt +1 potentially not equal to the interest rate. If long-term bond prices
       n is negative and the market value of debt v
fall, rt +1                                         t+1 falls.

         The main model below uses (1) directly, as the matrix solution method implicitly
solves it forward and imposes stationarity of the value of debt vt and all other variables.
However, it is useful to solve (1) forward explicitly, as this step allows us to solve sim-
pler models analytically and thereby to understand the mechanisms behind computed
solutions of the larger model.
         Iterating (1) forward, we have a present value identity,

                                                    
                                    j -1
                   vt =                    st+j -          j -1 rt
                                                                 n                T
                                                                   +j - t+j + lim  vt+T .   (2)
                                                                             T 
                          j =1                      j =1


I impose the infinitely-lived consumer's transversality condition, so this identity holds in
expectation and the limiting term vanishes. Taking innovations Et+1  Et+1 - Et and
                                              FTMP                                                  7


rearranging, we have an innovation identity,

                                                                  
                   n
  Et+1 t+1 - Et+1 rt +1 = -             j Et+1 st+1+j +                  j Et+1 rt
                                                                                 n
                                                                                   +1+j - t+1+j .   (3)
                                 j =0                             j =1


A decline in the present value of surpluses must correspond to a lower real value of the
debt. This reduction can come about by unexpected inflation, or in the presence of long-
                                                                                    n .
term debt by a decline in nominal long-term bond prices and therefore a low return rt +1

       The second term on the right hand side captures discount rate effects. If expected
real returns on government bonds rise, the present value of surpluses declines, which
requires either inflation or negative bond returns.
       When does a decline in the present value of surpluses result in inflation vs. a de-
cline in nominal bond prices? To eliminate the bond return on the left-hand side of (3),
and to include long-term debt in the model below, we need bond pricing equations. As-
suming a geometric maturity structure, in which the face value of maturity j debt de-
clines at the rate  j , we have a second linearized identity

                                          n
                                         rt +1 = qt+1 - qt                                          (4)


where qt is the log price at time t of the portfolio of government bonds. We can solve this
identity forward to express the bond price as the inverse of its future returns,

                                                 
                                        qt = -           j rt
                                                            n
                                                              +1+j .                                (5)
                                                 j =0


Taking innovations Et+1 of this equation we have we have

                                 
                      n
                Et+1 rt +1 = -           j Et+1 (rt
                                                  n
                                                    +1+j - t+1+j ) + t+1+j .                        (6)
                                 j =1

                                      n
An unexpectedly low bond return Et+1 rt +1 corresponds mechanically to higher ex-

pected future nominal returns, as bond prices are the inverse of bond yields. And nomi-
nal expected returns equal real returns plus inflation.
       We can now use (6) to eliminate the bond return from (3), which gives us an iden-
    8                                            COCHRANE



tity linking inflation, surpluses, and discount rates directly:

                                                         
             j Et+1 t+1+j = -          j Et+1 st+1+j +          (j -  j )Et+1 rt
                                                                               n
                                                                                 +1+j - t+1+j . (7)
     j =0                       j =0                     j =1


In the presence of long-term debt  > 0, a fiscal shock can be met by drawn-out inflation
rather than a one-period price level shock. The drawn-out inflation devalues long-term
                                         n in (3) essentially marks the future inflation
bonds as they come due. The bond return rt +1

to market. Drawn-out inflation is more realistic than one-period price-level jumps or
i.i.d. inflation. Real expected return variation adds a discount rate effect.
            Identities (3) and (7) allow us to account for the variation of unexpected infla-
tion. Unexpected inflation must stem from revisions in expected surpluses or revisions
in discount rates. Cochrane (2019) examines these decompositions in a VAR. I use these
identities here to understand the roots of inflation in the model.




3       Simplest FTMP model

To introduce the concept of a fiscal theory of monetary policy, and to establish a bench-
mark for response functions, start with flexible prices, a constant real interest rate, one-
period debt  = 0, and exogenous policy processes {st }, {it }. The model is composed of
only the Fisher equation, i.e. the linearized intertemporal first-order condition


                                               it = Et t+1 ,                                    (8)


the debt accumulation equation (1) which simplifies to


                                       vt+1 = vt + it - t+1 - st+1 ,


and the transversality condition that the value of debt cannot explode.
            As above, we can solve the debt accumulation equation forward and take innova-
tions to complete the model with the inflation identity (3) or (7). These relations simplify
to                                                          
                                 Et+1 t+1 = -Et+1                 j st+1+j .                    (9)
                                                           j =0
                                            FTMP                                            9


Unexpected inflation equals the negative of the revision of the present value of real pri-
mary surpluses.
       I specify "monetary policy" here as control over the nominal interest rate, with-
out changing surpluses. Central banks broadly speaking cannot directly affect taxes or
spending. By setting an interest rate target {it }, the bank can still determine expected
inflation by (8). The central bank remains powerful in this fiscal model.
       I specify "fiscal policy" here as control over real primary surpluses, without chang-
ing the nominal interest rate target. Such fiscal policy determines unexpected inflation,
the instantaneous response of inflation to a shock Et+1 t+1 , via (9). That is the entire
effect of fiscal policy on inflation. For this latter step to work, we need "active" fiscal pol-
icy, that surpluses do not respond to unexpected inflation in such a way that (9) holds for
any value of unexpected inflation.
       This flexible-price, money-free model is Fisherian: A rise in interest rates, with
no change in surpluses, produces a rise in expected inflation one period later via it =
Et t+1 , and it produces no change in current inflation Et+1 t+1 = 0. In response to a
fiscal shock, this model can only produce one period of inflation, a price-level jump that
devalues outstanding short-term (by assumption) bonds. If monetary policy chooses to
follow this inflation by raising interest rates, we will see a persistent inflation, but that
is an endogenous effect of monetary policy not essential to the fiscal policy shock and
such persistent inflation does not reduce the initial inflation shock. If we wish to describe
events such as the 1970s as a response to fiscal events, it would be more attractive to have
a model in which fiscal policy shocks directly lead to a drawn-out inflation response.
       Obviously, if we wish to have an empirically realistic model, we need to generalize
this simple structure. Therefore, I add sticky prices, long-term debt, policy rules, and a
more realistic fiscal policy. But as we will see the basic logic of its solution remains.
       The flexible-price new-Keynesian version of this model specifies that surpluses
are passive in (9), so the latter holds for any unexpected inflation. This model selects
unexpected inflation by an active monetary policy. It can produce a negative inflation
response by implicitly assuming a coincident fiscal contraction, a negative shock in (9),
achieved by "passive" fiscal authorities. The fiscal theory of monetary policy can produce
the same response, but would call it a coordinated fiscal and monetary shock.
    10                                      COCHRANE



4        Fiscal policy

I present here a simple version of the fiscal policy specification in the context of this
frictionless model. We add to the model of the last section a specific process for real
primary surpluses. The model is


                                       it = Et t+1                                       (10)
                                            
                                    st+1 = vt + us,t+1                                   (11)
                                                     
                                   vt +1 = vt - Et+1 t+1 - st+1                          (12)

                                   vt+1 = vt - Et+1 t+1 - st+1                           (13)
                                  
                             Et+1 t +1 = -s s,t+1                                        (14)

                                   us,t+1 = s us,t + s,t+1 .                             (15)


Equation (10) repeats the flexible price model with an interest rate target. For now, con-
sider a fixed interest rate target; we will add a monetary policy rule later. Equations (11),
(12) and (14) jointly describe the evolution of primary surpluses st . We will, bit by bit,
see how these work. Equation (13) is the debt evolution equation (1), with one-period
              n , substituting in the Fisher equation i = E 
debt so it = rt +1                                     t   t t+1 and with a constant real

interest rate. Comparing (12) to (13) we can interpret the former: The latent state vari-
       accumulates past surpluses and deficits as does the value of debt, but v  ignores
able vt
changes in the value of debt that come from unexpected inflation different from the tar-
                     . As we shall see, this specification gives us a fiscal policy that
get Et+1 t+1 = Et+1 t +1

is active, and rules out multiple equilibria, but nonetheless pays off debts accumulated
from past deficits in a way that st = us,t plus an AR(1) for us,t would not do.
          To see how this specification determines unexpected inflation, substitute (11) into
(12) to obtain
                                                    
                            vt +1 = (1 - )vt - Et+1 t+1 - us,t+1 .

                      } is stationary, v  grows at less than the steady state interest
Thus, assuming {Et+1 t +1

rate for  > 0, and it is stationary for  > 1 - . (Choosing  = 0 conveniently unites the
two cases.) Next, differencing (12) and (13) we have

                                   -1        
                (vt+1 - vt +1 ) =     (vt - vt ) - -1 Et+1 t+1 - Et+1 t
                                                                      
                                                                        +1 .             (16)
                                           FTMP                                          11


        does not explode, the condition that debt v does not explode requires v = v 
Since vt                                           t                           t   t
                     .
and Et+1 t+1 = Et+1 t +1

        By making surpluses not respond to arbitrary unexpected inflation, debt does not
respond to arbitrary unexpected inflation, and fiscal policy chooses a single value of un-
expected inflation, which it = Et t+1 and an interest rate target by themselves leave
undetermined. But surpluses do respond to increases in the value of debt brought about
by past deficits. This active-fiscal government can borrow, and promise to pay off the
debt.
        We can view the government in this model as having an interest rate target it and
                                   . Expected inflation follows from the interest rate
an unexpected inflation target Et t +1

target via it = Et t+1 . We can also start with an arbitrary stochastic inflation target,
  }. The government implements the inflation target by setting the interest rate target
{t
           
to it = Et t +1 and by using the unexpected value of the inflation target in the fiscal rule

(12).
        Equation (14) is not necessary. We could just substitute -s s,t+1 into the state
                                                                                
variable evolution (12). But expressing it this way allows us to interpret Et+1 t +1 as an

unexpected inflation target.
        The parameter s measures how much the unexpected inflation target moves when
there is a fiscal shock. It is part of the policy process. Through s , a surplus shock changes
the unexpected inflation target, which changes the state variable v  , which changes sub-
sequent surpluses. Thus, (14) describes how much future surpluses respond to pay off a
current deficit shock. The  notation thinks of this parameter as a regression coefficient
of the stochastic inflation target on the shock in question.
        The fiscal and monetary policy parts of the model separate. Inflation determina-
tion now reduces to the pair


                                           it = Et t+1

                                   Et t+1 = -s s,t+1 .


Fiscal affairs only enter into inflation determination via the latter condition. Given the
equilibrium interest rate and inflation process, we can then find the surplus and value of
 12                                       COCHRANE



debt from the equilibrium versions of (11), (12) and (15),


                                  st+1 = vt + us,t+1

                                vt+1 = vt - s s,t+1 - st+1

                                us,t+1 = s us,t + s,t+1 .


       That fiscal events only feed back to affect inflation through the parameter s , here
and in the sticky price model to follow, is a feature not a bug. This model is constructed
to be a transparent and minimal extension of the standard model. It's easy to add ad-
ditional feedback effects if one wants them, for example by putting government expen-
ditures in utility or by adding distorting taxes. Indeed, an enormous literature, some
mentioned in the review section, introduces fiscal policy in DSGE models to study such
effects. But these features would cloud the picture of how fiscal price level determina-
tion per se works. Let us first really understand fiscal price determination, then add the
separate question how spending and taxes alter equilibrium inflation and output. Also,
such feedback from fiscal affairs to inflation occurs equally under active monetary policy
specifications, so it really is orthogonal to the purposes of this paper.


4.1   Is it reasonable?

Once one considers its possibility, specifying that fiscal policy responds to changes in the
value of debt that result from accumulated deficits and (later) from changes in the real
interest rate, but does not respond to re-valuation of the debt stemming from arbitrary
unexpected inflation or deflation, is not unreasonable or artificial.
       Governments often do raise surpluses after a time of deficits. Doing so makes
good on the explicit or implicit promise made when borrowing, and sustains the repu-
tation needed for future borrowing. Governments often raise revenue from debt sales,
and the value of debt increases after such sales, which essentially proves that investors
believe surpluses will rise to pay off new debts. We see many institutions in place to try
to guarantee or pre-commit to repayment, rather than default or inflation, and those in-
stitutions help the government to borrow in the first place.
       But the same government may well refuse to accommodate changes in the value
of debt that come from arbitrary unexpected inflation and deflation, and people may
                                            FTMP                                       13


well expect such behavior. Should, say, a 50% cumulative deflation break out, likely in
a severe recession, does anyone expect the U.S. government to sharply raise taxes or to
drastically cut spending, to pay an unexpected, and, it will surely be argued, undeserved,
real windfall to nominal bondholders ­ Wall Street bankers, wealthy individuals, and for-
eigners, especially foreign central banks? Will not the government regard the deflation
as a temporary aberration, prices "disconnected from fundamentals," like a stock mar-
ket "bubble," that fiscal policy should ignore until it passes? Indeed, is the response to
such an event not more likely to be additional fiscal stimulus, deliberate unbacked fiscal
expansion, not heartless austerity? Concretely, Cochrane (2017a) and Cochrane (2018)
argue that this expectation is why the standard new-Keynesian prediction of a deflation-
ary shock at the zero bound, and the old-Keynesian predictions of a "deflation spiral,"
did not happen in 2008-2009. Many economists call now for governments to pursue
helicopter-drop unbacked fiscal stimulus in response to below-target inflation. Such a
policy likewise represents a refusal to passively adapt surpluses to deflation, but to repay
debts in normal circumstances. Jacobson, Leeper, and Preston (2019) argue persuasively
that the Roosevelt Administration, in its abandonment of the Gold standard, executed
such an unbacked fiscal expansion while preserving its reputation for repaying normal-
times debt. Conversely, is not fiscal austerity a common response to inflation?
       Committing not to accommodate arbitrary unexpected inflation and deflation is
as wise as committing to repay debts. The former allows the government to produce a
stable price level, just as the latter allows the government to borrow when in need.
       We can see institutions and reputations at work to make these commitments. A
gold standard is a commitment to raise taxes to buy gold in the event of inflation, or to
borrow gold against credible future taxes, rather than to enjoy the bounty of an inflation-
induced debt reduction. An inflation target signals the government's fiscal commitment
to pay off nominal debts at the inflation target, neither more nor less, as much or possi-
bly more than it signals the government's desired value for coefficients in a central bank
Taylor rule. Many economists have suggested an analogous fiscal rule that raises sur-
pluses in response to inflation, and runs deficits in the event of deflation, but still pays
off debts incurred from past deficits should the price level come out on target. Such a
rule is exactly the sort of policy I describe.
 14                                        COCHRANE



4.2   The surplus moving average




The structure (10)-(15) also allows us to specify surplus process with an s-shaped moving
average that can promise full or partial debt repayment, within the AR(1) structure that
is convenient for model solution. It is not the only way to specify such a process, but it is
an elegant and convenient way to do so. Examining the implied surplus moving average,
i.e. the response to a surplus shock, gives insight for how the model works.
       To see the basic point most clearly, simplify to it = 0, and thus Et t+1 = 0. In
equilibrium, the surplus and debt now follow


                                    st+1 = vt + us,t+1                                  (17)

                                   vt+1 = vt + s s,t+1 - st+1                           (18)

                                 us,t+1 = s us,t + s,t+1 .                              (19)


To find the implied moving average representation of the surplus process, which I denote

                                                    
                             st+1 = a(L)s,t+1 =           aj s,t+1-j ,                  (20)
                                                   j =0


first find the debt vt process. Substituting (17) in (18),


                            vt+1 = (1 - )vt + s s,t+1 - us,t+1

                                   1    1
                          vt+1 =             (s s,t+1 - us,t+1 ) .
                                    1 - 1- L
                                          

Substituting back to the s process (17),

                             L
               st+1 =                (s s,t+1 - us,t+1 ) + us,t+1
                         1 - 1- L
                              
                                         
                                 L        us,t+1 + s            L
               st+1   = 1 -                                       s,t+1 .               (21)
                             1-   1 - 
                                       L                 1 - 1- L
                                                                         


This representation is convenient for some intuition below. We can go further, gathering
                                              FTMP                                       15


the terms of the first polynomial and substituting in the disturbance process, to write

                                         1
                                      1-   L au (L) + s L
                             st+1 =                1-           s,t+1 ,                  (22)
                                              1-     L


where, reflecting (19),
                                                      1
                                       au (L)              .
                                                   1 - s L
Some points below hold for any disturbance process, so I introduce the general notation
au (L).
          We can think of this calculation as the surplus moving average representation im-
plied by the model, as I have derived it. We can also regard this surplus moving average as
an "exogenous" surplus process, in the usual way of thinking of such models. We thereby
think about (17)-(19) as just a way to write the surplus moving average (22) in state-space
form, but all the economics of the model flow from this surplus process directly. Indeed,
we can derive the representation (17)-(19) as a consequence of the surplus moving aver-
age (22). This way of thinking of the model avoids the entire v and v  business. I offer this
observation as an alternative for a reader who finds the v and v  expression distasteful or
confusing, and similarly as reassurance that it really does not do anything unusual in the
end.
          To be explicit at the cost of some repetition, in this way of thinking, we write the
model as


                                it = Et t+1

                              st+1 = a(L)s,t+1 ,
                                               
                       Et+1 t+1 = -Et+1               j st+1+j = -a()s,t+1 ,             (23)
                                               j =0


and a(L) is given by (22). The right hand equality in (23) comes from Hansen, Roberds,
and Sargent (1992). The Appendix includes a self-contained derivation for convenience.
In the case of the surplus moving average (22), we have


                                           a() = s
 16                                            COCHRANE



so unexpected inflation follows


                           Et+1 t+1 = -a()s,t+1 = -s s,t+1 .                            (24)


We just derived unexpected inflation, equation (24) of the original specification, from the
surplus moving average (22).
       Similarly, we can derive the value of debt, and thereby (17) of the original specifi-
cation. The value of debt is given by

                                    
                                                         a(L) - a()
                          vt = Et          j -1 st+j =              s,t+1 .             (25)
                                                          1 - L-1
                                    j =1


The right hand expression is the Hansen and Sargent (1981) prediction formula, adapted
to this model's timing. The Appendix gives a self-contained derivation. Substituting the
surplus moving average (22) on the right hand side of (25), we derive relation (17). To
show this result, I calculate vt - st+1 , and I show the result is equal to -us,t+1 :

                 a(L) - a()
 vt - st+1 =                - a(L) s,t+1
                  1 - L-1
                                          a()
            =             - 1 a(L) -            s,t+1
                 1 - L-1               1 - L-1
                  1
            =              - 1 + L-1 a(L) - s s,t+1
              1 - L-1
                                                                            
                                                  1                  
                  1                 1-        1 -   L  a u ( L ) +  s L     
                            -1
            =             L     1 -      L                               - s s,t+1
              1 - L-1                               1 - 1-  L
                                                                            
                    1
            =              L-1 - 1 au (L) + s  - s s,t+1
                1 - L-1
            = -au (L)s,t+1 = -us,t+1 .


       In this reading of (17), the surplus does not "respond" to debt. Surpluses are ex-
ogenous and debt is determined by the present value of surpluses. Equation (17) is an
observed correlation between the debt and surplus process.
                                          FTMP                                        17


4.3   The s-shaped moving average

However one thinks of the model, by looking at the surplus moving average we under-
stand better how the fiscal policy process works. With s = a() = 0, this surplus process
always pays back any incurred debts. Any positive responses aj , including a0 = 1 by def-
inition, are met by a corresponding set of negative aj . (Hansen, Roberds, and Sargent
(1992) show a() = 0 is the criterion for present value budget balance with constant in-
terest rates, and indeed its only observable implication.) For example, a(L) = 1 - -1 L
or st+1 = t+1 - -1 t has a() = 0. A shock 1 = -1 leads to s1 = -1, s2 = +. The deficit
is paid back the next period with interest.
      The s = a() = 0 case reminds us that fiscal theory of the price level does not
require that the government refuses to pay its debts, or always inflates away debt. This
specification provides a contrary example in which the government never inflates away
any debt and always repays debt with subsequent surpluses. The constant price level is
nonetheless determined by fiscal theory and deficits and debt vary as much as one likes.
      The first term of the surplus moving average expressed as (21) shows more clearly
how this model generates debt repayment in the case s = 0. This term of the moving
average has a movement in one direction, 1, followed by a string of small negative move-
ments in the opposite direction. They are small, since  is a small number ­ the fraction
of outstanding debt repaid by primary surpluses each period. And they decay over time
slowly, with a (1 - ) autocorrelation coefficient. Adding dynamics us,t+1 smears out the
shock, giving a stream of deficits which are only slowly followed by a longer-lasting small
AR(1) in the opposite direction.
      However, we want to study economies that do have some unexpected inflation, in
which part of a deficit may be inflated away. The s = 0 parameter of this parametric
surplus process allows us to introduce unexpected inflation in a convenient way. The
second term of (21) adds a small, AR(1)-shaped decay in the direction of the original
shock. This term adds a force by which the government does not fully pay back its ac-
cumulated deficits, and produces some unexpected inflation which inflates away and
devalues some of the outstanding initial debt.
      Figure 1 presents two cases of the surplus and debt process (17)-(19), equivalently
the surplus moving average (22). The dashed lines present s = 0.7,  = 0.1, s = 0. I plot
the response to a deficit shock, s,1 = -1, which tells a cleaner story. The surplus starts
 18                                                     COCHRANE




                  2




             1.5                                           v

                  1




             0.5

                                               s
                  0

                                           u
             -0.5




              -1

                      0          5                 10              15      20              25

                                                         Time
Figure 1: Response of the simple example surplus process to a unit deficit shock. The
solid lines present the case s = 1.0. The dashed lines present the case s = 0. Other
parameters  = 1, s = 0.7,  = 0.1.



by following the AR(1) pattern of the disturbance us,t . These deficits increase the debt vt .
In turn, the increased debt slowly pushes up the surpluses. Eventually the deficits cross
the zero line to surpluses, and positive surpluses start to pay down the debt. The many
small positive responses on the right hand side of the graph in this case exactly pay off
                                j -1 s
the initial deficits,     j =1         j   = a() = 0, and there is no unexpected inflation.
                                                                               j -1 s
       The solid lines plot the case s = 1.0. In this case               j =1        j   = -a() = -1,
so the entire initial deficit s1 is inflated away by a unit unexpected inflation. We see this
behavior by the fact that the initial debt response is zero ­ despite a unit deficit, the two
terms on the right hand side of (18) offset. Debt rises subsequently however. The per-
sistent disturbance us adds persistent deficits sj < 0 for j > 1, and these additional
deficits are paid off by subsequent surpluses. The disturbance has cumulative response
        j -1 u
  j =1        j   = -1/(1 - s ) = -3.33. If we had an AR(1) surplus st = us,t , we would see a
3.33% inflation shock at time 0, lowering the initial value of debt by the entire area under
the ut response.
                                           FTMP                                              19


4.4   Thinking about the parameters

The parameter s is convenient, as it directly controls unexpected inflation and the cu-
mulative surplus response a(). However, it is best regarded as a reduced-form parame-
ter, rather than an independent policy lever.
       The parameter s lets the modeler control (), but in reality the government does
the hard work of raising expected future surpluses, and s = a() is the result. I interpret
impulse-response functions this way, looking at the features of the time path of surpluses
that result in unexpected inflation rather than the other way around.
       Though one can estimate s and specify it in a model, one should not necessarily
hold s constant as one examines alternative values for other parts of the fiscal and mon-
etary policy specification, and that is what I mean by "reduced form." Usually, keeping s
constant while moving other parameters of the policy process does not ask an interesting
or sensible question. In practical terms, s directly controls unexpected inflation. If you
hold s constant as you move other parameters of the policy process, those parameters
cannot produce a different value of unexpected inflation.
       In this simple model, the persistence s of the surplus process is the main other
parameter. As we have seen, s measures how much of the initial, first period deficit
shock s,1 is inflated away. But as persistence s rises, cumulative deficits rise, and one
would naturally expect more inflation from a fiscal shock. It might make more sense to
compare the inflationary effects of two values of s by specifying that the government
will inflate away the same fraction of the overall deficit shock, not the same fraction of
                                                                              j -1 u
the first period deficit shock. The overall deficit shock, is au () =   j =1        j   = -1/(1 -
s ). Thus, it seems more interesting to specify a larger value s = s,0 /(1 - s ); or
equivalently that a() is the same fraction of au () not the same number. We would then
naturally conclude that if deficit shocks become more long-lasting, unexpected inflation
is larger.
       There is no right or wrong here, there are only interesting and uninteresting values
of policy parameters to compare with each other. Here and more importantly below, I
find that interesting policy experiments invite us to change s along with other policy
parameters.
       Why not take a stand, and parameterize the dependence of s on other policy pa-
rameters directly, as I suggest here with s = s,0 /(1 - s )? At this stage, I do not wish to
 20                                       COCHRANE



restrict in general which policy experiments are interesting and which are not interesting,
and I wish to leave the model as simple as possible. By varying s along with other pa-
rameters, I force myself and the reader to think about which variation asks an interesting
question.
       The "right" answer of course is to derive and constrain policy with a specific model
of optimal policy, derived from either economic and political fundamentals, or a specific
theoretical or empirical model of how parameters move across changes in policy regimes.
But for the present purpose that would be a long distraction, and also it would unwisely
tie the analysis to one specific such model.




4.5   Active and passive policy, and an analogy to monetary policy rules

To understand the idea behind the specification (11)-(15), and to see that it is reasonable
and not an artificial trick, it is useful to express standard active-money/passive fiscal pol-
icy for the same model in an analogous way.
       In this simple model, an interest rate target determines expected inflation via the
Fisher equation, it = Et t+1 . But this relation leaves unexpected inflation Et+1 t+1 un-
determined. The whole question is what else to add to the model to tie down unexpected
inflation.
       The standard monetary policy rule,


                                       it =  t + ui,t                                    (26)


is algebraically equivalent to a more insightful form introduced by King (2000),


                                    it = i          
                                          t +  (t - t )                                  (27)

                                    i       
                                     t = Et t+1 .                                        (28)


Together with the equilibrium condition it = Et t+1 , model dynamics are now

                                                    
                              Et t+1 - t +1 =  (t - t ).                                 (29)


With                                and thus i = i leads to an explosive solution.
             > 1 any value but t = t          t   t
                                           FTMP                                         21


                                                                                is
Adding a rule that nominal explosions are not equilibria, we conclude that t = t
                                                                   , E
the unique equilibrium. The same logic at time t + 1 yields t+1 = t +1 t+1 t+1 =
      , the crucial determinacy issue we are after. For 
Et+1 t +1                                                < 1, any value of Et+1 t+1

leads to converging expectations of future inflation, and we are back to indeterminacy ­
passive monetary policy.
       King's rule (27)-(28) clearly expresses the two separate and distinct functions of the
interest rate rule in the active-money model: There is a monetary policy, which sets the
observed, equilibrium path of interest rates i                      
                                              t . (Monetary policy it may also feed back

from other variables following rules, it need not be a stochastic peg.) There is a separate
                  , and a separate equilibrium-selection policy in which the central bank
inflation target t
threatens hyperinflation or deflation in response to deviations from the inflation target
 . We do not observe the hyperinflations in equilibrium. Monetary policy determines
t
expected inflation. Equilibrium selection policy determines unexpected inflation.
       I write the active-fiscal specification (11)-(14) intentionally in an analogous fash-
ion. It likewise separates how surpluses behave in equilibrium from how they react to off-
equilibrium inflation. Equilibrium condition (16), which I repeat here for convenience,

                                                                 
                  (vt+1 - vt +1 ) = (vt - vt ) - Et+1 t+1 - Et+1 t+1


is a direct analogy to (29).
       If the surplus responds to the value of debt, st+1 = vt + us,t+1 rather than respond
                         in (11), then fiscal policy is passive. Debt follows
to the latent variable vt


                          vt+1 = (1 -  )vt - Et+1 t+1 - us,t+1 .


If  > 0, debt grows more slowly than the interest rate, satisfying the transversality con-
dition. (The criterion  > 1 -  bounds debt itself.) Any value of unexpected inflation
Et+1 t+1 is an equilibrium, because it leads to surpluses which validate the inflation-
induced change in the value of debt.
       To include both active and passive possibilities in one model, we could write a
more general form


                               s       
                                t+1 = vt + us,t+1
 22                                        COCHRANE



                                                    
                                st+1 = vt +  (vt - vt ) + us,t+1
                                                       
                              vt +1 = vt - Et+1 t+1 - st+1

                              vt+1 = vt - Et+1 t+1 - st+1 .


Now, (16) generalizes to

                                                                     
                   (vt+1 - vt +1 ) = (1 -  )(vt - vt ) - Et+1 (t+1 - t+1 ).              (30)


Again,  > 0 means that debt vt will not explode faster than the interest rate for any
unexpected inflation. Since I am not interested in the passive-fiscal specification I leave
this generality out of the more detailed model to follow.
        Active fiscal policy means that the government will allow debt to explode at rate
-1    if inflation comes out differently from the inflation target, as the active-money gov-
ernment will force inflation to explode at the rate  > 1 if inflation comes out differently
from its inflation target in (29).
        Expression (30) clearly shows that relationships between surplus, debt and infla-
tion in equilibrium, governed by , tell us nothing about how surpluses react (or don't)
to debt and inflation off equilibrium, governed by  , as expression (29) clearly shows that
relationships between interest rates and inflation in equilibrium tell us nothing about
how interest rates would react to inflation off equilibrium governed by  .
                                             we see a positive regression coefficient of
        In particular, in equilibrium vt = vt
surplus on debt, st+1 = vt + .... Such regression coefficients have been interpreted
as evidence for passive policy, that  > 0. Likewise, regression coefficients of equilib-
rium interest rates on equilibrium inflation have been interpreted as evidence for active
monetary policy, that  > 1. But, as this example shows, observing such a relationship
between equilibrium surpluses and debt is not evidence for passive policy. Active fiscal
policy does not require that the government inflates away rather than repaying debt. In
the s = 0 case, debt and deficits vary, the government borrows and then repays, there is
no inflation at all, yet active fiscal policy determines the price level. Active fiscal policy
only requires that the government refuse to adapt surpluses to changes in the value of
debt brought about by arbitrary unexpected inflation and deflation. This fiscal specifi-
cation maintains that minimum only, while allowing the other commonsense features of
                                            FTMP                                           23


fiscal policy that have, mistakenly, been taken as evidence for passive fiscal policy.
        In both cases, these expressions stress the separation between the active/passive
question, which describes responses to alternative equilibria and unexpected inflation,
from monetary policy, which sets the equilibrium interest rate, and from fiscal policy,
which borrows, repays, and sometimes inflates away debt. Active fiscal policy substi-
tutes for the monetary equilibrium-selection policy, but can leave monetary policy and
observed fiscal policy alone.
        More deeply, the King interest rate rule in (29) and the v  specification of active fis-
cal policy in (30) show that the active-money vs. active-fiscal regimes are observationally
equivalent, for time series on observables, here {t , it }, drawn from an equilibrum. With
 =   , we never see the variation  -   or v - v  necessary to identify the off-equilibrium
responses that characterize each regime.
        That fact means that identifying which regime we are in takes more effort than a
simple time-series test such as regressions of interest rates on inflation or surpluses on
debt can provide.
        The traditional response to this problem is to add restrictions, which tie off-equili-
brium behavior ( ,  ) to something observable in equilibrium. By doing so, one restricts
the range of data that one or the other regime can explain. The literature review in Sec-
tion 9 explains in some detail. The testable content however is entirely that provided by
the identification assumptions.
        My point here is to establish that a fiscal regime can explain any data that a mone-
tary regime can explain. For that purpose, I do not wish to artificially restrict the ability of
either regime to explain data by making additional assumptions. First we open the door
to fiscal theory of monetary policy, then, perhaps, we test which side of the door the data
land.
                                                                       } may not be cho-
        In the active-money specification (28), the inflation target {t
sen independently of the interest rate {it } specified by monetary policy. It must respect

the private-sector equilibrium condition it = Et t+1 . That condition determines the ex-
pected inflation target, given the interest rate target, or the other way around. Thus, we
could write King's rule in this model instead as

                                                       
                                  it = Et t +1 +  (t - t )
    24                                       COCHRANE



                                                 } it wishes to see. Expected inflation
The central bank chooses the path of inflation {t
determines the necessary interest rate target. Or, the central bank picks the interest rate
target, and the expected value of the inflation target must follow. We have seen the same
                                    
restriction in the inflation target t +1 of the fiscal specification.




5        Long-term debt
Long-term debt with a geometric maturity structure is a second key ingredient. This
section shows how long-term debt modifies the constant real rate, flexible price model.
          The model consists of the Fisher equation (8)


                                            it = Et t+1 ,


and, from (7),
                                                           
                                   j
                                   Et+1 t+1+j = -                 Et+1 st+1+j         (31)
                           j =0                            j =0

which generalizes (9). (Reminder: The face value of debt declines at the rate  j .)
          Relation (31) introduces an important link between changes in expected inflation
at different dates. Consider a persistent monetary policy shock ­ a persistent positive
unexpected change in it = Et t+1 , starting at i1 = E1 2 , with no change in fiscal policy.
From (31), inflation follows

                                                  
                                       E1 1 = -           j E1 1+j .                  (32)
                                                  j =1


If the terms E1 1+j for j  1 are, on average, positive, then E1 1 < 0. In this way, a
positive persistent monetary policy shock that raises long-run inflation induces a nega-
tive initial inflation response. This mechanism temporarily overturns the otherwise Fish-
erian properties of this flexible-price money-free model. This observation boils down a
large effort in more complex models (Sims (2011), Cochrane (2017b), Cochrane (2018)).
This mechanism does not require sticky prices, and sticky prices alone do not produce a
negative inflation response.
          With short-term debt  = 0, a fiscal shock leads immediately to inflation at time
1 by (31). If the central bank chooses to follow that event with higher interest rates, the
                                           FTMP                                         25


inflation will persist, but that is an independent choice and has no effect on immediate
inflation E1 1 .
       With long-term debt  > 0, shocks to the present value of surpluses in (31) now
change a weighted average of current and expected future inflation. If a fiscal shock is fol-
lowed by persistent inflation, the initial inflation will be smaller, or there may even be no
immediate inflation. Since monetary policy controls expected inflation, monetary policy
chooses whether to smooth forward the fiscal shock, and thereby reduce its immediate
impact, or not to do so.
       Contrary to the impression one gets with short-term debt models, then, fiscal the-
ory can produce a persistent inflation response to fiscal shocks. And monetary policy
plays a crucial role: by accommodating the fiscal shock with higher nominal interest
rates, the central bank can turn what would be a price level jump into a slow smooth
inflation.




6   Model

Now we are ready to understand and to digest the main model. The model is


                                xt = Et xt+1 -  (it - Et t+1 )                          (33)

                                t = Et t+1 + xt                                         (34)

                                it = i t + ix xt + ui,t                                 (35)
                                                       
                             st+1 = s t+1 + sx xt+1 + vt + us,t+1                       (36)
                                          n     
                            vt +1 = vt + rt+1 - t+1 - st+1                              (37)
                                         n
                            vt+1 = vt + rt +1 - t+1 - st+1                              (38)
                              
                           Et t +1 = Et t+1                                             (39)
                           
                      Et+1 t +1 = -s s,t+1 - i i,t+1                                    (40)
                               n
                           Et rt +1 = it                                                (41)
                              n
                             rt +1 = qt+1 - qt                                          (42)

                            ui,t+1 = i ui,t + i,t+1                                     (43)

                            us,t+1 = s us,t + s,t+1 .                                   (44)
 26                                       COCHRANE



       These the same equations as the standard new-Keynesian model, with a set of
fiscal equations elaborated and spelled out. I parameterize and solve the model with
active fiscal rather than active monetary policy.
       Equations (33) and (34) are standard intertemporal IS and Phillips equations, with
xt denoting the output gap, it the nominal interest rate and t inflation. One can add
disturbances to both equations. I leave such disturbances out here as I only present re-
sponses to monetary and fiscal policy shocks below. While one can do much to make
both equations more realistic, I keep them deliberately simple and standard to focus on
the impact of the fiscal novelty on this well-understood textbook structure.
       Equations (35) and (36) are monetary and fiscal policy rules. In the fiscal policy
rule, surpluses respond to output and inflation. Such a response is natural for both me-
chanical and policy reasons. Tax receipts are procyclical as tax rate times income rises
with income. Spending is countercyclical, due to automatic stabilizer entitlements such
as unemployment insurance and food stamps, and also due to deliberate stimulus pro-
grams. Imperfect indexation may make surpluses rise automatically with inflation, and
inflation may provoke fiscal austerity programs. Beyond fitting data, we are interested
in alternative fiscal policy rules that can stabilize inflation or avoid deflation, especially
in a period of zero bounds or other constraints on monetary policy, and including or
strengthening fiscal policy responses to inflation and output is important to studying
these issues. Finally, including policy rules stresses that fiscal theory need not assume
fixed or exogenous surplus process.
       Equations (36)-(40) generalize the simple fiscal policy specification (11)-(15) to
include long-term debt and real interest rate variation. In (37), the state variable v  re-
sponds to real interest rates. Surpluses therefore rise to pay off increases in the value of
debt that come from higher real interest costs, but as before surpluses do not respond
to changes in the value of debt brought about by arbitrary unexpected inflation. The
          is the governments' stochastic inflation target. In (38), which is the debt ac-
variable t
cumulation identity (1), ex-post nominal returns on the portfolio of government bonds
 n raise or lower the value of debt.
rt +1

       Again, the parameter s = 0 in (40) allows for a s-shaped surplus process that
does not fully repay debts and interest costs. Now we have i as well, which describes
how much the state variable v  , future surpluses, and thereby the value of debt, respond
                                              FTMP                                          27


to monetary shocks, or to the deeper shocks that motivate monetary and fiscal policy
changes. New-Keynesian models with passive fiscal policy implicitly specify large values
for i , which we can emulate if we wish to do so.
        Equation (41) is the bond pricing equation, which imposes the expectations hy-
pothesis that expected returns on bonds of all maturities are the same. Equation (42) is
the linearized identity (4) that relates the return on the government bond portfolio to its
price qt .
        In Section 3, we saw that it = Et t+1 of that model gave the central bank, which
sets the interest rate it but cannot affect fiscal policy, control over expected inflation. The
bank retains a similar power in this model. Eliminating the output gap xt from (33)-(34),
we have
                        Et t+2 - (1 +  - )Et t+1 + t = it .                                 (45)

We can write this equation that expected inflation Et t+1 is a two-sided exponentially-
weighted moving average of the interest rate it ,
                                                             
                                                                    
               
     t+1 =         it +           - j
                                  1 it-j +          j
                                                    2 Et+1 it+j +
                                                                           - j
                                                                           1 Et+1-j t+1-j   (46)
             1 - 2
                           j =1              j =1                   j =0


with weights given by the roots of the lag polynomial (45) (Cochrane (2018) p. 165), plus
an exponentially decaying transient response to shocks. This formula naturally general-
izes t+1 = it + Et+1 t+1 to sticky prices. Therefore, monetary policy can still deter-
mine expected inflation. It just takes a more complex interest rate path to give any par-
ticular expected inflation path. The last term of (46) introduces persistent dynamics to
responses that only last one period under flexible prices. This standard new-Keynesian
model remains Fisherian, like the flexible price case: A rise in interest rates produces a
rise in inflation, unless accompanied by a shock to unexpected inflation in the last term.
As in the standard solution of this model, if a rise in interest rates is fully expected, it
produces a uniform rise in inflation, as the last term is absent.
        The IS and Phillips curves (33)-(34) only restrict expected inflation and output.
They leave two undetermined expectational errors, needing two forward-looking roots
to give a unique equilibrium. As usual, they have one forward and one backward-looking
root, so we need one extra forward-looking root. In active-money new-Keynesian mod-
 28                                        COCHRANE



els i > 1 (roughly speaking) generates the additional explosive root. I specify passive
monetary policy with i < 1. Fiscal policy provides the extra forward-looking root and
determines the additional expectational error. As in the simple case, (37)-(38) imply

                                                               
                            vt+1 - vt +1 = (vt - vt ) - (t+1 - t ) .                    (47)

                                                                                ,  = .
Hence, stationary solutions and the real transversality condition require vt = vt t  t

This is the extra forward-looking root provided by active fiscal policy. The computer will
discover (47) on its own and impose it, but we can also impose it to simplify the model
analytically.
                        
       Equation (39) Et t +1 = Et t+1 restricts the inflation target. In its place, we could

write (37)-(38) as

                                      n                   
                        vt +1 = vt + rt+1 - Et t+1 - Et+1 t+1 - st+1
                                     n
                        vt+1 = vt + rt +1 - Et t+1 - Et+1 t+1 - st+1 .


                     encodes a promise to adapt fiscal policy to arbitrary expected infla-
The state variable vt
tion, but insists on only one value for unexpected inflation. Then (47) reads

                                                                   
                      vt+1 - vt +1 = (vt - vt ) - (Et+1 t+1 - Et+1 t ) .


This writing reinforces the idea that the interest rate and monetary policy are in charge
of expected inflation, and fiscal policy here serves only to select unexpected inflation.
Choose whichever expression you find prettier.
       Again, the model solution separates. Fiscal affairs only influence inflation and
output by choosing unexpected inflation Et+1 t+1 = -s s,t+1 - i i,t+1 . We can solve
for inflation and output by pairing this condition with the IS, Phillips, and interest rate
rule, (33)-(35), and (43) and ignoring the rest.
       Having determined inflation and output, with  =   , v = v  , we can calculate
fiscal variables from the remaining equations of the model. Again, in a more general
model, these fiscal outcomes will feed back to inflation, output, and interest rates in ways
beyond the selection of unexpected inflation, but again simplicity is a virtue here: Fiscal
price level determination does not require such feedback, and the mechanisms for such
                                           FTMP                                           29


feedback are orthogonal to the price determination question.
       As in the simple model, linking the unexpected inflation target directly to policy
shocks in (40) is a convenient reduced-form simplification. One can estimate the  pa-
rameters, but one should consider changing s and i change as we change other param-
eters in order to make interesting comparisons of policy settings.
       In section 4, we saw how we might want to modify s as we make surplus shocks
more persistent, raising s . Here, we also might want similar modifications as we change
policy rules . For example, we might want to specify the first part of the unexpected
inflation target as
                                     
                                Et+1 t +1 = -s Et+1 st+1                                  (48)

in place of (40). Now s specifies how much of an actual deficit will be met by unexpected
inflation, not how much of a deficit shock will be so met. The actual deficit is influenced
by its endogenous reaction to inflation and output, which also respond to the shock. To
see the effect of (48), use the surplus policy rule (36), and also simplify to sx = 0, yielding


                            Et+1 st+1 = s Et+1 t+1 + s,t+1 .


Equation (48) then implies


                         Et+1 t+1 = -s (s Et+1 t+1 + s,t+1 )


and thus
                                                  s
                              Et+1 t+1 = -             s,t+1 .
                                               1 + s s
We're back to where we started, but the parameter s of the original specification de-
pends on the s parameter.
       So, if it is interesting to think of a government policy that splits a constant fraction
of shocks to actual deficits between repayment and inflation, rather than splitting shocks
to the disturbance part of a policy rule, then we would want to specify (48). Equivalently,
we recognize that the parameter s is a reduced-form parameter, and we change s as we
change s in thinking about the effects of alternative policies.
       Why not write such a more general structure? First, it makes no difference to the
result, it just suggests different parameter values. In the end unexpected inflation is a
 30                                        COCHRANE



function of the shocks s,t+1 and i,t+1 . We just end up deriving the coefficients s and
i from that more general structure. Second, while other structures are more plausible,
we don't have a single obvious deep theory of just how a government chooses and com-
mits to dividing the fiscal consequences of shocks between state-contingent default via
inflation and promises to repay via taxation or spending cuts, that would make sense to
impose at this stage of modeling. Third, this specification of fiscal policy is complicated
enough for a first attempt. Adding equations to derive the s , i parameters in a more rig-
orous way will only obfuscate the model. So, I proceed as specified, with the disclaimer
that one should not view the  coefficients in (40) as a deep description of policy, and
one should consider changing their values along with changes in other aspects of the
policy specification including the coefficients  and s , i , and a warning that I do so in
considering the effects of different policy parameters below.
       Moreover, the parameters i and s give the modeler too much control, in a sense.
One should regard unexpected inflation as coming from revisions to the present value of
surpluses, now including a discount rate term. When one changes i or s , the surplus
process changes, and discount rates may change, until the specified unexpected inflation
is again the revision in the present value of surpluses. But it is more economically sensi-
ble to think of the surplus and discount rate process as causing the change in inflation. I
will look at the surplus and discount rate responses with that intuition in mind.
       Long-term debt adds another expectational error, (41), but one more unstable root
in (42). Together (41)-(42) solve forward to say that the bond price is the weighted sum
of future interest rates,
                                               
                                    qt = -Et           j -1 it+j -1 .
                                               j =1

Therefore, the ex-post bond return depends on current and future interest rates,

                                                                   
                        n
                       rt +1   = qt+1 - qt = it -  Et+1                   j -1 it+j .
                                                                  j =1


       I next compute the impulse-response functions. The surplus responses so com-
puted are the moving average representation of the surplus, st = a(L) [i,t s,t ] . If one
wished, one could avoid the v  ,   expression of fiscal policy and simply pair the moving
average for surpluses with the equations of the new-Keynesian model (33), (34), (35) and
                                           FTMP                                          31


the debt accumulation identity (38), as we did in the simple model. The surplus moving
average and debt accumulation equation would result in a unique unexpected inflation,
from which the equations of the new-Keynesian model have a unique solution. The sur-
plus moving average would not be algebraically pretty.



7     Responses

The Appendix documents the algebra for numerically solving the model in the standard
Blanchard and Kahn (1980) way. I set the model up in VAR(1) form yt+1 = Ayt + Bt+1 +
Ct+1 with  denoting structural shocks ­ monetary and fiscal policy here ­ and  de-
noting expectational errors, i.e. I write it = Et t+1 as t+1 = it + ,t+1 . I solve unsta-
ble eigenvalues of A forward and stable eigenvalues backward. We need just as many
forward-unstable eigenvalues as there are expectational errors, to uniquely determine
the latter as functions of the structural shocks.
       Throughout I use parameters  = 1,  = 0.5,  = 0.5,  = 0.2,  = 0.7, i = 0.7, s =
0.4. I pick these parameters as vaguely plausible, but to clearly illustrate mechanisms, not
to match data.


7.1   Deficit shocks without policy rules

Figure 2 presents the responses of this model to a negative fiscal policy disturbance us,t ,
i.e. a deficit shock, in the case of no policy rules  = 0. I specify s = 0.25, allowing a
quarter of the deficit shock to be met by inflation and the rest, plus the following deficits,
to be financed by borrowing against subsequent surpluses.
       With neither monetary policy shock nor rule, the interest rate it and therefore
                               n do not move. Long-term debt therefore has no in-
long-term nominal bond return rt +1

fluence on these responses, which are the same for any bond maturity  .
       Inflation rises and decays with an AR(1) pattern. The deficit shock results in drawn-
out inflation, not just a one-period price-level jump. This drawn-out inflation is entirely
the effect of sticky prices. It reflects the last term of (46), the exponentially decaying
response to a shock in a sticky-price model. The drawn-out inflation does nothing to
reduce the first-period inflation shock.
                                                                                    n is
       The nominal interest rate does not move, so the bond return the bond return r1
32                                                      COCHRANE




                        0.8


                        0.6                     v

                        0.4


                        0.2
                                   x
                                   i, rn
              Percent




                          0


                        -0.2                    us
                                            s
                        -0.4


                        -0.6


                        -0.8


                         -1
                               0   1        2   3       4    5     6   7   8   9   10
                                                            Time


Figure 2: Responses of the sticky-price model to a fiscal shock with no policy rules.


                        0.6                             v

                        0.4


                        0.2

                                        i
                          0                 x
              Percent




                                                    s
                        -0.2                    u
                                            s
                                   rn
                        -0.4


                        -0.6


                        -0.8


                         -1
                               0   1        2   3       4    5     6   7   8   9   10
                                                            Time


     Figure 3: Responses of the sticky-price model to a fiscal shock, with policy rules.
                                              FTMP                                                        33


also constant. The real rate falls exactly as inflation rises.
       Output rises, following the forward-looking Phillips curve that output is high when
inflation is declining, i.e. inflation is high relative to future inflation. This deficit does
stimulate, by provoking inflation.
       The surplus st and the AR(1) surplus disturbance us,t are not the same. The surplus
initially declines, but deficits raise the value of debt overall. A long string of small positive
surplus responses on the right side of the graph then partially repays the incurred debt
with an s-shaped response pattern. Here we see the major innovation of this model at
work ­ the s-shaped surplus response.
       That inflation rises at all comes from the specification s = 0.25. With s = 0, the
long run surplus response would be higher, the discounted sum of all future surpluses
would be exactly zero, and there would be no inflation. Or, better put, a surplus process
with larger long-run positive responses would imply s = 0. Conversely, the government
may choose or be of a type that inflates away more of its debts in response to fiscal shocks,
which we would model with a higher value of s .



                                  j                                                       
     Shock and model         j =0  E1 1+j       =        -       j =0 E1 s1+j     +       j =1 (1
                                                                                                              n
                                                                                                    -  j )E1 r1+ j - 1+j
    Fiscal, no  rules            (0.44)         =            -(-0.66)                                 +(-0.22)
   Fiscal, yes  rules            (0.44)         =            -(-0.50)                                 +(-0.06)
 Monetary, no  rules            (-1.79)         =            -(3.26)                                   +(1.47)
 Monetary, yes  rules          (-0.093)         =            -(0.53)                                   +(0.62)
                                           n                                                              n
     Shock and model       E1 1       -E1 r1         =       -     j =0 E1 s1+j       +     j =1 E1      r1+ j - 1+j
    Fiscal, no  rules       (0.25)   -(0.00)         =            -(-0.66)                          +(-0.41)
   Fiscal, yes  rules       (0.15)   -(-0.28)        =            -(-0.50)                          +(-0.07)
 Monetary, no  rules       (-1.37)   -(-1.37)        =             -(3.26)                           +(3.26)
                +(0)
 Monetary, yes  rules      (-0.36)   -(-1.06)        =             -(0.53)                           +(1.23)
                               n                    j                                j           n
     Shock and model       E1 r1     =    -    j =1  E1 1+j             -       j =1  E1        r1+ j - 1+j
    Fiscal, no  rules        (0)     =         -(0.19)                                -(-0.19)
   Fiscal, yes  rules      (-0.28)   =         -(0.29)                                -(-0.01)
 Monetary, no  rules       (-1.37)   =         -(-0.41)                                -(1.79)
 Monetary, yes  rules      (-1.06)   =         -(0.45)                                 -(0.61)

                    Table 1: Inflation and bond-return decompositions.
 34                                       COCHRANE



       The "Fiscal, no  rules" rows of Table 1 present the terms of the unexpected in-
flation decompositions (3) and (7) and the bond return decomposition (6) for these re-
sponses.
                                                        
       The cumulative fiscal disturbance is E1          j =0 us,j   = 1/(1 - s ) = -1.67%, which
on its own would lead to 1.67% inflation. We see two mechanisms that buffer this fis-
cal shock. First, the s-shaped endogenous response of surpluses to accumulated debt v  ,
                                                                                          
pays off one percentage point much of these accumulated deficits, leaving a E1            j =0 sj   =
-0.66% unbacked fiscal expansion. Second, higher inflation with no change in nominal
rate means a lower real interest rate, which raises the value of debt, a deflationary force.
This discount rate effect offsets another 0.22% of the fiscal inflation in the top row, lead-
ing to 0.44%  -weighted inflation, and 0.41% in the second row, leading to 0.25% first-
period inflation.


7.2   Deficit shocks with policy rules

Next, let us add fiscal and monetary policy reaction functions. I use numerical values


                           it = 0.8 t + 0.5 xt + ui,t                                       (49)
                                                           
                         st+1 = 0.25 t+1 + 1.0 xt+1 + 0.2 vt + us,t+1                       (50)

                       ui,t+1 = 0.7 ui,t + i,t+1                                            (51)

                       us,t+1 = 0.4 us,t + s,t+1                                            (52)


These parameters are also intended only as generally reasonable back of the envelope
values that illustrate mechanisms clearly in the plots. Estimating policy rules is tricky,
as the right hand variables are inherently correlated with errors, and there no reliable
instruments.
       I specify an interest rate reaction to inflation i less than one, to easily generate
a stationary passive-money model. The on-equilibrium monetary-policy parameter i
can in principle be measured in this fiscal theory, so regression evidence is relevant. But
the evidence for i substantially greater than one in the data, such as Clarida, Gal´
                                                                                   i, and
Gertler (2000), is tenuous, needing specific lags, instruments, and a sample period. OLS
regressions lead to a coefficient quite close to one ­ the "Fisher effect" that interest rates
rise with inflation dominates the data. With more complex specifications, one can create
                                               FTMP                                       35


a passive-money model in which regressions of interest rates on inflation have a coeffi-
cient greater than one (Cochrane (2011b)). But, as I am not trying to match regressions
and independent estimates of the other parameters of the model, I leave estimation of
the policy response functions along with those other parameters for another day.
       I use a surplus response to output sx = 1.0. The units of surplus are surplus/value
of debt, or surplus/GDP divided by debt/GDP, so one expects a coefficient of about this
magnitude. For example, real GDP fell 4 percentage points peak to trough in the 2008
recession, while the surplus/GDP ratio fell nearly 8 percentage points. Debt to GDP of
0.5 (then) leads to a coefficient 1.0. Surpluses should react somewhat to inflation, as the
tax code is less well indexed than spending. But it's hard to see that pattern in the data.
Surpluses were low with inflation in the 1970s and an OLS regression that includes both
inflation and output, though surely biased, gives a negative coefficient. (The Appendix
presents simple OLS regressions, which give this result and also suggest s = 0.4.) I use
s = 0.25 to explore what a small positive reaction to inflation can do.
       Figure 3 adds these policy responses . This plot presents the responses to a deficit
shock s,1 = -1, holding constant the monetary policy disturbance ui,t but now allowing
surpluses and interest rates to change in response to inflation and output. Table 1 quan-
tifies the corresponding decompositions, in the "fiscal, yes " rows.
       To produce this example, I did not keep the parameter s constant. If we keep s
constant, then we produce exactly the same unexpected inflation E1 1 = -s s,1 for
any choice of the other parameters. As above, s is not a deep parameter. The role of s is
to characterize how much of a fiscal shock the government chooses to meet by inflating
away its debt, vs. how much it meets by borrowing against higher future surpluses, but s
itself does not well characterize this split, especially in this model with long-term debt.
For example, suppose the government paid for the fiscal shock with future inflation en-
tirely, raising interest rates and thereby devaluing outstanding long-term bonds. Then
we would have a s = 0 even though all of the fiscal shock is met by inflation.
       To produce a more comparable simulation across parameter values, I choose the
parameter s so that the  -weighted sum of current and expected future inflation rela-
                                                     j                j
tive to the overall size of the fiscal shock    j =0  E1 1+j /   j =0  E1 us,1+j   is the same
across the calculation without rules and this calculation with rules. Via the decomposi-
tion (7), the numerator is as the total amount of the fiscal shock absorbed by current and
 36                                        COCHRANE



future inflation, devaluing long and short term bonds. The denominator is the amount
of inflation that the surplus shock would produce on its own absent all policy rules ­ the
vt response to debts as well as the  responses to output and inflation. This scaling pro-
duces s = 0.61 × 0.25 = 0.1525. The graph with an unchanged s = 0.25 is qualitatively
similar, except inflation starts at an unchanged 0.25.
       Monetary policy reacts to higher inflation and output by raising the nominal in-
terest rate, which was constant with no policy rules. (The nominal interest rate, labeled i,
is just below the inflation  line.) This unexpected rise has the standard long-term debt
effect: it pushes inflation forward and thereby reduces current inflation. It produces a
negative ex-post bond return.
       Greater inflation and output also raise fiscal surpluses through the sx and s
parts of the fiscal policy rule. The surplus line is slightly higher in Figure 3 than in Figure
2. (Look hard. Small changes add up.) These higher subsequent surpluses also reduce
the inflationary effects of the fiscal shock.
       Finally, the inflation rate is slightly larger than the interest rate, leading to a persis-
tent negative real interest rate. This real rate reduction is also deflationary. You can see it
drag down the value of debt despite positive surpluses.
       In Table 1,  -weighted inflation is the same, 0.44%, by construction. Instanta-
neous inflation 0.15% is about half its previous value 0.25%, since inflation is much more
persistent. The cumulative surplus shock is the same, 1.66%, and the s-shape surplus
process pays back a bit more, as we saw, leaving 0.50%. Since the interest rate moves
with the inflation rate, there is much less real interest rate and discount rate variation,
only 0.06% and 0.07%. In the second panel a negative bond return, reflecting future in-
flation, soaks up the fiscal shock in the mark-to-market accounting.
       This example produces drawn-out inflation in response to a transitory fiscal shock,
not a price level jump. The endogenous policy responses smooth forward and thereby re-
duce the inflation and output response to the fiscal shock, a novel argument in favor of
such rules. This result begins a suggestive story of the 1970s. However, the model does
not produce the lower output characteristic of stagflation. That failure is likely rooted
in the simplistic and often-criticized nature of this Phillips curve, and also the absence
of any interesting supply side of the economy such as the oil shocks and productivity
slowdown of the 1970s.
                                            FTMP                                       37


7.3   Monetary policy shocks without policy rules


Figure 4 presents responses to a monetary policy shock i,1 , with no policy rule response
to endogenous variables  = 0. The nominal interest rate it just follows the AR(1) shock
process ui,t .
       Again, the tricky question in this response is what value of i to specify ­ what
is the most interesting way to define a monetary policy shock that does not move fiscal
policy? I already specify that the monetary policy shock comes with no direct fiscal shock
ust = 0. I furthermore choose i so that the value of the debt vt is unaffected by the
shock, E1 v1 = 0, as you can see in Figure 4. Any rise in the value of the debt triggers
subsequent surpluses via the vt term in the surplus process, so specifying no shock to
debt is another way of specifying that the monetary policy shock does not directly change
surpluses.
       This choice of i also sensibly generalizes the case without pricing frictions or pol-
icy rules. Taking innovations of the debt accumulation equation (38), we have

                                        n
                            E1 v1 = E1 r1 - E1 1 - E1 s1 .                             (53)


Recall also the identity (3),

                                                        
                            n
                 E1 1 - E1 r1 =-          j E1 s1+j +          j E1 r1+
                                                                     n
                                                                        j - 1+j .      (54)
                                   j =0                 j =1


In the simple case we hold surpluses constant E1 s1+j = 0 and real interest rates are
constant. Both terms on the right hand side of (54) are zero, so the left-hand side is also
zero: The period 1 price level jump exactly matches the decline in nominal bond prices,
    n = E  . In (53), then, the real value of debt does not change.
E1 r1    1 1

       Inflation  declines initially, and then rises to meet the higher nominal interest
rate. This model remains Fisherian in the long run, or to expected interest rate move-
ments. But the rise in inflation is long delayed, and would be hard to detect. Output also
declines, following the new-Keynesian Phillips curve in which output is low when infla-
tion is rising, i.e. lower than future inflation. The path of the expected nominal return
 n follows the interest rate i , as this model uses the expectations hypothesis. That rise
rt +1                         t

in expected returns and bond yields sends bond prices down, resulting in the sharply
38                                                            COCHRANE




                   2


                                                          v
                 1.5



                   1                                 rn


                 0.5        i, u i
       Percent




                                                          s
                   0



                 -0.5
                                                          x


                  -1



                 -1.5

                        0        1               2        3   4    5     6   7   8   9   10
                                                                  Time


     Figure 4: Responses to a monetary policy shock, no policy rules.


                                                              v
                   1

                                         ui


                 0.5
                                     i
                                                                                     s
                                                              s
       Percent




                   0


                                                          x

                 -0.5




                                             n
                                         r
                  -1
                        0        1               2        3   4    5     6   7   8   9   10
                                                                  Time


     Figure 5: Responses to a monetary policy shock, with policy rules.
                                          FTMP                                          39


                                    n . Subtracting inflation from these nominal bond
negative instantaneous bond return r1
returns, the expected real interest rate rate, expected real bond return, and discount rate
rise persistently.
       Surpluses are not constant. Here, I define a monetary policy shock that holds con-
stant the fiscal policy disturbance us,t = 0, but not surpluses st themselves. Even though
surpluses do not (yet) respond directly to inflation and output, surpluses respond to the
increased value of the debt v that results from higher real returns on government bonds.
I include this effect deliberately. It seems a realistic description of an "unchanged fiscal
policy" that fiscal authorities will raise surpluses to meet higher real interest costs. One
can easily change the model to embody the opposite assumption. This positive surplus
response enhances the disinflation. The higher real discount rates resulting from the
interest rate, on the other hand, push near-term inflation up.
       The "Monetary, no  rules" rows of Table 1 present inflation decompositions for
this case. The  -weighted sum of inflation is large and negative, -1.79%. In the absence
of price stickiness, this number would be zero­monetary policy could rearrange infla-
tion, lowering current inflation by raising future inflation, but monetary policy could
not create less inflation overall. Here it does, by two effects: Monetary policy induces
a large fiscal tightening, as we see in the rising surplus, amounting to 3.26% deflationary
pressure. Sticky prices lead to higher real interest rates, which give an offsetting 1.47%
inflationary discount rate effect.
       In the middle panel, the unexpected inflation and bond returns exactly offset. This
occurs by construction, as I specified the shock not to change the value of debt, as above.
By consequence, the surplus and discount rate shocks must also exactly offset.


7.4   Monetary policy shocks with policy rules

Figure 5 plots responses to the monetary policy shock, now adding fiscal and monetary
policy rules  that respond to output and inflation. The monetary policy rule responses
to lower inflation and growth push the interest rate i initially below its disturbance ui . I
held down the coefficient i = 0.8, rather than a larger value, to keep the interest rate
response from being negative, the opposite of the shock. Interest rates that go in the op-
posite direction from monetary policy shocks are a common feature in new­Keynesian
models of this sort. (Cochrane (2018) p. 175 shows some examples.) But such responses
 40                                         COCHRANE



are confusing, and my point here is to illustrate mechanisms. The interest rate is then
quite flat, the policy rules times rising inflation and output offsetting the declining dis-
turbance ui . Long-term bonds again suffer a negative return on impact, due to the per-
sistent rise in nominal interest rate. They then follow interest rates with a one period lag,
under the model's assumption of an expectations hypothesis. The real rate, the differ-
ence between interest rate and inflation, again rises persistently.
       Comparing the cases with and without policy rules, the surplus, responding to
the output and inflation decline, now declines sharply on impact and persists negatively
for a few years, before recovering. The monetary policy change induces a fiscal policy
change, primarily by inducing a recession. These deficits contribute an additional infla-
tionary force that offsets the disinflationary force of the interest rate rise. This simulation
illustrates an important balance of competing effects behind the usual presumption that
higher interest rates lower inflation.
       Output and inflation responses have broadly similar patterns, but about half the
magnitude of the response without policy rules, and somewhat more persistent dynam-
ics. As an instance of a general pattern, policy rules smooth and therefore help to buffer
the inflation and output responses to shocks. This consideration motivating Taylor-type
monetary policy rules and automatic stabilizers is a fiscal-theory novelty.
       The "Monetary, yes  rules" rows of Table 1 again quantify these offsetting effects
on inflation. The  -weighted sum of inflation is very small, as the initial negative infla-
tion balances the later positive inflation. However, this is not a pure rearrangement of
inflation over time as in the frictionless model. There is instead a substantial 0.53% over-
all fiscal tightening, offset by a slightly larger 0.62% overall rise in the discount rate. In the
one-period accounting of the middle panel, we see the still-present though much smaller
-0.36% one-period inflation. The large increase in discount rate which on its own would
cause inflation causes bond prices to fall instead.


7.5   Shock definition

These calculations require us to think just how we wish to define and orthogonalize mon-
etary and fiscal policy disturbances. In the simplest model, I defined monetary policy as
a movement in interest rates that does not change surpluses. In the context of the latter
more general model, that definition does not seem interesting. There I define a monetary
                                          FTMP                                         41


policy shock as a movement in the Taylor-rule residual ui,t that does not affect the fiscal
disturbance us,t . But monetary policy nonetheless has fiscal consequences: Surpluses
respond to output, to inflation, to changes in the value of debt induced by varying real
interest rates, unexpected inflation, and past surpluses. This is not passive fiscal policy
in the traditional definition, since it does not respond to arbitrary unexpected-inflation
induced variation in the value of the debt. But it is a likely fiscal response to a monetary
policy shock.
      Should an analysis of the effects of monetary policy include such systematic fiscal
policy responses? In many cases, yes. If one is advising Federal Reserve officials on the
effects of monetary policy, they likely want to know what happens if the Fed were to raise
interest rates persistently ui,t , but the Treasury takes no unusual action. But they would
likely want us to include usual fiscal actions and responses, as we include the usual be-
havioral responses of all agents. They might not want us to assume that fiscal authorities
embark on a simultaneous deviation from standard practice, a change in us,t .
      Perhaps not, however. Perhaps the Fed officials would like us to keep fiscal sur-
pluses constant in such calculations, so as not to think of "monetary policy" as having
effects merely by manipulating fiscal authorities into austerity or largesse. An academic
description of the effects of monetary policy might likewise want to turn off predictable
fiscal reactions, again to describe the monetary effects of monetary policy on the econ-
omy, not via manipulation of fiscal policy. In that case, even if one estimates s response
parameters in the data, one should turn them off to answer the policy question.
      There is no right and wrong in specifying policy questions, there is only interesting
and uninteresting ­ and transparent vs. obscure. The issue is really just what do we ­ and
the Treasury, and the Federal Reserve ­ find an interesting question, and is the modeler
clear on just what assumption has been made. Calculations of the effects of monetary
policy must and do, implicitly or explicitly, specify what parts of fiscal policy are held
constant or allowed to move. This eternal (and eternally forgotten) lesson is especially
important here.
      Though orthogonal shocks are interesting for policy experiments, if we are de-
scribing history, estimating the model, or thinking about how external shocks affect the
economy, we will surely confront monetary ui,t and fiscal us,t disturbances that occur at
the same time, as both authorities respond to similar events. For this reason, the re-
    42                                       COCHRANE



sponses I calculate holding one of the fiscal us,t and monetary ui,t disturbances constant
in turn are surely unlikely guidelines to interpreting specific historical events. The classic
"monetary policy shock" of the early 1980s involved joint monetary, fiscal (two rounds of
tax reform), and regulatory (supply or marginal cost shock) reforms. At a minimum, this
fact means that estimating policy shocks with a fiscal sensibility needs one more diffi-
cult orthogonalization. And perhaps the Fed officials, since they are seeing events that
make them consider raising interest rates, do want you to put in whatever fiscal policy
disturbance Treasury officials are likely to pursue in the same circumstance.
          These calculations are also important rhetorically and methodologically. Yes, one
can include such endogenous reactions or policy rules if it is interesting to do so. There
is nothing in fiscal theory that requires "exogenous" surpluses. We can model fiscal and
monetary policy quite flexibly. We need only one thing ­ that the fiscal authorities refuse
to validate arbitrary inflations and deflations.



8        Puzzles resolved

This section documents the counterfactual predictions of positively correlated surplus
processes, and how an s-shaped surplus process resolves them. These observations of-
fer multifaceted and robust evidence how important it is to include an s-shaped surplus
process in a fiscal-monetary model, or equivalently how much damage the contrary as-
sumption does to the model's ability to fit data. For simplicity, I explore these issues using
the case of one-period debt and a constant expected return.


8.1      The magnitude of inflation and the correlation of inflation and surpluses

With one-period debt and a constant expected return, the unexpected inflation identity
(9) gives us

                                     
                                                                         1
              Et+1 t+1 = -Et+1             j st+1+j = -a()s,t+1 = -         s,t+1 .      (55)
                                                                      1 - s
                                    j =0


The last equation is the case of an AR(1)


                                     st+1 = s st + s,t+1 .
                                            FTMP                                           43


       Surplus shocks are large, so a positively autocorrelated surplus predicts counter-
factually large inflation. Estimates in Table 2 below give a  (s,t+1 ) = 5.5% annual stan-
dard deviation of surplus shocks and persistence s = 0.55.            These estimates imply
a 5.5/(1-0.55) = 12.2% standard deviation of unexpected inflation from surplus shocks
alone. We don't see anything like this volatility of inflation.
       Such large inflation shocks would stand out from all the other sources of inflation
and generate a large correlation between deficits and inflation. This prediction is the op-
posite of the sign we typically see in the data ­ inflation comes in booms with surpluses,
and disinflation in recessions with deficits. More generally, there is little correlation be-
tween inflation and deficits, across time or countries.
       By contrast, consider the important case a() = 0, in which debts are fully repaid.
Now a string of positive short-run aj , representing the fact that surpluses and deficits are
persistent, is met by a long strong of negative aj as illustrated in Figures 1 and Figure
6 below. Such an s-shaped moving average representation removes the prediction that
inflation must come with deficits.
       In the presence of other shocks, a value 0 < a() << 1 can still remove the pre-
diction of a strong correlation between deficits and inflation. (One could go the opposite
direction with a() < 0 to generate a prediction of deficits with deflation, but in fact dis-
count rates account for the negative correlation of surpluses with inflation.)
       A correlation of deficits with inflation is possible. The surplus process does not
have to be s-shaped. Many extreme inflations correlate with deficits, and some cross-
country experience lines up inflation and devaluation with deficits. For example, in Jiang
(2019b), Jiang (2019a), an AR(1) surplus assumption seems to work. But a strong corre-
lation of deficits with inflation is not a necessary prediction of the fiscal theory. It results
from an auxiliary assumption, or, as we shall see, a mistaken measurement, of a posi-
tively autocorrelated surplus process.


8.2   Surpluses and the change in the value of the debt

A positively correlated surplus predicts that a higher surplus produces a higher value of
the debt, because it signals higher surpluses to come and the debt is the present value of
subsequent surpluses. In fact, deficits are financed by borrowing, which raises the value
of debt, and surpluses pay down the debt (Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2001)).
  44                                      COCHRANE



        However, if today's deficit predicts higher subsequent surpluses ­ if the moving
average is s-shaped, if a() is small ­ then the prediction is reversed. Higher surpluses
lower the value of the debt, in the model as in reality.
        We can state and analyze the point most simply by taking innovations of the flow
identity (1) to write


                Et+1 vt+1 = -Et+1 t+1 - Et+1 st+1 = [a() - 1]s,t+1                       (56)


If a() > 1, as is the case with an AR(1), then a surprise surplus at time t + 1 raises the
value of debt, because it implies higher future surpluses. If a() = 0, then a surprise
surplus at time t + 1 implies an exactly offsetting decline in future surpluses, so a positive
surplus surprise lowers the value of the debt one for one. If 0 < a() << 1, then a positive
surplus lowers the value of debt, but not quite one for one.
        Inflation is a connected observation. Look at the debt accumulation equation it-
self, (1),
                               vt+1 = vt + it - t+1 - st+1 .

This equation seems to state already that a higher st+1 lowers the value vt+1 . How does
the AR(1) example reverse that prediction? Because with a() > 1, it states that inflation
t+1 moves at the same time, in the opposite direction (more surplus, less inflation) and
by a greater quantity. In the case a() = 0, inflation is completely unaffected by the
surplus shock and the conventional reading of the equation applies. If 0 < a() << 1
then a deficit shock corresponds to some inflation, and some increase in the value of
debt, prompted by partial repayment.
        Now, a higher dividend typically raises the stock market value, since it forecasts
higher subsequent dividends. A positively correlated dividend process does make sense.
But debt is not equity. The baseline cashflow pattern for any debt issue is s-shaped. If
you take out a mortgage, you have an initial deficit and then a string of surpluses. If a
corporation borrows, it has an initial cash inflow, and a string of cash outflows. This is
the natural pattern to assume of government debt as well.
                                           FTMP                                         45


8.3   Financing deficits ­ revenue or inflation

When the government runs a deficit, it has to get the resources from somewhere. Usually,
we think that the government borrows to finance a deficit. Such borrowing results in a
larger value of debt. And to borrow, the government must promise to repay, to run an
s-shaped surplus. Equation (56) captures this intuition with a() = 0.
       That story can't work for an AR(1), with a() = 1/(1 - s ) > 1, or other surplus
process with positive moving average coefficients. So how does the government finance
a deficit in this case? By inflation (or more generally, default).
       Suppose the government decides at t + 1 to run an unexpected deficit. At t + 1,
surprise inflation t+1 devalues the outstanding nominal debt that must be rolled over.
In real terms this is equivalent to a partial default. For a() > 1, the government sells less
debt vt+1 than previously planned. The inflation-induced devaluation is even larger than
the current deficit shock. For a() = 1, the inflation-induced devaluation is equal to the
deficit, so the deficit is exactly financed by devaluation. And if 0 < a() < 1, then the
deficit is partially financed by inflation, and partially financed by borrowing.
       Most deficits in US and other advanced countries are clearly financed by borrow-
ing more debt, another piece of evidence that a() is a small number.


8.4   The risk and premium of government debt

The ex-post real return on government debt in this simple example is


                        rt+1 = it - t+1 = -Et+1 t+1 = a()s,t+1 .


       An AR(1), with a() = 1/(1 - s ), predicts that the standard deviation of inflation,
and therefore of ex-post bond returns, is larger than that of surpluses. As we saw for
inflation, a 5.5% annual standard deviation and 0.55 autocorrelation coefficient (Table 2)
imply a 5.5/(1-0.55) = 12.2% standard deviation of the real one-year treasury bill returns.
In fact, unexpected inflation and real treasury bill returns are vastly less volatile. In the
same data, unexpected inflation has a 1.1% standard deviation.
       A smaller a() solves the bond return volatility puzzle. With a() = 0, unexpected
inflation in this simple model is zero, and one-year government bonds are risk free in real
terms, for any volatility of surpluses themselves.
 46                                           COCHRANE



       Surpluses are procyclical, falling in recessions at the same time as consumption
falls and the stock market falls. A volatile, procyclical, positively autocorrelated surplus
thus generates a high risk premium as well as high risk. But government bonds have a
very low expected return as well as low volatility. (Jiang et al. (2019) quantify this obser-
vation. They generate a puzzle by incorrectly leaving the value of debt out of their VAR
and thus producing much too high an estimate of a().)
       The s-shaped surplus process solves the expected return puzzle as well as the
volatile return puzzle, and the low average return of government bonds is one more piece
of evidence for the s-shaped surplus process.
                                                                            j -1 s
       Specifically, the present value expression vt = Et             j =1        t+j   and the obser-
vation that surpluses st are volatile and procyclical suggests that government bonds, a
claim to surpluses, should have a stock-like expected return and variance. But with an
s-shaped surplus response, government debt becomes like a security whose price rises
every time its dividend declines, so even a volatile dividend stream has a steady return.
From the debt accumulation equation (1) we can write the one-period real return,


               rt+1 = it - t+1 = vt+1 - vt + st+1 = [a() - 1]s,t+1 + s,t+1 .


With a()  1, the innovation in value vt+1 reinforces the surplus innovation, so that the
rate of return is more volatile than surpluses. With a() = 0, however, a surprise deficit
st+1 is met by a rise in the value of debt vt+1 , so the overall rate of return is risk free. In fact,
government debt is a negative-beta security with a very low expected return. This fact is
most easily rationalized by a fiscal theory model with low a() and procyclical discount
rates (Cochrane (2019)).



8.5   Estimates

These stylized facts, putting together various data sources, a simple model, and clear
facts, are, I think the most convincing evidence that we must specify an s-shaped surplus
process with small a(). However, one should not slight direct estimates. Table 2 presents
three vector autoregressions involving surpluses and debt. Here, vt is the log market
value of US federal debt divided by consumption, scaled by the consumption/GDP ra-
tio. I divide by consumption to focus on variation in the debt rather than cyclical vari-
                                          FTMP                                              47


                                                                       n is the nominal
ation in GDP.  is the log GDP deflator, gt is log consumption growth, rt
return on the government bond portfolio, it is the three month treasury bill rate and yt is
the 10 year government bond yield. I infer the surplus s from the linearized identity (1),
allowing growth,
                                       n
                          vt+1 = vt + rt +1 - t+1 - gt+1 - st+1 .


Cochrane (2019) describes the data and VAR in more detail.

                       st        vt       t        gt        n
                                                            rt       it       yt      ()      (s)
       VAR st+1 =     0.35     0.043    -0.25     1.37    -0.32     0.50    -0.04    4.75    6.60
         std. err.   (0.09)   (0.022)   (0.31)   (0.45)   (0.16)   (0.46)   (0.58)
           vt+1 =    -0.24      0.98    -0.29    -2.00     0.28    -0.72     1.60
         std. err.   (0.12)    (0.03)   (0.43)   (0.61)   (0.27)   (0.85)   (1.04)
 Small VAR st+1 =     0.55     0.027                                                 5.46    6.60
         std. err.   (0.07)   (0.016)
           vt+1 =    -0.54      0.96
         std. err.   (0.11)    (0.02)
    AR(1) st+1 =      0.55                                                           5.55    6.60
         std. err.   (0.07)



Table 2: Surplus forecasting regressions. Variables are s = surplus, v = debt/GDP,  =
inflation, g = growth, i = 3 month rate, y = 10 year yield. Sample 1947-2018.



      The first group of regressions in Table 2 presents the surplus and value regressions
in the full VAR. The surplus is moderately persistent (0.35). Most importantly, the surplus
responds to the value of the debt (0.043). This coefficient is measured with a t statistic
of barely 2, using simple OLS standard errors. However, this point estimate confirms
estimates such as Bohn (1998). (Bohn includes additional variables in the regression,
which one may interpret as estimates of the  terms of the policy rule, and which soak
up a good deal of residual variance. For this reason, and by using longer samples, Bohn
finds much stronger statistical significance though roughly similar point estimates.) Debt
is very persistent (0.98), and higher surpluses pay down debt (-0.24).
      The second group of estimates presents a smaller VAR consisting of only surplus
and debt. The coefficients are similar to those of surplus and debt in the larger VAR, and
we will see that this smaller VAR contains most of the message of the larger VAR.
 48                                          COCHRANE



      The third estimate is a simple AR(1). Though the small VAR and AR(1) have the
same coefficient 0.55 of the surplus on the lagged surplus we will see how the specifica-
tions differ crucially on long-run properties.



                         1.5


                                    v
                           1



                                                           surplus
               Percent




                         0.5                               debt
                                                           surplus, simple VAR,   =-0.26
                                                           surplus, AR(1)
                                        s,   =-0.31
                           0
                                             s,   =-2.21

                         -0.5




                          -1        s
                                0       5                  10                              15
                                                  Years




Figure 6: Responses to 1% deficit shocks from VARs. "                 =" gives the sum of the re-
sponses.



      Figure 6 presents responses of these VARs to a 1% deficit shock at time 1. I allow all
variables to move contemporaneously to the deficit shock. The central point shows up
right away: The VAR shows an s-shaped surplus moving average. The initial 1.0% deficit
is followed by two more periods of deficit, for a cumulative 1.75% deficit. But then the
surplus response turns positive. The many small positive surpluses chip away at the debt,
                                                                                                
until the sum of surpluses in response to the deficit shock is only -a(1) =                     j =0 s1+j   =
-0.31%.
      Mechanically, the surplus response function comes from the coefficient by which
the surplus responds to the value of debt. The value of debt jumps up initially when
surplus jumps down. Shocks to the surplus and value of debt are strongly negatively cor-
related, itself below a piece of evidence for an s-shaped response: When the government
runs a deficit, the value of debt rises, which can only happen if people expect future re-
payment. Surpluses then respond to the greater value of debt, and slowly bring down
                                               FTMP                                    49


the value of debt. Thus, the s-shaped surplus response estimate is robust and intuitive,
as the ingredients come from the negative sign of the regression of surplus on debt, the
persistent debt response, and the pattern that higher surpluses bring down the value of
debt.
        The simple VAR shows almost exactly the same surplus response as the full VAR,
emphasizing how the response comes just from these intuitive features of that VAR. The
point estimate of the sum of coefficients in the simple VAR is smaller, -a(1) = -0.26. The
simple VAR surplus response crosses that of the full VAR and continues to be larger past
the right end of the graph.
        The AR(1) response looks almost the same ­ but it does not rise above zero. It
would be very hard to tell univariate and VAR surplus responses apart based on autocor-
relations or short-run forecasting ability emphasized in statistical tests. But the long-run
implications are dramatically different. For the AR(1), we have -a(1) = -2.21. Where
a simpleminded constant discount rate model, fed the VAR-estimated surplus process,
predicts 0.26%-0.31% inflation in response to a 1% fiscal shock, the AR(1) predicts 2.28%
inflation. The volatility of real one-period bonds is entirely unexpected inflation, so the
AR(1) also predicts dramatically higher bond return volatility.




8.6     Econometrics

For the purposes of examining present value relations, an estimated AR surplus process
is not just a different specification choice that happens to produce a sharply different
result for the cumulative sum of responses a(). It is wrong. The valuation equation,
simplified for this point to constant discount rate, is
                                                              
                                               
                                 vt = E            j -1 st+j |t                        (57)
                                            j =1


where t denotes people's information set, which crucially includes the current value of
the debt vt . From (57) we may derive
                                                               
                                        
                              vt = E           j -1 st+j |It  t  ,                     (58)
                                        j =1
 50                                           COCHRANE



if the information set It includes the value of debt vt .
        Thus, for example, one may make calculations based on a VAR. The VAR variables
are a subset of all information. By doing so one does not assume that people have no
more information than is included in the VAR.
        But this conditioning down does not work if the information set It does not in-
clude the debt vt . Then, we have E (vt |It ) on the left hand side. Excluding vt from the VAR
and testing a present value relation is simply wrong. Or, more politely, it assumes that
people have no more information than we include in the VAR, which is a false assump-
tion.
        Several additional econometric considerations justify the current wisdom that it is
unwise to try to estimate a surplus process ignoring debt, calculate revisions in its present
value, and test relations such as (58).
        From (21), the univariate surplus process in my parametric example is

                                    1
                                 1-   L                              L
                 st+1 =                            s,t+1 + s             s,t+1 .                 (59)
                           1-   1-
                                       (1 - s L)                 1 - 1-
                                                                       L
                                  L


In the case s = 0, the numerator coefficient is 1/  1. This process is not invertible,
and cannot be recovered from a regression of the surplus on lags of the surplus. An
autoregression will lead to

                           1 - L
           st+1 =                           vs,t+1 ; vs,t+1 = st+1 - E (st+1 |st , st-1 , ...)
                          1-
                    1-      L   (1 - s L)

                                    1 1-2
This wrong estimate has a() =        1-s  ,   and a researcher following this procedure would
be puzzled to see no inflation in the data. In this case, one must include the value of
debt in a VAR in order to correctly estimate the surplus process. (Hansen, Roberds, and
Sargent (1992) make this point in general.)
        When s > 0, we can write the moving average (59) as

                                       1
                                    1-   L + s  L (1 - s L)
                           st+1 =                                    s,t+1
                                              1-
                                       1-       L    (1 - s L)
                                             FTMP                                     51


and hence

                                  (1 - 1 L)(1 - 2 L)
                         st+1 =                            s,t+1 ;                    (60)
                                       1-
                                  1-     L     (1 - s L)

                                  1 - s                   4s s
                         1,2 =               1±     1+               .
                                     2                   (1 - s )2

The parameter  is small, so the numerator coefficients 1,2 are close to one. These de-
cline with s , and eventually cross below one, so the surplus moving average becomes
invertible. Still, the surplus process has multiple nearly-canceling and near-unit AR and
MA roots, which is notoriously difficult to estimate by univariate methods.
      In Figure 1 and Figure 6, the AR(1) disturbance us,t and the two surplus responses
st are clearly hard to distinguish based on univariate methods. But the response of debt
and inflation to the surplus shock captured by s , and the response of surplus to debt
captured by  > 0 are quite different between these processes. A vector autoregres-
sive approach that measures  and s has a much better chance of distinguishing these
processes.
      In sum then, the surplus process specified by this model, like any surplus pro-
cess we expect of a debt issuer, is of a type common, but all too frequently mistreated in
macroeconomics and finance, especially when we are interested in its long-run proper-
ties such as a(). In the form (21), we see a big movement in one direction, followed by
a long string of offsetting movements in other direction. In (60) we see the classic ARMA
with nearly-canceling and near-unit roots.
      The subtleties of measuring the surplus response of this model is good news. They
mean that we need not be too quickly discouraged by empirical work on surpluses that
does not treat these subtleties with care.
      For all these reasons, the modern asset pricing literature, following Campbell and
Shiller (1988) no longer tries to test present value relations. Instead, it recognizes that
relations such as (58) with arbitrary (arbitrage-free, empirical) time-varying expected re-
turns are identities. It remains interesting and productive for economists to measure
terms of identities and see which one matters. Challenges remain in reconciling the time-
varying dividend or surplus and return forecasts that make sense of present value rela-
tions with economic models. But the business of testing present value relations per se ­ of
    52                                    COCHRANE



forecasting the right-hand side of expressions like (58) with information that excludes vt ,
and trying to test equality, has vanished, recognized as an attractive but pointless path.
This insight is only slowly making its way to present value relations in government fi-
nance.


8.7      Summary

Summarizing this whole section, I hope I have put the nail in the coffin that a sensi-
ble surplus process must be s-shaped and allow the government to borrow, incurring
a deficit today, and promising surpluses in the future. This statement is likely not at all
controversial. The more important point is that the fiscal theory can easily accommodate
such a surplus process. The main point of contention is the widespread false impression
that following such a process implies and requires passive fiscal policy, and that any fis-
cal theory of the price level model must be at odds with such basic facts. It does not, and
it is not.



9        Literature and identification

Finally, I describe how this paper relates to and builds on similar work in the literature


9.1      Models

The fiscal theory of monetary policy, uniting fiscal theory with interest rate targets, sticky
prices and other ingredients of the new-Keynesian DSGE paradigm, is a recent develop-
ment in a long literature on the fiscal theory of the price level. Sims (2011) and Cochrane
(2017b) are immediate antecedents, including sticky prices, long-term debt, and com-
puting the response to monetary and fiscal policy shocks. This paper both builds on and
simplifies those models. Both models specify perpetuities and an exogenous AR(1) sur-
plus. As a result, they embody the above puzzles.
          A variety of more complex, and therefore potentially more realistic models have
been built, combining fiscal price determination, detailed fiscal policy, and interest rate
targets. Important examples include Davig and Leeper (2006), Leeper, Traum, and Walker
(2017), Bianchi and Melosi (2017), Bianchi and Ilut (2017), Bhattarai, Lee, and Park (2016),
and Eusepi and Preston (2018).
                                           FTMP                                           53


       These models are specified in much more detail than this paper, and are esti-
mated. Most include detailed fiscal policy, distorting taxes, capital, explicit microfoun-
dations, more complex preferences and technologies, nonlinear solution methods, and
other elaborations. They include the possibility of active fiscal or active monetary policy,
and often Markov switching between the two.
       However, none has included the surplus process with an s-shaped moving aver-
age, or the equivalent possibility that surplus, while reacting to debt, does not react to
arbitrary unexpected inflation. Thus, they all embody the restriction that active fiscal
policy cannot specify governments that substantially repay debt, and their fiscal regime
embodies counterfactual predictions like the above puzzles. Though I deliberately sim-
plify many elements relative to this literature in the quest of transparency, in that respect
this paper is novel.
       In simplest terms, and in this paper's notation, these authors write


                                     st+1 = vt + us,t+1


with positively correlated us,t+1 , typically an AR(1). They identify active fiscal policy with
 = 0, and passive fiscal policy with  > 0. They also write monetary policy rules that
embody identifying restrictions, unlike the general form (27-28). (The models include
other variables such as inflation and output in fiscal policy rules, as I have, and they typ-
ically model taxes and spending separately. Often the positive serial correlation comes
through a lag rather than the disturbance,


                       st+1 = s st + vt + s, t+1 + s,x xt+1 + s,t+1 .


The general point is the same however. Some take  > r or  > r - g as the dividing line.)
       With this structure, these papers are able to identify active-money vs. active-fiscal
regimes. Indeed, many papers incorporate Markov-switching between regimes and mea-
sure which regime the economy is in at a point in time (caveat below). Others split the
sample and identify regimes in subsamples.
       Alas, this approach leads to a conundrum. The active-fiscal regime so constrained
produces the above puzzles. Estimates, which look for the least-bad fit, find active fiscal
policy at most for short periods characterized by volatile inflation, and small regression
 54                                       COCHRANE



coefficients  , typically only the 1970s if even then. In such a period the puzzles pro-
vide less statistical evidence against the model than the apparently more counterfactual
predictions of the models' active-money specifications.
        In this structure, one can eliminate the puzzles by adopting  > 0. Then, even
with positively serially correlated residuals us,t+1 or a single lag s st , the surplus has an
s-shaped moving average that allows substantial debt repayment and eliminates the puz-
zles. But doing so also eliminates active fiscal policy in these specifications. Thus, most
of the time, the estimates find passive fiscal policy.
        At one level, the point of this paper is to write fiscal policy in a way that removes
this conundrum. Fiscal policy can be active, yet we see  > 0 in equilibrium, or we
have a disturbance with an s-shaped moving average, that removes the puzzles. This
generalization should at least broaden the applicability of the active-fiscal regime in such
models.
        More deeply, there is an underlying observational equivalence theorem between
active-fiscal and active-money regimes. That theorem goes back at least to Cochrane
(1998), and we saw it in section 4.5 here. The regime depends only on how people be-
lieve authorities would behave away from the observed equilibrium inflation, and we
cannot see, measure, or test such behavior using only time-series data from an equilib-
rium. Thus, there is a way to write any time series that a model can produce equally as
the unique equilibrium of an active-fiscal as from an active-money specification. I write
fiscal policy in a way that exhibits this observational equivalence, in analogy to King's
elegant writing of the standard monetary equilibrium-selection policy. Then the active-
fiscal regime can apply always, or at least equally well to an active-money regime.
        So how does the standard approach achieve a measurement of active-fiscal vs.
active-money regimes? Well, by making identification assumptions. There is nothing
wrong with identification assumptions. Economics is littered with observational equiva-
lence theorems, and we routinely surmount them with identification assumptions, from
the day we try to tell how much of a price change comes from a shift in supply vs. de-
mand.
        Unfortunately, in this case, the identification assumptions are implicit, and once
stated explicitly they are not compelling. The standard approach assumes that the sur-
plus either responds to all variation in the debt, including that induced by unanticipated
                                           FTMP                                           55


inflation  > 0, or the surplus responds to no variation of the debt at all  = 0. A distur-
bance us,t with small a() would also solve the puzzles in the latter case, but the models
also specify that if  = 0, the surplus must be positively correlated, i.e. has a large value
of a(). These assumptions produce identification all right ­ they produce the puzzles, so
the data can and mostly do reject this regime. But once stated and examined, and ­ im-
portantly ­ once one exhibits a reasonable alternative, these identification assumptions
seem highly artificial.
       Likewise, the standard active-money regime requires identification, essentially
that the response of interest rates to off-equilibrium inflation is the same as the response
of interest rates to inflation in equilibrium, as section 4.5 clarifies. I argue elsewhere such
as Cochrane (2011a) that this identification is just as incredible.
       Now, I may have inferred these papers' implicit identification assumptions ( = 0
and positively autocorrelated surplus) incorrectly. They are complex models and they
use the full set of time series, along with complex formal estimation techniques, to iden-
tify regimes. (In the face of well-known observational equivalence and non-identification
theorems, it would have helped a lot for the authors to state what the identification as-
sumptions are!) But by definition, if a paper can identify active fiscal vs. active money
regimes, in the face of an observational equivalence theorem, that paper must add some
restriction on the kinds of data that one or the other regime can describe. The fact that
the computer programs run, that the standard errors are not infinite, that posteriors are
not exactly equal to priors, that the test for one regime vs. another reports an answer,
means that the modelers have added some restriction that the active-fiscal model can-
not describe some aspect of time series in a way that the active-money model can, and
vice versa.
       I have written the model with no identification assumptions, to emphasize that
an active-fiscal regime can match any data that the model can match in an active-money
regime. The reader naturally may want to take the next step: What is an alternative, more
reasonable set of identifying assumptions, of restrictions on the model's ability to de-
scribe time series, imposed by either regime, by which one may test for active-fiscal vs.
active-money regimes? And please conduct such a test.
       I do not add alternative identification assumptions in the present paper for two
reasons. First, finding credible identifying restrictions is an orthogonal and substantial
 56                                       COCHRANE



contribution, and I don't know how to do it. Second, my writing on this issue argues that
it is a fool's errand. Cochrane (2011a), Cochrane (2017a) and Cochrane (2018) argue that
the standard active-money equilibrium selection policy ( ( -   ) in the notation of
section 4.5 here) simply makes no sense, and the identification restrictions to make that
reaction visible make no sense either. Central banks following interest rate targets do
not have an "equilibrium selection policy" that intentionally destabilizes the economy,
they do not threaten hyperinflation or otherwise to blow up the economy if inflation
differs from their target, (crucially) nobody expects such behavior, and one cannot ob-
serve such an off-equilibrium threat from what they do or what they say. If active-money
doesn't make any sense, there is no point in testing for it. All we have (so far) is active
fiscal policy. So, if you only have one sensible theory, don't restrict it, use it. For these
purposes, just use the v = v  ,  =   equilibrium condition as a theoretical footnote to
answer determinacy. The model has a unique equilibrium, centrally described by how
unexpected inflation reacts to shocks, Et+1 t+1 = i i,t+1 + s s,t+1 . Estimate it, simu-
late it, run policy experiments, enjoy it. Don't bother with formal time-series tests of the
unobservable question, off-equilibrium reactions to v = v  , or  =   , or restricting the
model artificially to appear to test such a thing.
       This approach does not mean that the off-equilibrium foundations are empty of
economic or empirical content. Yes, we should examine carefully and critically the insti-
tutions that commit the government not to respond to unexpected inflation, described
at some length above. Historical episodes and analysis of policy institutions and choices
are deeply informative about the fiscal-monetary regime. (Many excellent papers by Tom
Sargent and coauthors fall in this class, starting with the classic Sargent (1983) to the re-
cent Hall and Sargent (2014) and Bassetto and Sargent (2020).) Economic theory describ-
ing equilibrium foundations is deeply important. (Good recent examples include Atke-
son, Chari, and Kehoe (2010), Bassetto (2002) and Bassetto (2005).) But do not expect
to easily test such off-equilibrium behavior by finding restrictions in time-series drawn
from an equilibrium.
       The reader may not be convinced by the latter approach, and it is not necessary
that he or she be convinced. I only explain why this paper does not add restrictions
linking off-equilibrium behavior to something observable and to attempt a test. Readers
are invited to add identifying assumptions, defend them, and test models that include
                                             FTMP                                            57


them.
        How do these papers, including my own Cochrane (2017b), not notice the sharply
counterfactual implications of their active-fiscal regime? They don't find them because
they don't look for them. None of the cited papers examines whether the fiscal-regime
estimates do or do not display or resolve the above list or related puzzles. (Jiang et al.
(2019), discussed below, notice, but proclaim a puzzle rather than resolve it with an s-
shaped surplus.)
        Not noticing is natural. Estimates, especially formal estimates of complex models
with time-varying regimes, settle on parameters that do least damage to the data, but that
does not mean they don't do a lot of damage to data. Most obviously, most models reject
the fiscal regime for the bulk of their data, since the fiscal regime is tied to counterfactual
puzzles. So the models, at their estimated parameters, don't display the puzzles. Just why
the model rejects a fiscal regime for the 1980s, say, belongs to deep diagnostic exercises
that most authors do not pursue.
        Moreover, this is not their question and goal. The papers are aimed at measuring
impulse response functions at estimated parameters, not evaluating measures of model
fit. And formal measures of fit are not revealing of these sorts of stylized fact problems.
Any model that isn't sprinkled with additional shocks will fail an overall fit test. Many
of the models' structural equations are not exactly true and may provide more statistical
evidence against models than these intuitively appealing facts. Even if one computes a
measure of fit, it's easy to fail to reject the overall fit of a model despite failing the sign of
un-examined point estimates and correlations, if the standard errors are large enough.
You have to look for specific qualitative failures to see such failures.
        (A technical note: the foundations of determinacy are actually more subtle than
they seem. As with monetary policy rules, the  coefficients raise the possibility of more
complex parameter regions. Determinacy relates to whole-model eigenvalues, not one
parameter. More deeply, Markov-switching raises a technical and definitional issue. The
current value of fiscal  and monetary  responses do not necessarily control the long-
run behavior of the economy. If currently  = 0,  > 1 but people expect a switch to
 > 0,  < 1, then we are really in an active fiscal regime. Whether inflation or the
real value of government debt explodes in expectation if the economy starts at an off-
equilibrium inflation rate depends on Markov transition probabilities as well as current
 58                                      COCHRANE



parameter values. Davig and Leeper (2006) point out that an economy which appears
to have both policies passive can be determinate, if people expect at some future date
to switch to one or the other active regime. Much new-Keynesian literature at the zero
bound, where monetary policy must be locally passive, gains determinacy by imagining
a switch to active monetary policy at the end of the zero bound. In sum, even periods
that papers identify as active money, or active fiscal, based on time-varying estimates
of  and  may actually have inflation determined by active fiscal, or active monetary
policy. This is a labeling issue more than a model issue however.)
      Some details:
      Leeper, Traum, and Walker (2017) is a detailed a sticky-price model allowing fiscal
theory solution, aimed at evaluating the output effects of fiscal stimulus. But they specify
fiscal policy as an AR(1) (p. 2416) along with one-period debt. Their paper includes the
above-mentioned indirect mechanism that buffers the AR(1) surplus conundrum some-
what: A deficit leads to inflation, which raises output, which raises tax revenues, and
leads to higher surpluses. But that mechanism is not necessarily large enough to gener-
ate substantial repayment of large debts. Some of their surplus responses change sign,
but one cannot tell how much debt is repaid by subsequent surpluses, and how this dif-
fers across regimes, just by eyeballing the plots. Their paper is focused on a different
issue, of course, so there is no reason they should analyze this question.
      Bianchi and Melosi (2017) specify that taxes follow an AR(1) that responds to out-
put. Their model switches between a passive-fiscal regime in which surpluses respond to
debt and an active-fiscal regime that does not (their equation (6) p. 1041). Government
spending also follows an AR(1) that responds to output (p. 1040). Their paper is centrally
about the absence of deflation in response to a preference shock, and how expectations
of a switch between regimes affects responses to shocks. They don't analyze monetary
policy shocks.
      Bianchi and Ilut (2017) come to an appealing conclusion: The inflation of the
1970s came from loose fiscal policy, and the disinflation of the 1980s followed a fiscal
reform. They augment a new-Keynesian model with a fiscal block and the geometric
term structure for government debt that I use here. They also posit monetary and fiscal
rules that feed back from interest rates and output. Their tax rate feeds back from the
quantity of debt as well as output ­ ~t =  sp 
                                          t,t ~t-1 + ... +  sp ~
                                                          b,t  bm + ... + ,t in their equa-
                                                                t-1
                                            FTMP                                            59


tion (5). They specify Markov-switching between active fiscal and active money regimes,
          sp > 0 and 
between b,t             sp = 0, finding passive fiscal policy in the 1980s and active fis-
                      b,t

cal policy in the 1970s Parts of the resultant puzzle is a feature in their analysis: They find
that the change to active fiscal policy led to an increase in debt as well as to a decline in
inflation, because only a government that commits to repay can borrow large quantities.
The low value of debt in the 1970s results from an active-fiscal government that cannot
commit to repay debts. (This is my interpretation, not theirs.) This story provides a nice
counterexample to the usual story that active fiscal policy pairs large debts with a greater
danger of inflation. But this result only holds because they rule out the possibility that
an active fiscal policy can promise to repay debts, i.e. that we can see a coefficient  > 0
(b,t
   sp > 0) in an active-fiscal equilibrium.


       Bhattarai, Lee, and Park (2016) likewise add fiscal policy to a DSGE model. They
split the sample pre and post-Volcker. They find both monetary and fiscal policy pas-
sive pre-Volker, and thus "equilibrium indeterminacy in the pre-Volcker era," modeled
as sunspot shocks. They include standard fiscal and monetary policy rules (their equa-
tions (1) and (2)). The fiscal rule moves tax rates in response to output, debt, and lagged
tax rates. As in all these papers, the government either responds or does not to the entire
value of debt. Fiscal policy is active if and only if the coefficient of taxes on debt is smaller
than r. (p. 972.)
       Eusepi and Preston (2018) is an active-money passive-fiscal model, in which irra-
tional expectations generate violations of Ricardian equivalence. Even so, they specify
fiscal policy that responds to debt, making it passive, and an i.i.d. shock (Equation (6)).
       While most of this literature sees a change in regime around 1980, there is notably
little agreement which regime held in which sub-period. This fact should warn us that
the regime identification is tenuous.


9.2   Direct estimates

Bohn (1998), finding a positive coefficient  of surplus on debt, writes "The positive re-
sponse of the primary surplus to changes in debt also shows that U. S. fiscal policy is
satisfying an intertemporal budget constraint." This statement might be interpreted in
favor of passive fiscal policy, but it is not. Under the fiscal theory interpretation, we see a
positive coefficient in equilibrium. One might quibble that complete repayment of debts
 60                                      COCHRANE



depends also on the correlation of inflation and fiscal shocks, s above; i.e. a surplus
response can coexist with partial repayment, and the equation at hand is a valuation
equation not a budget constraint. But all of this subtlety long-postdates Bohn's paper.
Bohn does not actually say anything about active vs. passive fiscal policy.
       Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2001) exploit a different prediction to try to test ac-
tive vs. passive fiscal policy. They point out that an AR(1) surplus process, discounted at
a constant rate, with active fiscal policy, predicts that higher surpluses raise the value of
debt, where in the data higher surpluses pay down the debt - essentially focusing on the
opposite regression of debt on surplus. They are unusually aware that their estimate em-
bodies an identifying assumption, that there is an underlying observational equivalence
theorem, and that an s-shaped moving average surplus process can resolve the puzzle.
They argue that the s-shaped surplus process is unreasonable, writing


         "NR [active-fiscal] regimes offer a rather convoluted explanation that re-
      quires the correlation between today's surplus innovation and future surpluses
      to eventually turn negative. We will argue that this correlation structure seems
      rather implausible in the context of an NR regime, where surpluses are gov-
      erned by an exogenous political process."


       I think it is clear with over two decades of ex-post wisdom that an s-shaped sur-
plus process, which results from any borrowing with promise of repayment, is natural
and sensible, no matter how one specifies the government's reaction to unexpected in-
flation and deflation. Even "political processes" must obey the constraints imposed by
market prices, one of which is that people will not lend you money if you do not credibly
promise to pay it back. Their evidence that surpluses pay down debts, and deficits in-
crease the value of debt, is straightforward evidence that the surplus process does have
this s-shaped moving average. The passive-fiscal regime they advocate has such an s-
shaped moving average, induced by  > 0. So s-shaped moving averages are not im-
plausible per se, by their own estimates.
       Cochrane (2001) advocates a surplus process with an s-shaped moving average
representation, in order to fix some of the pathologies of the usual AR(1) specification
and in response to the Canzoneri, Cumby, and Diba (2001) puzzle in particular. That
paper also shows an example in which one incorrectly measures an AR(1) surplus by
                                           FTMP                                          61


leaving debt out of the VAR. There, I wrote the surplus as a sum of two AR(1)s, in which
the short term component may represent cyclical deficits and the long term component
can represent the long-lasting smaller surpluses that repay deficits. This parametric form
also produces a pretty s-shaped response function, visually almost identical to Figure 1,
and it would be easy to incorporate in a model such as this one. But this parametric form
does not neatly encode or generalize the a() = 0 special case, it does not show as clearly
how fiscal policy serves to enforce one specific value of unexpected inflation, and it does
not so clearly illustrate how responses to arbitrary inflation are the only key feature of
active vs. passive fiscal policy, and it does not express observational equivalence as well.
       Jiang et al. (2019) document the puzzle that with a positively correlated surplus
process, government bonds should have volatile and procyclical real returns, and hence
a large expected return. They estimate a VAR that excludes the value of debt as a forecast-
ing variable, contra the advice and counterexample in Cochrane (2001), contra Hansen,
Roberds, and Sargent (1992), and contra the above discussion that leaving out such debt
is a mistake. They pronounce a puzzle to be fixed by very large liquidity premiums in
government bonds. They do not resolve the predictions of volatile government bond
returns, volatile inflation, surpluses that are positively correlated with inflation, and sur-
pluses that raise the value of debt in their model. These predictions remain even with
large but steady liquidity premiums in government bonds.


9.3   Active fiscal policy with repayment

An active fiscal policy in which the government nonetheless can promise debt repay-
ment, or run an s-shaped surplus process, has some precedent, at least implicit.
       Benhabib, Schmitt-Groh´
                             e, and Uribe (2002) advocate that governments undertake
unbacked fiscal expansion to escape a deflationary liquidity trap, and commit to such
expansion ahead of time to avoid such traps. This is a good example of a policy that
repays debt in normal times, but commits not to react to multiple equilibrium inflation.
       Jacobson, Leeper, and Preston (2019) clearly describe the Roosevelt administra-
tion's actions in 1933 as a refusal to accommodate deflation, and to convince people
that the government would undertake an unbacked fiscal expansion. By separating the
budget into a "regular" budget and an "emergency" budget, the government was able to
commit that the former would be repaid, that future borrowing after the emergency had
 62                                       COCHRANE



passed would be repaid, but that the emergency budget was unbacked and should result
in inflation. Bianchi and Melosi (2019) model this distinction between "regular budget"
which is passive-fiscal and an "emergency budget" of unbacked fiscal expansion to fight
deflation.
       Eggertsson (2008) gives a similar account of the history. His theoretical account is
different, focusing on expectations of monetary policy after the end of the zero bound,
but even that account must have the same fiscal underpinnings, "passively" achieved:
The government does not pay off the deflation-induced windfall to bondholders.
       The United Kingdom's fiscal policy in centuries leading up to the famous restora-
tion of gold parity in the 1920s is a good example in the opposite direction. The govern-
ment suspended convertibility to gold during wars, and there was some inflation. Rather
than pay off its nominal debt at the new lower value, the government refused to respond
to that inflation, and repaid debt as if the inflation had not happened. By doing so, it es-
tablished a reputation that enhanced its ability to borrow vast amounts in the first place,
and held down inflation during the period of suspended convertibility. Though the UK
also suffered the economic consequences of high marginal tax rates during restoration,
viewed in intertemporal terms, it was not as senseless a policy as Keynes famously ar-
gued. Whether wise or not, it was a policy followed for centuries and not some-other-
planet artificial policy for us to assume holds today, at least in part, spirit or expectation.




9.4   Additional models with detailed fiscal policy

This literature linking fiscal policy to nominal events is a drop in the ocean of quantita-
tive DSGE models in which fiscal policy feeds back to output. Leeper, Plante, and Traum
(2010) is an excellent example of such dynamic fiscal policy modeling. (In additional to
voluminous economic literature, the authors point to a large-scale IMF effort to develop
such models.) The authors estimate a model with government spending, transfers, and
distorting taxation on labor, capital, and consumption. The model includes many feed-
back mechanisms from fiscal to real events. The model is however entirely real, avoiding
all the price-level determination issues at the heart of this paper. Models of this sort are
ripe for merging with the active-fiscal sort of specification in this paper to include nomi-
nal issues and monetary policy.
                                          FTMP                                            63


      Leeper, Plante, and Traum (2010) includes a sophisticated estimation of a fiscal
VAR. The authors focus on which components of fiscal policy adjust, and find that all fis-
cal instruments except labor taxes react strongly to debt, and all components including
labor taxes contribute to long-run intertemporal financing. (See their Table 2, coeffi-
cients of various variables on debt.) The reaction to debt mirrors the coefficient st+1 =
vt + ... in the very simple VAR of this paper, and produces the sort of s-shaped moving
average I impose here. On its own, such a reaction function would produce passive fiscal
policy. But one can easily construct a model with a real/nominal distinction in which
equilibrium fiscal policy follows the sort of empirical characterization in this paper.


9.5   The Fisherian conundrum

I focus much discussion of the effect of monetary policy shocks on how the model can
overcome the "Fisherian" prediction that higher interest rates without a contemporary
fiscal contraction lead to uniformly higher inflation, and the model can instead produce
a negative inflation response to unexpectedly higher interest rates. The Fisherian predic-
tion is a troubling and robust prediction of rational expectations models (Uribe (2018),
Cochrane (2018)), and tough to eradicate. This paper shows how long-term debt and fis-
cal policy which responds positively to output and inflation can overcome the Fisherian
prediction. That is not a novel contribution, as this ingredient is included in Sims (2011)
and my effort to explain that paper, Cochrane (2017b). It is at least implicit in any paper
that has a maturity structure of nominal debt, including Bianchi and Ilut (2017).
      By working hard to create a negative inflation response to monetary policy I do
not mean to imply thereby that we know the Fisherian prediction is false. Evidence that
higher interest rates reduce inflation, especially without contemporaneous fiscal con-
tractions, is weak. Uribe adds evidence on the other side. Different parameterizations of
this model are also consistent with Fisherian responses.



10    The way forward

This model is still simple and unrealistic. I advance it to show what can be done, and to
build intuition for mechanisms that will appear in larger models, but are clouded by the
interaction of even more effects.
 64                                       COCHRANE



       The obvious next step is to incorporate this sort of fiscal policy into more detailed
and realistic fiscal-monetary models, of the sort cited above. If I were in charge, I would
estimate them entirely in an active-fiscal regime. The point of this paper is that it is nearly
trivial to adapt any new-Keynesian DSGE model to active-fiscal underpinnings. Even-
tually one wants even more ambitious models incorporating habits or other dynamic
preferences and investment adjustment costs, heterogeneity, variation in risk premia, la-
bor market and investment frictions, the latest in financial frictions, zero bounds, and
so forth. Clearly, one wants detailed fiscal modeling including distorting taxes and infla-
tionary effects in tax and spending policies by which fiscal affairs feed back to real affairs
and inflation.
       A major point of this paper is that one can construct such models, and quite easily
from a technical standpoint. But finding the right model is not so easy, as that specifica-
tion search has not been so easy for standard new-Keynesian models.
       My monetary policy rule is simplistic, needing at least lags of the interest rate and
other variables, expected future variables, and an effective lower bound, plus match-
ing policy rule regressions in data. Specifying and estimating the fiscal policy rule is a
challenge of similar order, not yet started, and made even more challenging by the fact
that any sensible rule, such as this one, has subtle but crucial long-run responses, or a
latent state variable. On the other hand, much of the fiscal policy rule can be estimated
from structural knowledge of the tax code, the nature of automatic stabilizers, and visible
spending decisions such as stimulus programs in recessions, where the monetary policy
rule consists only of modeling the human decisions of central bankers. Estimating the
parameters  of the fiscal policy may be easier than running regressions with delicate
instruments for right hand variables correlated with error terms.
       If one wants to test monetary vs. fiscal price level determination, one needs to
come up with credible identifying assumptions, as outlined above. Or, one can join in
my announcement that such tests are pointless and analyze models entirely in the active-
fiscal regime.
       Like the rest of the model, this surplus process can and should be generalized to-
wards realism in many ways. News about future surpluses and historical episodes are
likely not well modeled by AR(1) shocks to the disturbance us,t . The choice to finance
deficits by inflating existing debt vs. borrow against future surpluses is likely to change
                                          FTMP                                     65


over time and in response to state variables as well.
      There are many steps to take. But each step is also an unexplored opportunity.
 66                                          COCHRANE



References
Atkeson, Andrew, Vardarajan V. Chari, and Patrick J. Kehoe. 2010. "Sophisticated Monetary Poli-
  cies." Quarterly Journal of Economics 125 (1):47­89.

Bassetto, Marco. 2002. "A game-theoretic view of the fiscal theory of the price level." Econometrica
  70:2167­ 2195.

------. 2005. "Equilibrium and government commitment." Journal of Economic Theory 124 (1):79
  ­ 105. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022053104001334.

Bassetto, Marco and Thomas J. Sargent. 2020. "Shotgun Wedding: Fiscal and Monetary Policy."
  Federal Reserve of Minneapolis Staff Report 599 .

Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Groh´
                                      e, and Mart´
                                                 in Uribe. 2002. "Avoiding Liquidity Traps."
  Journal of Political Economy 110 (3):535­563.

Bhattarai, Saroj, Jae Won Lee, and Woong Yong Park. 2016. "policy regimes, policy shifts, and u.s.
  business cycles." The Review of Economics and Statistics 98:968­983.

Bianchi, Francesco and Cosmin Ilut. 2017. "Monetary/Fiscal policy mix and agents' beliefs." Re-
  view of Economic Dynamics 26:113 ­ 139. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
  pii/S1094202517300315.

Bianchi, Francesco and Leonardo Melosi. 2017.          "Escaping the Great Recession."      Ameri-
  can Economic Review 107 (4):1030­58. URL http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.
  20160186.

------. 2019.   "The dire effects of the lack of monetary and fiscal coordination."         Journal
  of Monetary Economics 104:1 ­ 22. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/
  S0304393218300564.

Blanchard, Olivier Jean and Charles M. Kahn. 1980. "The Solution of Linear Difference Models un-
  der Rational Expectations." Econometrica 48 (5):1305­1311. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/
  1912186.

Bohn, Henning. 1998. "The Behavior of U. S. Public Debt and Deficits*." The Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 113 (3):949­963. URL https://doi.org/10.1162/003355398555793.

Campbell, John Y. and Robert J. Shiller. 1988. "The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
  Future Dividends and Discount Factors." The Review of Financial Studies 1 (3):195­228. URL
  +http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/rfs/1.3.195.
                                             FTMP                                           67


Canzoneri, Matthew B., Robert E. Cumby, and Behzad T. Diba. 2001. "Is the Price Level Deter-
  mined by the Needs of Fiscal Solvency?" American Economic Review 91:1221­1238.

Clarida, Richard, Jordi Gal´
                           i, and Mark Gertler. 2000. "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic
  Stability: Evidence and Some Theory,." Quarterly Journal of Economics 115:147­180.

Cochrane, John H. 1998. "A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation." NBER Macroeconomics Annual
  13:323­384. URL http://www.jstor.org/stable/4623752.

------. 2001. "Long term debt and optimal policy in the fiscal theory of the price level." Econo-
  metrica 69:69­116.

------. 2011a. "Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules." Journal of Political Economy
  119:565­615.

------. 2011b. "Determinacy and Identification with Taylor Rules, Manuscript with Techni-
  cal Appendix." URL http://faculty.chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/taylor
  rule jpe final.pdf.

------. 2017a. "The New-Keynesian Liquidity Trap." Journal of Monetary Economics 92:47­63.
  URL https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmoneco.2017.09.003.

------. 2017b. "Stepping on a Rake: the Fiscal Theory of Monetary Policy." European Economic
  Review 101:354­375.

------. 2018. "Michelson-Morley, Fisher, and Occam: The Radical Implications of Stable Quiet
  Inflation at the Zero Bound." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 32:113­226. URL http://faculty.
  chicagobooth.edu/john.cochrane/research/papers/MM occam fisher.pdf.

------. 2019. "The Fiscal Roots of Inflation." Manuscript .

Davig, Troy and Eric Leeper. 2006. "Fluctuating Macro Policies and the Fiscal Theory." In NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual 2006. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 247­298.

Eggertsson, Gauti B. 2008. "Great Expectations and the End of the Depression." American
  Economic Review 98 (4):1476­1516. URL http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.98.
  4.1476.

Eusepi, Stefano and Bruce Preston. 2018. "Fiscal Foundations of Inflation: Imperfect Knowledge."
  American Economic Review 108 (9):2551­89. URL http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id=10.1257/
  aer.20131461.
 68                                          COCHRANE



Hall, George J. and Thomas J. Sargent. 2014. "Fiscal Discriminations in Three Wars." Journal of
  Monetary Economics 61:148­166.

Hansen, Lars Peter, William Roberds, and Thomas J. Sargent. 1992. "Implications of present value
  budget balance and of martingale models of consumption and taxes." In Rational Expectations
  Econometrics, edited by Lars Peter Hansen and Thomas J. Sargent. London and Boulder, Co.:
  Westview Press, 121­161. URL http://www.tomsargent.com/books.html.

Hansen, Lars Peter and Thomas J. Sargent. 1981.                 "A Note on Wiener-Kolmogorov
  Prediction Formulas for Rational Expectations Models."               Federal Reserve of Min-
  neapolis    Staff   Report    URL     https://www.minneapolisfed.org/research/staff-reports/
  a-note-on-wienerkolmogorov-prediction-formulas-for-rational-expectations-models.

Jacobson, Margaret M, Eric M Leeper, and Bruce Preston. 2019. "Recovery of 1933." Working Pa-
  per 25629, National Bureau of Economic Research. URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w25629.

Jiang, Zhengyang. 2019a. "Fiscal cyclicality and currency risk premia." Manuscript .

------. 2019b. "US Fiscal Cycle and the Dollar." Manuscript .

Jiang, Zhengyang, Hanno N. Lustig, Stijn Van Nieuwerburgh, and Mindy Z. Xiaolan. 2019. "The
  U.S. Public Debt Valuation Puzzle." Manuscript URL https://ssrn.com/abstract=3333517.

King, Robert G. 2000. "The New IS-LM Model: Language, Logic, and Limits." Federal Reserve Bank
  of Richmond Economic Quarterly 86 (3):45­104.

Leeper, Eric M. 1991. "Equilibria Under `Active' and `Passive' Monetary and Fiscal Policies." Jour-
  nal of Monetary Economics 27:129­147.

Leeper, Eric M., Michael Plante, and Nora Traum. 2010. "Dynamics of fiscal financing in the
  United States." Journal of Econometrics 156 (2):304 ­ 321. URL http://www.sciencedirect.com/
  science/article/pii/S0304407609002905.

Leeper, Eric M., Nora Traum, and Todd B. Walker. 2017. "Clearing Up the Fiscal Multiplier
  Morass." American Economic Review 107 (8):2409­54. URL http://www.aeaweb.org/articles?
  id=10.1257/aer.20111196.

Ramey, Valerie A. 2011. "Identifying Government Spending Shocks: It's all in the Timing." The
  Quarterly Journal of Economics 126:1­50.

Romer, Christina D. and David H. Romer. 1989. "Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in
  the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz." NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4:121­170. URL https:
  //doi.org/10.1086/654103.
                                              FTMP                                             69


Sargent, Thomas J. 1983. "The Ends of Four Big Inflations." In Inflation: Causes and Effects, edited
  by Robert E. Hall. University of Chicago Press, for the NBER, 41­97.

Sims, Christopher A. 2011. "Stepping on a rake: The role of fiscal policy in the inflation of the
  1970s." European Economic Review 55:48­56. URL doi:10.1016/j.euroecorev.2010.11.010.

Uribe, Martn. 2018. "The Neo-Fisher Effect: Econometric Evidence from Empirical and Optimiz-
  ing Models." NBER Working Paper 25089 URL http://www.nber.org/papers/w25089.
                                          FTMP                                          1


    Online Appendix to "A Fiscal Theory of Monetary Policy with
                Partially Repaid Long-Term Debt"



A   Model solution algebra

This Appendix sets out the algebra to solve the model (33)-(44). I express the model in
the form
                               yt+1 = Byt + Ct+1 + Dt+1                               (61)

where y is a vector of variables,  are the structural shocks, and  are expectational errors
in the equations that only tie down expectations. (The general case has a leading term
Ayt+1 , but we do not need that here.) We eigenvalue decompose the transition matrix
B , we solve unstable roots forward and stable roots backward to determine the expecta-
tional errors  as a function of the structural shocks . Then, we can compute impulse-
response functions. This is the standard Blanchard and Kahn (1980) method, applied to
this problem.
      For ease of reference, the model (33)-(44) is


                               xt = Et xt+1 -  (it - Et t+1 )                         (62)

                               t = Et t+1 + xt                                        (63)

                               it = i t + ix xt + ui,t                                (64)
                                                       
                             st+1 = s t+1 + sx xt+1 + vt + us,t+1                     (65)
                                         n     
                           vt +1 = vt + rt+1 - t+1 - st+1                             (66)
                                        n
                           vt+1 = vt + rt +1 - t+1 - st+1                             (67)
                             
                          Et t +1 = Et t+1                                            (68)
                           
                      Et+1 t +1 = -s s,t+1 - i i,t+1                                  (69)
                              n
                          Et rt +1 = it                                               (70)
                              n
                             rt +1 = qt+1 - qt                                        (71)

                           ui,t+1 = i ui,t + i,t+1                                    (72)

                           us,t+1 = s us,t + s,t+1 .                                  (73)
 2                                         COCHRANE



As outlined in the text, we can difference (66)-(67) to yield

                                      -1        
                      vt+1 - vt +1 =     (vt - vt ) - -1 (t+1 - t
                                                                
                                                                  ).

                                                     ,  =   . We could leave the 
Thus with   1, stationary solutions must have vt = vt  t  t

in and let the matrix solution method figure that out, but it's easier to do that manually
now. We just impose that the  values equal the non-* variables.
                       = v , (13), and (69) just describe how surpluses and debt evolve
       Now (65) with vt   t

given the other variables. Debt does not explode because  > 0 in (11). The model
looks like passive fiscal policy with one crucial exception: it allows only one value of un-
expected inflation in (69). The point of fiscal theory is to determine unexpected inflation
in the place of a Taylor principle threat, and that is just all this fiscal theory does. For
                                                                         n } given { ,  }
solving the model, then, we can simplify by first solving for {t , xt , rt          s,t i,t

and then calculating


                           st+1 = s t+1 + sx xt+1 + vt + us,t+1                         (74)
                                       n
                          vt+1 = vt + rt +1 - t+1 - st+1

                         us,t+1 = s us,t + s,t+1 .                                      (75)


Again, we could leave it all in and the computer will figure out that this block is indepen-
dent, but it's prettier and adds intuition to simplify the model algebraically first.
       Adding  shocks in place of expectations and rearranging the equations we now
have


                          xt+1 = xt + it - t+1 + x,t+1 + ,t+1

                        t+1 = t - xt + ,t+1

                             it = i t + ix xt + ui,t

                        ,t+1 = -s s,t+1 - i i,t+1
                           n
                          rt +1 = it + rn ,t+1
                                     n
                        qt+1 = qt + rt +1

                        ui,t+1 = i ui,t + i,t+1
                                                FTMP                                     3


                       n ,
Eliminating it , ,t , rt +1


                                                    1
                 xt+1 =       1++ ix xt +  i -                    t + ui,t + x,t+1
                                                    
                               1
                 t+1   = - xt + t - s s,t+1 - i i,t+1
                               
               qt+1 = ix xt + i t + qt + ui,t + rn ,t+1

               ui,t+1 = i ui,t + i,t+1 .


or in matrix form,
                                                                                     
               xt+1              1 + ix + / i - /                  0            xt
                                                                                     
             t+1                       -/              1/          0    0   t
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                       =                                                             
                                                                                     
             qt+1                      ix /            i /        1/ 1/   qt         
                                                                                     
             ui,t+1                     0               0          0  i      ui,t
                                                                     
                                   0    0            1            0
                                                                             
                            -i -s            i,t+1   0            0  x,t+1
                                                                     
                          +                 
                                                   +
                                                                     
                                                                             
                            0   0            s,t+1   0            1   r ,t+1
                                                                        n
                                                                     
                             1  0                    0            0

       Now, we solve the model as


                                 yt+1 = Byt + Ct+1 + Dt+1

                                 yt+1 = QQ-1 yt + Ct+1 + Dt+1

                          Q-1 yt+1 = Q-1 yt + Q-1 Ct+1 + Q-1 Dt+1

                                 zt+1 = zt + Q-1 Ct+1 + Q-1 Dt+1                        (76)


Let Gf select rows with eigenvalues greater than or equal to one, and Gb select rows with
eigenvalues less than one. For example, if the first and third eigenvalues are greater than
or equal to one,
                                                               
                                               1 0 0 0 ...
                                       Gf =                    ,
                                               0 0 1 0 ...
 4                                        COCHRANE


                                                            
                                          0 1 0 0 ...
                                Gb =                        .
                                          0 0 0 1 ...

The zt corresponding to eigenvalues greater than one must be zero, so we can find the
expectational errors t+1 in terms of the structural shocks t+1 ,


                              0 = Gf Q-1 Ct+1 + Gf Q-1 Dt+1
                                                 -1
                           t+1 = - Gf Q-1 D            Gf Q-1 Ct+1


For this to work there must be as many rows of Gf as columns of  , i.e. as many eigenval-
ues greater or equal to one as there are expectational errors. Substituting in (76), we have
the evolution of the transformed z variables,

                                                          -1
                  zt+1 = zt + Q-1 I - D Gf Q-1 D               Gf Q-1 Ct+1 ,


and then the original variables obey


                                          yt = Qzt .


      I include two small refinements. First, for computation it is better to force the
elements of zt that should be zero to be exactly zero. Machine zeros (1e-14) multiplied by
explosive eigenvalues eventually explode. Thus, I find the non-zero z only by simulating
forward the nonzero elements of z ,

                                                                -1
              Gb zt+1 = Gb zt + Gb Q-1 C - D Gf Q-1 D                Gf Q-1 C t+1 .



B    Basic policy rule regressions

I report here basic policy rule regressions. I do not report them in the paper or use their
values, since I do not attempt the hard topic of identification ­ whether the correlation
between interest rates and inflation, say, represents the policy rule feedback or the re-
sponse of inflation to an interest rate shock. I present them to show the data, and to give
reassurance that a fiscal policy rule which loads on output and (to a lesser extent) on
inflation is not unreasonable, and to examine the size of the correlations.
                                          FTMP                                         5




                                  it = a + it-1 + bxt + ct + ui,t
                                             b       c       u       R2
                          OLS              0.19    0.98     0.72    0.52
                           s.e.           (0.16) (0.21)
                   Single OLS              0.13            0.90     0.01
                           s.e.           (0.23)
                   Single OLS                      0.97     0.69    0.50
                           s.e.                   (0.21)
                       1 - L               0.29    0.48             0.29
                           s.e.           (0.10) (0.24)
                      With lag     0.81    0.30    0.22     0.16    0.86
                           s.e.   (0.06) (0.06) (0.11)
                     b/(1 - )              1.55    1.15
                                  st = a + st-1 + bxt + ct + us,t
                                             b       c       u       R2
                          OLS              1.62   -0.38     0.37    0.37
                           s.e.           (0.34) (0.35)
                   Single OLS              1.64            0.38     0.35
                           s.e.           (0.32)
                   Single OLS                     -0.49    0.53     0.03
                           s.e.                   (0.44)
                       1 - L               1.45   -0.24             0.26
                           s.e.           (0.33) (0.37)
                      With lag     0.39    1.27   -0.38    -0.06    0.50
                           s.e.   (0.10) (0.27) (0.27)
                     b/(1 - )              2.06   -0.62



Table 3: Policy rule regressions. i= interest rate, x = GDP gap, s = surplus. Sample 1949-
2018.
6                                   COCHRANE




    0.15
                                                                     i
                                                                     gap
                                                                     pi


      0.1




    0.05




       0




    -0.05




     -0.1
            0        10      20      30      40      50       60           70




                Figure 7: Interest rate, output gap, and inflation




      0.2
                                                                     s
                                                                     gap
    0.15                                                             pi


      0.1


    0.05


       0


    -0.05


     -0.1


    -0.15


     -0.2


    -0.25


     -0.3
            0        10      20      30      40      50       60           70




                  Figure 8: Surplus, output gap, and inflation
                                          FTMP                                           7


       Table 3 presents regressions of the interest rate and surplus on inflation and the
output gap. Figure 7 presents the interest rate, output gap and inflation data underlying
the monetary policy rule regressions, and Figure 8 presents the surplus, output gap and
inflation data underlying the surplus policy rule regressions. The data are annual, and
the same as used in Cochrane (2019).
       These are simple regressions, that make no effort to surmount the profound iden-
tification problems of estimating policy rules. In the model, inflation and output gap
respond contemporaneously to a surplus and interest rate shocks, so the right hand vari-
able and error terms of the policy rule regressions are correlated. I include the regressions
to characterize the data, and to give some sense of reasonable magnitudes.
       Though there are thousands of monetary policy rule regressions in the literature, I
start with that regression in part to frame the contrast with surplus policy rule regressions
in the same data set. The OLS regressions show a small 0.19 output gap response and a
large, nearly unit inflation response. The residual is strongly serially correlated. Figure
7 shows that the inflation response is, of course, driven by the rise and fall of inflation
in the 1970s and 1980s. The single regression coefficients are just about the same as
the multiple regression coefficients, with the output gap providing very little explanatory
power.
       One may wish to focus on the business cycle frequencies. The next two rows do
that, and address serial correlation of the error, in two different ways. Using the error
serial correlation i of the OLS regression, the regression labeled "1 - L" runs (1 - L)it
on (1 - L)xt + (1 - L)t . This specification mirrors that of the policy rule, (35) and
(43). If the regression is correctly specified, the quasi-differenced coefficients should be
the same. Here, the main effect is to lower the inflation response to about 0.5. The nearly
unit inflation response does reflect the low frequency rise and fall of inflation rather than
business cycle movement.
       Adding a lagged interest rate, in the last regression estimates a partial adjustment
model, common in the monetary policy shock literature. The coefficients are reduced,
but the implied long run coefficients are much larger. One needs this sort of model to
produce a coefficient greater than one on inflation, as Clarida, Gal´
                                                                    i, and Gertler (2000)
famously found. Stationary data do not easily produce a coefficient that leads to explo-
sive behavior.
  8                                       COCHRANE



       Overall, these regressions reflect the great uncertainty and sensitivity to specifica-
tion typical of the literature.
       The OLS regression estimate of the surplus rule shows most of all a strong associ-
ation with the output gap. This association stands out in Figure 8. It is clear at business
cycle frequencies and also in the long dip of potential GDP (and, not reported, unem-
ployment) in the 1970s and 1980s. The tables are turned. Here the output gap is the
strong correlation, and the inflation coefficient is insignificant and results in very small
R2 .
       This surplus is the ratio of surplus to value of the debt, or equivalently (surplus/GDP)
to (value/GDP). Thus, the coefficient that a 1% rise in GDP gap results in a 1.62 percent-
age point rise in surplus means, if debt/GDP = 0.5, a 0.81 percentage point rise in sur-
plus/GDP ratio.
       One expects the coefficient of surplus on inflation to be positive, due to an im-
perfectly indexed tax code. The coefficient is -0.38, though insignificant. One can see in
Figure 8 that the 1970s, with high inflation, had lower surpluses. This observation how-
ever reinforces the central weak point of such regressions. The negative correlation of
surpluses with inflation is likely the response of inflation to surplus shocks, not the rule.
       Any serious estimation of policy rules, which this is not, must take the identifica-
tion problem seriously. To measure the interest rate or surplus policy rules, we must find
movements in inflation and output gap which are not correlated with the interest rate
or surplus disturbances ui,t and us,t . This is a different task than the usual one, of mea-
suring directly the economy's response to monetary or fiscal policy shocks. There, one
must find movements in ui,t and us,t that are not correlated with changing expectations
of future inflation, output, etc.
       This is not a hopeless task. The Romer and Romer (1989) approach could look
for such shocks. Romer and Romer looked for shocks that were a response to inflation,
but not to output, in order to measure the response of output to such shocks. We need to
measure the systematic part of policy, not the economy's response to policy. So, we either
need narrative measurements of the systematic component, or we can use the monetary
shock to measure the fiscal response function. Likewise Ramey (2011) pioneered the
use of military spending as an exogenous shock to us,t . We can use this to measure the
monetary response function.
                                                   FTMP                                 9


        The structural or narrative approach may be much more fruitful for the fiscal re-
sponse function than it is for the monetary response function. Much of the strong re-
sponse of surpluses to output, and the response we wish to measure to inflation, are
generated by the tax code and automatic stabilizers. Those can be modeled to generate
s parameters. Additional fiscal decisions are measurable too, in acts of congress.
        Identification and estimation within the structure of a model may also be fruitful.
The task is not as hopeless as it seems from the Cochrane (2011a) critique of monetary
policy rule estimation in new-Keynesian models. That paper concerned the difficulties
of measuring off-equilibrium responses from data in an equilibrium, which really is hard.
The  responses here are all relations between variables that we do see in equilibrium.




C    Hansen-Sargent formulas

Here is the algebra for the Hansen, Roberds, and Sargent (1992) formula (23)

                                            
                                     Et+1          j st+1+j = a()t+1
                                            j =0


where                                                      
                                     st+1 = a(L)t+1 =            aj t-j .
                                                          j =0

We just write out the terms,

                           
                 Et+1             j st+1+j = Et+1 (a0 t+1 + a1 t + a2 t-1 + ...
                           j =0

                                          + a0 t+2 + a1 t+1 + a2 t + ...

                                          + 2 a0 t+3 + 2 a1 t+2 + 2 a2 t+1 + ...)


Only the t+1 terms are nonzero so

                     
             Et+1          j st+1+j = a0 t+1 + a1 t+1 + a2 t+1 + ... = a()t+1
                    j =0


        Here is a derivation of the Hansen and Sargent (1981) prediction formula equation
  10                                                     COCHRANE



(25). If
                                                      st+1 = a(L)t+1

then                                        
                                                                 a(L) - a()
                                       Et          j -1 st+j =              t+1 .          (77)
                                                                  1 - L-1
                                            j =1

           We just write out the right hand terms and re-group them

                      
                 Et          j -1 st+j = Et (a0 t+1 + a1 t + a2 t-1 + a3 t-2 + ...
                      j =1

                                        + a0 t+2 + a1 t+1 + a2 t + a3 t-1 + ...

                                        + 2 a0 t+3 + 2 a1 t+2 + 2 a2 t+1 + 2 a2 t + ...)


The terms inside the expectation are given by

                              
                                                        1                1
                                    j -1 st+j =           -
                                                              st+1 =         a(L)t+1       (78)
                                                    1 - L   1        1 - L-1
                             j =1


So to generate the conditional expectation Et we need to subtract off the terms in t+1
and forward. They are


                a0 t+1 + a0 t+2 + a1 t+1 + 2 a0 t+3 + 2 a1 t+2 + 2 a2 t+1 + ...

                = a0 + a1 + 2 a2 + ... t+1 +  a0 + a1 + 2 a2 + ... t+2 + ...
                                 1
                = a()                t+1 .
                             1 - L-1

Subtracting these terms from (78), we get (77).
