                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




      DRUG FIRMS' PAYMENTS AND PHYSICIANS' PRESCRIBING BEHAVIOR IN
                            MEDICARE PART D

                                        Colleen Carey
                                       Ethan M.J. Lieber
                                         Sarah Miller

                                      Working Paper 26751
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26751


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




We are grateful for helpful comments from Judy Hellerstein, Seth Freedman, Sean Nicholson,
Ashley Swanson, Benedic Ippolito, Thuy Nguyen, and seminar participants at Harvard
University, Cornell University, University of Michigan, Duke University, Johns Hopkins
University, University of Maryland, the 2020 American Economic Association meetings, the
2015 International Health Economics Association meetings, the 2015 American Health
Economics Conference, the 2016 Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management
Annual Meeting. Anup Das provided excellent research assistance. Colleen Carey acknowledges
the financial support of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Colleen Carey, Ethan M.J. Lieber, and Sarah Miller. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Drug Firms' Payments and Physicians' Prescribing Behavior in Medicare Part D
Colleen Carey, Ethan M.J. Lieber, and Sarah Miller
NBER Working Paper No. 26751
February 2020
JEL No. D83,I11,L15

                                         ABSTRACT

In a pervasive but controversial practice, drug firms frequently make monetary or in-kind
payments to physicians in the course of promoting prescription drugs. We use a federal database
on the universe of such interactions between 2013 and 2015 linked to prescribing behavior in
Medicare Part D. We account for the targeting of payments with fixed effects for each physician-
drug combination. In an event study, we show that physicians increase prescribing of drugs for
which they receive payments in the months just after payment receipt, with no evidence of
differential trends between paid and unpaid physicians prior to the payment. Using hand-collected
efficacy data on three major therapeutic classes, we show that those receiving payments prescribe
lower-quality drugs following payment receipt, although the magnitude is small and unlikely to
be clinically significant. In addition, we examine five case studies of major drugs going off
patent. Physicians receiving payments from the firms experiencing the patent expiry transition
their patients just as quickly to generics as physicians who do not receive such payments.


Colleen Carey                                           Sarah Miller
Department of Policy Analysis and Management            Ross School of Business
Cornell University                                      University of Michigan
MVR Hall, Room 298                                      701 Tappan Street
Ithaca, NY 14853                                        Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER                                                and NBER
colleenmariecarey@gmail.com                             mille@umich.edu

Ethan M.J. Lieber
Department of Economics
University of Notre Dame
3049 Jenkins Nanovic Halls
Notre Dame, IN 46556
and NBER
elieber@nd.edu
1    Introduction
More than 85 percent of drug firms' marketing expenditures are targeted at influencing physi-
cians as the key prescribing decision-maker (Pew Charitable Trust, 2013). Such marketing
expenditures include face-to-face "detailing" visits from pharmaceutical sales representatives
that commonly involve purchases of food and beverage for physicians, as well as high-dollar
speaking fees or travel reimbursements. These financial interactions are commonly thought
to distort physician's prescribing decisions; Consumer Reports declares that "a major con-
flict of interest is at work when a physician has accepted payments from a drug company
whose products he or she then prescribes" (Consumer Reports, 2014). However, the fact that
drug firms target payments at physicians who are ex ante most likely to prescribe the drug
makes it difficult to establish the causal effect of payments. In addition, even if payments
influence a physician's behavior, it is an empirical question whether patients' outcomes are
helped or harmed. Defenders of the practice argue that payments facilitate education on a
fast-changing evidence base: "Pharma reps provide timely access to balanced, FDA-approved
research and information. This `delivery mechanism' organically complements and reinforces
the information they receive from medical journals and conferences" (Flewell, 2006).
     In this paper, we use rich microdata to evaluate how financial interactions between drug
firms and physicians affect prescribing outcomes such as expenditures, the number of patients
taking the drug, transitions to generic versions of branded drugs, and the quality of prescribed
drugs. Our analysis links the Open Payments dataset--the universe of monetary or in-kind
payments that drug firms made to physicians between 2013 and 2015--to prescription data
for a large panel of Medicare Part D enrollees. We examine prescribing behavior at the
monthly level to identify abrupt changes in a physician's prescribing of a drug that occur
right after a physician receives a payment related to that drug. This "event study" approach
permits physician by drug fixed effects, allowing us to overcome the empirical challenge that
physicians who receive payments tend to be ex ante higher-volume physicians than those who
do not. Our approach also allows us to examine the trends of paid and unpaid physicians
prior to the payment's receipt and to confirm that paid physicians are not on different
trends prior to the payment, and that they diverge in their prescribing behavior only after
the payment is received. These patterns support the claim that our analysis captures the
causal impact of payments on prescribing behaviors.
     We find that over the years 2013-2015, more than one-fifth of branded expenditure in
Part D comes from a physician who has recently received a payment for the drug, and 29
percent of Part D physicians are paid for at least one drug over the sample period. If the
payments have substantial causal impacts on prescribing behavior, the prevalence of the


                                               2
practice implies that the financial impacts are economically large.
    In our primary specification, we find that paid and unpaid physicians are trending simi-
larly prior to receiving a payment. However, beginning in the month the payment is received,
paid physicians increase the number of patients taking the drug for which they received a
payment and increase the total amount of expenditures on that drug. Our results suggest
that a single payment raises expenditures on the paying drug1 by $121 during the first year,
or 4 percent, with effects peaking approximately six months after the payment is made and
declining after that. Scaling up this effect to the full prescription drug market, and dividing
through by the best-available estimates of the cost of the marginal visit to a doctor, we find
that drug firms can expect $2.64 in returns for another dollar spent in these marketing ef-
forts. Although large, this is considerably smaller than existing estimates (Narayanan et al.,
2004; Schwartz and Woloshin, 2019).
    We next explore heterogeneity by type of payment and market structure. Firstly, we
characterize payments by the type and dollar value. The majority of payments are an in-
kind meal, while others signify a deeper relationship, e.g. fees for speaking or conducting
continuing medical education. Eighty percent of payments are less than $20. We find that
our overall effects are driven by food payments and low-dollar payments. We also show how
the impact of a drug's payment varies with its competitive setting. If a doctor receives a
payment from two drugs in the same therapeutic class, the second payment partially offsets
the impact of the first payment. In addition, we show that payments have a higher estimated
impact in therapeutic classes with five or fewer drugs making payments as compared to all
classes.
    We conduct two exercises to assess the impact of these payments not only on prescrib-
ing behavior, but on welfare-relevant quality outcomes. Payments from drug firms may
increase expenditures without decreasing patient well-being if these payments also improve
the quality of the drug prescribed. We use hand-collected data on drug efficacy for three
major therapeutic classes where there is a common and well-defined clinical endpoint for
drug therapy. For each therapeutic class, we obtain a unidimensional efficacy measurement
for every molecule from the medical literature. Using this drug quality measure, we find
that paid and non-paid physicians prescribe drugs of a similar quality prior to receiving a
payment, but that relative drug quality falls among drugs prescribed by paid physicians after
the payment. Although these reductions in drug quality are statistically significant, they are
very small; our confidence intervals allow us to rule out reductions in drug efficacy larger
than about 1/100th of a standard deviation. Thus, we conclude that, on average, there are
   1
     For ease of exposition, we describe instances in which a firm makes a payment to a physician related to
a particular drug as the drug "paying" the physician.



                                                     3
no clinically meaningful changes in prescribing quality.
    As a second evaluation of prescribing quality, we examine five case studies in which a
major drug went off patent. If paid physicians do not transition their patients to a generic
version of a drug following a patent expiry, this behavior would financially reward the drug
firms and increase patients' cost-sharing, suggesting the physicians are poor agents for their
patients. We find that paid physicians move patients just as quickly to the generic version
of the drug as unpaid physicians, contradicting some media reports (e.g. Gold, 2001). At
the same time, we observe that paid physicians also tend to switch patients to the (still
patent protected) extended release version of a molecule that has lost patent protection.
Extended release versions commonly cost substantially more but only improve on the original
version in convenience. Taken together, we find that payments to physicians do not impede
the transition to generics in the general case, but can help a drug firm implement a "line
extension" with potentially low benefits for patients.
    Our paper contributes to the literature that explores whether pharmaceutical detailing
affects the quantity and cost of physicians' prescribing. The majority of past work in the
medical literature has found a positive relationship between a physician's exposure to phar-
maceutical companies' sales representatives and the quantity and cost of prescribed drugs.
However, most of these studies have not addressed the selection of payments to physicians2 or
are studying the impacts of other types of pharmaceutical firm marketing (Adair and Holm-
gren, 2005; Dolovich et al., 1999; Freemantle et al., 2000). Some recent analyses in economics
and marketing have used longitudinal data to explore the effect of payments on prescribing,
but are limited to a small number of drugs (e.g. Mizik and Jacobson, 2004; Datta and Dave,
2017; Grennan et al., 2018; Agha and Zeltzer, 2019). Grennan et al. (2018) use variation in
hospitals' policies that ban pharmaceutical sales representatives from the premises and find
that a meal increases cardiologists' prescribing of detailed statins by roughly 70 percent.
Shapiro (2018a) and Agha and Zeltzer (2019) use fixed-effect approaches similar to ours
and find that a detailing visit increases prescribing of an antipsychotic by 14 percent in the
following twelve months3 and that small payments increase prescribing of blood thinners by
   2
      See Spurling et al. (2010) and Henry (2010) for a review and discussion of the medical literature on this
topic. Overall, the review concludes that "the limitations of studies reported in the literature mentioned
above mean that we are unable to reach any definitive conclusions about the degree to which information
from pharmaceutical companies increases, decreases, or has no effect on the frequency, cost, or quality of
prescribing" (Spurling et al., 2010, p. 19).
    3
      The estimates from Shapiro (2018a) are not immediately comparable to ours. He assumes that a
detailing visit adds to a detailing stock that depreciates over time. We convert his estimates to a year-long
percentage increase in prescribing as follows. We compute the implied increase in prescriptions over a one
                                                                                         11
                                                                                            t 
year period and then divide by average prescribing in a year. Mathematically, this is t=0 Rx
                                                                                                 where  = 0.6
is the speed at which the detailing stock depreciates,  = 0.1224 is the estimated impact of a unit increase
in the detailing stock on total prescriptions in a month (from his Table 5), and Rx = 5.124 is the average


                                                      4
approximately 10 percent, respectively.4
    We contribute to this literature in three ways. First, we exploit the detailed timing of
payments to address concerns about selection of payments to physicians. Second, we estimate
the impacts of detailing for all drugs that pharmaceutical firms were promoting, rather than
focusing on a single drug or drug class. By examining the universe of drugs, we are able to
improve on the external validity of estimates based on a narrow set of drugs and establish
new descriptive facts about the prevalence of detailing in the Part D market overall. And
third, because it is becoming increasingly difficult for sales representatives to gain access to
physicians,5 past estimates of detailing's effects may no longer reflect its current impacts.
Our estimates are based on the immediate past and so may better reflect detailing's changing
influence. To our knowledge, this is the first paper that shows the trajectory of prescribing
behavior for physicians before and after a payment, for all detailed drugs, in a recent time
period.
    Our paper also contributes to the literature assessing whether payments from pharma-
ceutical firms affect the quality of physicians' prescribing. Past work has used a number of
different measures of prescribing quality: reviews of prescribing by other physicians (Becker
et al., 1972; Haayer, 1982), the variance in the number of prescriptions a particular physician
made (de Bakker et al., 2007), and adherence to certain treatment guidelines (Muijrers et al.,
2005).6 These analyses have tended to find that physicians who had greater interaction with
pharmaceutical sales representatives had lower quality prescribing. Our results complement
this literature by addressing the selection of payments to physicians and using a clinical
measure of quality. Our results using patent expirations also contribute to this literature
by showing how a sharp change in benefits to patients differentially affects paid and unpaid
physicians' choices.7
yearly prescriptions (twelve times the 0.427 monthly average from Table 2).
    4
      Mizik and Jacobson (2004) use a fixed-effect approach to study the impact of detailing on new prescrip-
tions for three different drugs. Their estimates suggest that detailing increases new prescriptions by between
3.6 percent and 11.8 percent over a six month horizon.
    5
      For example, a growing number of academic medical centers forbid pharmaceutical sales representatives
from visiting physicians on their campuses (Larkin et al., 2017).
    6
      The impacts of information from the government (Soumerai et al., 1987), "dear doctor" letters (Kazmier-
czak and Coley, 1997), the presentation of information during grand rounds (Spingarn et al., 1996), and being
involved in a clinical trial (Andersen et al., 2006) on similar measures of quality have also been explored
with mixed results.
    7
      Our results on quality are also related to a long literature in marketing that models physician learning
about drugs via detailing or other sources in a Bayesian framework (e.g. Narayanan et al., 2005; Narayanan
and Manchanda, 2009; Ching and Ishihara, 2010, 2012; Chintagunta et al., 2012). This is discussed further
in Section 2.




                                                      5
2        Background
According to Pew Charitable Trusts, in 2012 pharmaceutical firms spent more than $27
billion in marketing with 85 percent of that sum spent on marketing direct to physicians
(Pew Charitable Trust, 2013). The three major categories of marketing to physicians are
face-to-face promotional activities ($15 billion), expenditures on educational opportunities
for physicians such as conferences ($2.1 billion), and drug samples for physicians to distribute
to patients free of charge (imputed value of $5.7 billion). These expenditures are targeting
a population of approximately one million physicians. Given such large expenditures on
physician marketing, it is no surprise that relationships between drug firms and physicians
are commonplace (Campbell et al., 2007).
    In the 2000s, there were a number of efforts to curb these physician-industry relationships
for fear that they influenced prescribing at the cost of patient welfare. For example, in 2008,
the Association of American Medical Colleges called on all academic medical centers to ban
acceptance of industry gifts by doctors, faculty, students, and residents (Sears, 2008). In
2007, Senator Chuck Grassley proposed the "Sunshine Act" to force drug firms to publicly
disclose interactions with physicians and it passed as part of the Affordable Care Act in 2010.
As of August 1, 2013, all drug and medical device firms were compelled by the Sunshine Act
to start tracking these payments and were required to report them for public release to the
Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
    There is a long theoretical literature in economics about the varied impacts of advertis-
ing.8 The "persuasive" view goes back at least as far as Robinson (1933). She discusses
how advertising increases demand for a particular product, tending to increase prices and
reduce social welfare. On the other hand, proponents of the "information" view (beginning
with Stigler, 1961) outline how advertising notifies consumers of products' existence, prices,
or other qualities. This information tends to increase welfare via reduced search costs and
increased competition. Because the theories have opposing predictions, how pharmaceuti-
cal firms' marketing affects the costs, quantity, and quality of prescribing is an empirical
question.
    Past work from the medical literature has shown a positive association between receiving
a payment and awareness of the paying firm's drug, prescribing the firm's drug, and adding
the firm's drug to the hospital formulary (Wazana, 2000; Spurling et al., 2010). Although
these correlations are suggestive, they are not able to account for the fact that pharmaceu-
tical firms direct payments to physicians with patient populations most likely to use the
drug. However, a small number of studies have estimated the impacts of pharmaceutical
    8
        For a thorough review of this literature, see Bagwell (2007).



                                                         6
marketing on physicians' behavior using randomized controlled trials or quasi-experimental
variation. In a study of 29 medical residents, Adair and Holmgren (2005) randomized letters
to half the residents that discouraged the use of free samples and found that the letters did
reduce residents' use of samples. This suggests that the standard practice of firms providing
samples might affect physicians' choices. Epstein and Ketcham (2014) randomly provide IT
to physicians that conveys information about patients' cost-sharing for specific drugs, but
also reports the hassle costs of prescribing particular drugs (e.g. prior authorization). They
find that physicians' choices are more influenced by hassle costs than they are by payments
from pharmaceutical sales representatives. Shapiro (2018b) and Sinkinson and Starc (2019)
use quasi-experimental designs to study the impacts of direct-to-consumer advertising on
prescribing with a focus on the market-expanding and business-stealing aspects of adver-
tising. While both studies find important market-expanding effects, Sinkinson and Starc
(2019) also find business-stealing effects. Ching and Ishihara (2012) exploit co-marketing
agreements to show that the informative and persuasive roles of advertising are important
in medical marketing.
    There is also an extensive literature that models physician learning about the underlying
quality of a particular drug. Narayanan et al. (2005) finds that medical marketing is pri-
marily informative for the first 6-14 months of a drug's life and then primarily persuasive
thereafter. Chintagunta et al. (2009) and Chintagunta et al. (2012) find that physicians
learn about drug quality from both pharmaceutical sales representatives and feedback from
patients. While these findings are very suggestive, they only indirectly speak to the qual-
ity of physicians' prescribing since they are focused more on physician learning about the
underlying quality of a drug. Additional work has found that there are diminishing returns
to detailing (Manchanda and Chintagunta, 2004), that firms' advertising decisions take ac-
count of how learning about drug quality affects the dynamics of price-sensitivity (Ching,
2010), that there is important heterogeneity across physicians in how much detailing affects
their prescribing (Janakiraman et al., 2008), and that historically, detailing tended to have
stronger business-stealing than market-expanding effects (Fischer and Albers, 2010). The
data used in these studies is often from previous decades and focuses on very few drugs; be-
cause of the change in medical professionals' attitudes towards industry interactions, there
could be important differences in the impacts of payments today.




                                              7
3       Data
3.1     Medicare Part D
We assess prescribing behavior using the prescription drug claims of a 20% random sample of
enrollees in Medicare Part D from 2013 through 2015; both enrollees in Medicare Advantage
Part D plans and free-standing Part D plans are included. Over the sample period, Medicare
Part D provided subsidized private insurance for outpatient prescription drugs to about 37
million elderly and disabled enrollees per year and represents approximately 30% of US
retail prescription drug expenditure (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2019). An advantage of
this dataset over a commercial claims dataset is that nearly all individuals continue in the
sample once enrolled, minimizing changes in the composition of a particular physician's
patient pool.
     For each Part D claim, we observe the exact drug purchased (ingredients, strength,
drug form, brand/generic status, extended release if applicable), the date of the pharmacy
fill, the days supplied, the full drug price paid by the patient's insurer to the drug firm
(prior to discounts or rebates),9 and the National Provider Identifier of the prescriber.10 We
define a "drug" for the purposes of our analyses as an ingredient (or ingredient combination)
in either branded or generic status. We do not differentiate between prescriptions of the
same ingredients in different strengths (10mg, 50mg) or drug forms (oral, injectable). This
definition reflects the level of specificity in the Open Payments database, which generally does
not distinguish between strengths and drug forms of the same ingredients. We do, however,
distinguish between the original and "extended release" formulation of a drug. Versions
of drugs with extended release properties may be introduced prior to patent expiry and
are often promoted independently from the non-extended release version. Open Payments
commonly reports payments for both the original and extended release formulations of an
ingredient, so we consider these as distinct drugs and examine a case study of Namenda and
Namenda XR in Section 5.2.
     We observe 2,513 drugs over our sample period, of which one-quarter are branded drugs
that account for 69% of Part D expenditure. We acknowledge the competitive structure of
    9
       Like most research in prescription drug markets, our measure of "expenditure" does not reflect post-
market rebates paid from drug firms back to insurers. The expenditures reported in Part D are closer to
"list prices" announced for all drugs than the "net prices" that represent the true income to a drug firm.
According to an analysis by Milliman of rebates in Part D in 2016, rebates represented 22% of branded
expenditure (16% of all expenditure) in that year (Johnson et al., 2018). We use number of patients as a key
outcome that is not subject to this weakness, but focus on expenditure in order to facilitate our calculation
of drug firms' returns from payments.
    10
       While some prescribers in Part D are non-physician nurse practitioners or physician assistants, we
describe all prescribers as "physicians" in what follows.



                                                     8
prescription drugs by assigning each drug to one of 159 therapeutic classes using the 2011
and 2014 Formulary Reference Guides provided to Medicare Part D plans. Drugs in the
same therapeutic class are not perfect substitutes, but there is much higher substitutability
within classes than between them.
    We aggregate these prescription drug claims to the physician × calendar month × drug
level, measuring the total pre-rebate expenditure incurred for that drug, the number of pa-
tients the physician treats with the drug, and total days supply consumed by those patients.
Our use of the month as our unit of time allows us to illustrate in our event-study design
the sharp change in behavior at the exact month of payments.


3.2     Open Payments
Our data on payments made by drug firms to physicians come from the Open Payments
database. Under the Affordable Care Act, drug firms must report to the Open Payments
database any payment or in-kind "transfer of value" they make to physicians. These trans-
fers of value include the meals, travel, and educational expenses that direct-to-physician
marketing activities commonly entail. Although the database does not record free samples,
the encounters recorded may involve the distribution of free samples. Open Payments sepa-
rately collects information on payments that drug firms make to physicians for participation
in clinical trials ("research payments"); however, these data do not describe the drug being
researched and so we do not include them in this analysis. The database contains information
beginning August 2013.
    For each encounter between drug firms and medical professionals, Open Payments records
the individual's name, address, and other identifying information, the drug or drugs dis-
cussed, the dollar amount of in-kind or cash payments, and a coarse description of the
purpose of the encounter. We find the National Provider Identifier for each professional
named in Open Payments using the publicly-available National Plan and Provider Enumer-
ation System. We refer to each encounter as a "payment."11 We remove payments for
medical devices and Part B drugs, and for physicians who we never observe prescribing any
drug in Part D. The median payment is small, at about $10, reflecting the typical purpose
of the encounter (a meal). We will distinguish food payments from all others. The non-food
payments are most commonly for continuing medical education, consulting, education, or
travel. There are very small numbers of payments described as gift, grant, honoraria, royalty,
entertainment, charity, or own investment.
    In Figure 1, we show how the number and value of payments in each of the categories
  11
     When an encounter includes multiple drugs being promoted, we divide the total dollar value of the
payment equally among each of the promoted drugs.


                                                  9
over the time period. The first column shows that more than 95% of the payments are for
food and about 5% are in the "other" category. However, the average encounter where there
is only a food payment represents about $16 of value, while the "other" category transfers
are much larger, averaging $1,239.12 Thus, the second column in the figure shows that the
other payment types constitute the majority of the dollar value of payments.
    The next two columns in Figure 1 show the distribution of payments by amount. The vast
majority of payments are less than $50, and about 80 percent are less than $20. However, the
rare, very large payments dominate the distribution by value. In our primary analysis, we
define our independent variable of interest as a binary indicator that a physician has received
a payment for a drug by that month. We consider payment size in a separate analysis.
    Payments to at least one Part D physician are reported in Open Payments for 574 dis-
tinct Part D drugs in 128 of the 159 therapeutic classes. It is clear that encounters with
physicians are a core part of marketing and promotion activities for prescription drugs over
the time period. For our main analyses, only drugs with at least some payments contribute
to identification in our empirical strategy. Consequently, we retain only drugs for which at
least one physician receives a payment.
    Between 2013 and 2015, there are nearly four million payments, totaling almost one
billion dollars, related to the 574 distinct Part D drugs. We merge payments to a physician
for a drug to the physician's monthly prescribing history. In some cases, a Part D physician
receives a payment for a drug that they never prescribe over the three years.13 We retain
these payments, imputing zeroes for the physician's prescribing of the drug in all months, as
long as the physician ever prescribes in the drug's therapeutic class over the time period. We
rectangularize the dataset to include an observation for every physician × drug combination
in all 36 months, to facilitate our event study research design. The resulting dataset has
more than 446 million observations, reflecting 991,380 physicians' prescribing of 574 drugs
for 36 months each.


3.3     Summary Statistics
It is common for Part D physicians to receive payments related to the drugs they prescribe.
In the first row of Table 1, we describe the prevalence of payments overall. Our sample of
   12
      The low average amount of food payments can reflect the Open Payments reporting rules for cases where
non-physician office staff and physicians both participate in a meal brought by a drug firm (Federal Register,
2013). If only front office staff consume the meal, drug firms are not required to report this interaction. If any
physicians eat the meal, the meal is apportioned equally among all participants (including non-physicians),
and then the physician's portion is reported.
   13
      Some of these payments may arise due to scattershot marketing strategies, for example at medical
conferences, or efforts to simply instill brand awareness.



                                                       10
drugs with some payments, equal to 63 percent of total Part D expenditure, captures 92
percent of overall Part D branded expenditure, implying the vast majority of branded drugs
are using direct-to-physician marketing captured by Open Payments. Of all expenditure on
drugs making payments, 21 percent has been "affected by payments," in that the physician
has received a related payment prior to prescribing. By the end of the time period, more
than one-fifth (22 percent) of physician × drug combinations have a payment. Overall, 29%
of Part D physicians are paid for at least one drug over the sample period. Clearly, even after
the required disclosure represented by Open Payments, drug firms are reaching substantial
numbers of physicians with their marketing efforts.
    The next rows of Table 1 report the same statistics for the top twenty drugs by total
expenditure over the sample period. Together, these drugs account for nearly one-third of
all Part D expenditure. Payments are common across nearly all of these drugs, which span a
number of distinct indications and include both long-standing drugs (Crestor and Zetia) and
new entrants (Harvoni and Sovaldi). The percent of expenditure that comes from physicians
who had received a related payment by the time of prescribing ranges from 2 percent for
Namenda to close to half for Humira and Xarelto. Generic competition was imminent for
both Namenda and Gleevec, which explains why payments were less common for those drugs.
We examine generic onset during our sample period, including for Namenda, in Section 5.2.
    We know, however, that drug firms commonly monitor physicians' prescribing and specif-
ically target high-volume physicians for payments (Fugh-Berman and Ahari, 2007). Conse-
quently, our empirical strategy, detailed below, exploits variation within a physician × drug
combination over time. To ensure we have a sufficient "pre" period for each paid physician
× drug, we will exclude from our analysis in Section 4 physician × drug pairs whose first
observed payment occurs in 2013. The last column of Table 1 describes the share of physi-
cians who are first paid in 2014 or 2015. The relationships described in Open Payments are
commonly ongoing frequent interactions, so on average about 40 percent of the physicians
who are ever paid got a payment in 2013.
    Our research is unique in describing the universe of payments instead of focusing on a
single class. Thus, we are able to explore some dimensions of how competitive structure
affects the impact of payments. In heterogeneity analyses, we will explore how the impact
of payments varies by the number of drugs in a class making payments. Across the 128
therapeutic classes, we observe as few as one and as many as 26 different drugs making
payments to Part D physicians. In Figure 2, the x-axis counts the number of drugs in a
therapeutic class making payments. The y-axis measures, for drugs in each x-axis category,
the average share of expenditure where a physician has received a payment at the time of
prescribing (the same measure as the fourth column of Table 1). The size of the marker


                                              11
denotes the total expenditure represented. The two measures are positively related, such
that going from one paying drug in the therapeutic class to eleven paying drugs in the
class would raise the percent of branded expenditure affected by payments by 17 percentage
points.
    Given how often multiple drugs are engaged in competing payments in a therapeutic
class, we find, perhaps surprisingly, that 81% of our physician × drug observations are paid
by only one drug in the therapeutic class. We propose in the next section an empirical
specification to test how payments from a second drug in the therapeutic class affect the
physician's behavior. However, we exclude cases where a physician is paid by more than two
drugs in a therapeutic class, which amounts to about six percent of all observations.


4        How Do Payments Affect Prescribing?
4.1      Empirical Strategy
Because drug firms commonly monitor physicians' prescribing and specifically target high-
volume physicians for payments, the cross-sectional correlation between a physician's pay-
ments and her patients' expenditures overstates the impact of payments on prescribing. To
address this targeting of payments to physicians, we use a difference-in-differences design
that compares outcomes for physicians who are paid to those who are not paid, before and
after the payment.14 This research design relies upon a physician's changes over time and
so is able to account for time-invariant characteristics of physicians that lead a drug firm
to target them for payments. For physician p, drug d, and year-month t, we estimate the
event-study specification

              ypdt =          PresPaid pd r +          PresPaidOth pd r + pd + dt +     pdt           (1)
                       r=-1                     r=-1


Our outcomes, ypdt , are total expenditures, number of patients, or total days supply for a
physician-drug-month. PresPaid pd indicates whether the physician will be paid for drug d at
some point in our sample, and r denotes the time period relative to the time the physician
is paid (if ever). PresPaidOth pd indicates whether the physician will be paid for a drug d
in the same therapeutic class as d (a competitor) at some point in our sample. Including
this variable both controls for the effects of a competitor payment and allows us to directly
    14
     We use a linear model to represent a physician's supply of each drug in each month. While a discrete-
choice model such as logit might be appropriate for a patient's choice of drugs, the typical physician is
prescribing five different branded drugs in a therapeutic class over the time period, and even in a single
month a physician is prescribing an average of 1.5 distinct branded drugs in each therapeutic class.


                                                       12
observe their time pattern, measured by the  coefficients. We estimate r and r for every
event period and report a 25-month window around the time of payment in the figures.
Because we have prescribing information beginning in January 2013 but only use payments
that take place in January 2014 or later, we observe 12 pre-event months for all physician-
drug pairs that are paid. We normalize -1 and -1 to zero, making the month preceding
the payment the reference period.
    The fixed effect pd allows a different intercept for each combination of physician and
drug. The drug × year-month fixed effect dt adjusts for changes in each drugs' prescribing
over time, including the overall effects of direct-to-consumer advertising. Both the paid and
the never-paid physician × drugs contribute to this fixed effect. With these sets of fixed
effects, we are effectively running the event-study specifications separately for each drug and
then aggregating across the different drugs. Finally, we cluster errors at the physician level,
which accounts for serial autocorrelation in the errors as well as the possibility of correlation
in a physician's behavior across drugs.
    We weight observations by the physician's average number of patients in drug d's thera-
peutic class. By weighting by the number of patients, our coefficients are representative of
patients' experiences rather than physicians'. We use the average number of patients across
all periods because we find that the treatment affects the number of patients directly. And
finally, we use the average number of patients in the entire therapeutic class because we
wish to include with positive weight cases where a physician is paid for a drug but never
prescribes it.
    In order to provide a summary of the impact of payments on outcomes over different
time periods, we also report linear combinations of r and r . Because we observe dynamic
treatment effects, we report two estimates, reporting the average coefficient and its standard
error in months 0 through 5 as well as months 6 through 12.
    We make three edits to our dataset prior to estimation. As discussed, we drop physician-
drug pairs that receive a payment in 2013; this gives us twelve pre-period months for all
payments. We drop physician-drug pairs where the physician is paid by more than three
drugs in the therapeutic class. Finally, to reduce the computational burden of the analysis,
we conduct our main analyses using a random 50 percent sample of physicians, retaining all
of their prescribing and payment information. These changes result in 494,525 physicians
and 190,511,352 physician × drug × month observations.




                                               13
4.2    Effect of Payments on Prescribing
Figure 3 presents the event study results from equation (1) where the dependent variable is
the total expenditure by a physician's patients on a drug in a given month. Shortly after
the payment, expenditures begin to increase, remain elevated, and then decline a bit. This
pattern is consistent with empirical findings that physicians forget advertising over time
(Iizuka and Jin, 2005). On average, expenditures are approximately $9 greater per month
in the year following the payment. Relative to average monthly expenditures, $238, this
is slightly less than a 4 percent increase. There is no obvious trend in the twelve months
leading up to the payment that would suggest our estimated increase in expenditures is due
to differential underlying trends.
    Our estimated impact is considerably smaller than some recent findings. Grennan et al.
(2018) study how payments for statins affect cardiologists' prescribing and find that payments
increase prescribing by 73 percent. Shapiro (2018a) studies prescribing of an antipsychotic,
Seroquel, between 2001 and 2006 and finds that a detailing visit increases prescribing by
14 percent in the following twelve months. Agha and Zeltzer (2019) study anticoagulants
("blood thinners") and find that small payments increase prescribing by 10 percent while
large payments increase prescribing by 65 percent. Although a full reconciliation of results
is beyond the scope of this article, some portion of the differences are likely due to the
specific therapeutic classes studied (all classes with payments vs. a subset of classes with
payments), differences in the variation exploited by the empirical designs, and differences in
the effects of detailing over time. We further discuss the implied magnitude and estimate a
return-on-investment in Section 4.4.
    To assess whether our estimated increases in expenditures are due to more patients being
put on a drug, we estimate our event study specification with the physician's number of
patients as the dependent variable and present the results in Figure 4. As with expenditures,
there is no systematic differential trend prior to the payment. Upon receiving the payment,
the number of patients increases immediately, remains elevated for approximately six months,
and then returns to pre-payment levels; Mizik and Jacobson (2004) find a similar, short-lived
increase following detailing visits. The number of patients does increase shortly after the
payment, although the magnitude is relatively small. We note that an increase in the number
of patients taking the drug could arise both from physicians deciding to start a new patient
on the drug after an encounter with the drug firm or physicians differentially continuing
current patients on the drug (instead of switching to another drug).
    Table 2 summarizes the event study estimates. As seen in column (1), expenditures
increase by $5.67 on average in the first six months after a payment; in months 6 - 12,
expenditures are an average of $12.47 greater per month than in the month prior to the

                                             14
payment. In column (2), we present analogous results for the number of patients. Payments
increase the number of patients significantly in months 0-5 by 0.016 patient, on average
(about 1.3%), but the effect is not significant in months 6-12.
    To further examine the margins of adjustment, we examine the impact of payments
on the total days supplied of the drug by the physician in the month (results provided in
Appendix Figure A.1 and Appendix Table A.1). We find that the days supplied increases
by 1.4 percent after a payment. Since expenditure increases by 4 percent and expenditure
is the product of days supply and expenditure per day, our findings imply increases in the
expenditure per day.15 A potential explanation is that some individuals are using newer or
stronger formulations of the drug that have a higher price.
    Whereas most previous studies on the impacts of payments have only had information
on the detailing or drug samples for a very small subset of drugs (usually one to three),
our data contain this information for all detailed drugs. This allows us to not only control
for other firms' activities, but to also directly estimate the impact of a being paid for both
a drug and its competitor. Figure 5 presents the event study estimates that show how
prescribing changes when a physician who has been paid for one firm's drug also receives a
payment from the drug's competitor. Figure 5a suggests that expenditures for drug d fall
after the physician gets a second payment for a competing drug d in the therapeutic class,
although the individual event study estimates are somewhat noisy. In the first 6 months
after the competitor's payment, expenditures on drug d fall by a (statistically insignificant)
$1.91 per month on average (see Table 3). In the following 6 months, expenditures on drug d
decrease significantly by $10.53 on average. Figure 5b provides the corresponding figure for
the number of patients as the dependent variable. There appears to be a somewhat steady
downward trend in the number of patients preceding a competing firm's payment and this
trend continues after the payment is made. We conclude that payments by other firms do
not appear to have large, lasting impacts on the number of patients taking drug d.


4.3     Heterogeneity of Payment Impact
Different types of payments might have different impacts on physicians' choices. If payments
are part of a "quid pro quo" in which physicians exchange prescribing volume for a payout,
impacts would likely be strongest for the high-value payments and small for very low-dollar
payments. As we saw in Section 2, there is tremendous heterogeneity in the dollar value of
the payment.
    In Figures 6a to 6d, we present the event-study results for payments below $500 and
  15
     We cannot test this finding directly because we cannot calculate an implied expenditure per day for
physician-drug combinations with zero prescribing in a month.


                                                  15
payments of at least $500. The results for payments less than $500 closely mirror those for
payments overall. Given that the vast majority of payments have a small dollar value, the
results for payments of at least $500 are considerably more noisy. There appears to be a
slight upward trend in the pre-payment period and little increase in expenditures until eight
months after the payment. We summarize the event-study figures by grouping the estimates
from months 0-5 and 6-12; these are presented in Table 4.
    We also present results for payments under $20, $20-$49, $50-$99, and $100-$499 in Ap-
pendix Figure A.2. Generally, the payments below $50 appear to be driving the results seen
in the under $500 figure. The fact that we observe meaningful changes in prescribing even
for these small payments, which are trivial relative to the average income of a physician, sug-
gests that a simple "quid pro quo" model of physician-pharmaceutical company interactions
is unsatisfying in describing the purpose and impact of these payments.
    If prestigious (and lucrative) speaking or consulting opportunities are used as rewards to
encourage high levels of prescribing, then these types of payments might have very different
impacts on expenditures. Figure 7 shows the event-study results for payments for food (7a
and 7c) and for other relationships such as consulting or speaking at a continuing medical
education event (7b and 7d). The estimates are summarized in Table 4. We show the
estimates for food because it is by far the most common type of payment and provides
a baseline against which we can compare the estimates for other activities (see Figure 1).
Food payments appear to closely resemble our overall estimates with a small increase in the
number of patients taking the drug and a larger increase in expenditures. However, other
types of payments do not appear to have clear impacts on either the number of patients
or expenditures, although our conclusions are limited by the large size of the confidence
intervals. Figure 7b and 7d appear to show somewhat elevated expenditures in the months
prior to a promotional payment (though for expenditure we can not reject that the individual
estimates are different from zero at conventional levels). That might suggest that firms are
using promotional payments as rewards for past prescribing. However, that strategy seems
unlikely since these payments do not appear to increase expenditures going forward at all.
    We might also think that a payment has different impacts depending on the underly-
ing competitive structure of the therapeutic class. For example, in classes with very few
branded drugs, a payment might be more effective than in a class where there are many
different drugs being promoted. In our data, among therapeutic classes with at least one
promoted drug, the median number of drugs being promoted is five. Figure 8 show the
estimated impacts of a payment in classes with five or fewer promoted drugs ("low com-
petition"). Again, we see increases in expenditures following a payment. In the first year
after a payment, expenditures increased by an average of approximately $25 per month (see


                                              16
Table 4). Given the $206 average monthly expenditure in these classes, this translates to a
12 percent increase. Because our overall estimate was a 4 percent increase in expenditures,
this suggests a potentially important role for the competitive structure of the class in deter-
mining the impacts of payments. This may, in part, explain differences between our main
results that use data on drugs in all therapeutic classes and other papers that focus only on
classes with relatively few detailed drugs; e.g., Grennan et al. (2018). In contrast, in high
competition classes (those with more than 5 drugs making payments), we observe that firms
make payments to prescribers who were cutting back on that firm's drug even prior to the
payment (reported in Appendix Figure A.3), suggesting that in these classes, firms may be
attempting to stem losses rather than spur new revenue. However, the pre-existing trend
observed in these high competition classes makes the causal interpretation of the event study
coefficients more difficult.


4.4     Gauging the Magnitude of our Estimates
To gauge the magnitude of our main estimates, we estimate a firm's return on investment
for its payments. The following calculation should be treated as speculative because there
are many important determinants excluded from the analysis or not measured precisely.
    Because the vast majority of the payments in our data are small, they are likely made in
the context of a detailing visit. Given that, the relevant measure of marginal costs should
include the sales representative's time cost, travel costs, and the dollar cost of the payment.16
Liu et al. (2015) presents a range of estimates related to the sales representative's costs. Using
their structural model, they estimate that the marginal cost of a visit is $195.17 Based on
the Open Payments data, the average payment on these visits is approximately $18.18 Then
a rough estimate of the marginal cost of a single detailing visit is $213.19
    To estimate the increased expenditures from a detailing visit, we must scale our estimates
to account for multiple relevant factors. Medicare Part D accounts for approximately 30
percent of retail prescription expenditures in the United States (Kaiser Family Foundation,
2019). In addition, our data only include 20 percent of Part D patients. Together, these
   16
      Here we abstract away from issues of divisibility such as whether the firm would need to hire an addi-
tional sales representative. Instead, we assume that we could simply increase an existing sales representative's
wages without any negotiation or administrative costs.
   17
      The Liu et al. (2015) estimate is $153 based on data from 2002-2004; we assume their estimate is in
2003 dollars and convert it to 2015 dollars to arrive at $195.
   18
      Consulting, speaking at medical events, research, and other payments unlikely to be associated with a
standard detailing visit have been excluded from this average.
   19
      This estimate of the marginal cost of a single detailing visit is likely an underestimate of the average
cost. Descriptive statistics from Pew Charitable Trust (2013) suggest that the average cost of a detailing
visit might be as much as an order of magnitude larger.



                                                      17
factors suggest we need to scale up our estimates.20 On the other hand, our measure of
expenditures is not the expenditures that the pharmaceutical firms get to keep. Rebates
are common and in 2016 accounted for 22 percent of raw Part D drug spending measures
(Johnson et al., 2018). Consequently, we scale our estimates down by 22 percent.
    In order to facilitate our calculation, we must specify a time period over which the costs
and benefits are realized. For simplicity, we assume that the relevant time frame is one
year. Our estimates indicate that a payment increases Part D expenditures among the 20%
sample by $121 in the first year after the payment.21 After applying the scaling discussed
previously, this suggests that expenditures to the pharmaceutical firm increased by $1,573.
Conditional on receiving a payment, physicians receive 2.8 payments in the following twelve
months (including the original payment). A rough, back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests
that the return on investment (ROI) is approximately 164 percent. Although this might seem
quite large, it is smaller than available estimates in the literature which range from 200 -
1,700 percent (Narayanan et al., 2004; Schwartz and Woloshin, 2019). We also note that the
increase in expenditure we find (about 4 percent) is smaller than that found by most previous
research (e.g. 10 percent by Agha and Zeltzer (2019), 14 percent by Shapiro (2018a), or 73
percent by Grennan et al. (2018)) and so implies a smaller ROI overall than their class- or
drug-specific estimates.
    There are factors that would cause this estimate to be an underestimate, as well as
factors that would cause it to be an overestimate. To the degree that physicians' behaviors
are affected for longer than 12 months, we will underestimate the additional expenditures the
firm receives in response to the detailing visit. Agha and Zeltzer (2019) find that spillovers
to non-paid physicians via physician social networks contribute one-quarter of the overall
impact of payments in the blood-thinner class; if this effect holds for all classes, the ROI we
calculate would be an underestimate. On the other hand, it is possible that the marginal
treatment effect of the next physician to be detailed would be lower than our estimates. If
so, our ROI comparing estimated benefits to the marginal cost of another detailing visit will
be an overestimate.
  20
      More specifically, if the impact on expenditures is the same for a physician's Medicare and non-Medicare
patients, we should scale our estimate up by 10/3. To account for the fact our data are a 20 percent random
sample of Part D patients, we scale up by a factor of 5.
   21
      This is calculated by multiplying the estimates in Table 2 by the number of months covered in each
period (i.e., $5.67 × 6 months + $12.47 × 7 months). Because the first month is only partially treated, this
time period represents somwhere between 12 and 13 months.




                                                     18
5        How to Payments Affect Drug Quality?
5.1      Payments and the Efficacy of Prescribed Drugs
Industry representatives have claimed that regular contact with drug firm representatives
helps to keep physicians up to date on the availability and quality of new drugs. If these
interactions do result in physicians having better information about which drugs are most
efficacious, they may lead to an overall improvement in the quality of drugs prescribed.
Alternatively, if the payments mislead physicians into incorrectly assessing the quality of
drugs available, we may find a negative relationship between payment receipt and drug
quality.
    We evaluate whether payments lead physicians to choose more efficacious drugs using a
novel dataset on drug efficacy. Together with an MD/PhD student, we identified three ma-
jor therapeutic classes where there is a common and well-defined clinical endpoint for drug
therapy. For each therapeutic class, we obtained a unidimensional efficacy measurement for
every molecule (including generics) from the medical literature. Within the drug class of
statins, our measure of efficacy for each drug is the percent reduction in LDL cholesterol
associated with use of that drug observed in clinical trials; for ARBs (Angiotensin II Re-
ceptor Blockers), the outcome is the reduction in systolic blood pressure; and for atypical
antipsychotics, the outcome is the reduction in the Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale.
    This measure of efficacy is imperfect along a number of dimensions. First, it is a single
measure of efficacy for all patients and yet there is almost certainly heterogeneity in a given
drug's efficacy for different patients.22 Because efficacy will be our dependent variable, this
could bias our estimates if physicians who receive payments differentially increase use of the
paid drug in patients for whom it is least effective. Second, bad clinical trial results might be
censored by pharmaceutical firms (Turner et al., 2008). If firms that pay physicians censor
their clinical trial results more (or less) than firms that do not pay physicians, our estimates
will be biased.
    Despite these drawbacks, our measures largely capture efficacy as viewed by physicians.
Sullivan et al. (2014) show that when asked about drug efficacy, physicians seek information
about clinical studies. In addition, a 2012 survey of more than 250 physicians found that
physicians want more information about clinical studies and evidence-based medicine from
their interactions with pharmaceutical sales representatives (Publicis Touchpoint Solutions,
2012). In 2011, a nationally representative survey of more than 500 physicians found that in
addition to a physician's clinical knowledge and experience, one of the most important factors
    22
    High-efficacy drugs may still have adverse effects on patients. Alpert et al. (2019) show the relationship
between Oxycontin detailing and subsequent overdose deaths.


                                                     19
in drug prescribing decisions was clinical practice guidelines, which are based on clinical trial
results (KRC Research, 2011). Together, these studies suggest that physicians view clinical
trial results as important indicators of efficacy and actively seek this information from drug
firms' representatives.
    We adjust our empirical strategy to evaluate how payments affect the efficacy of pre-
scribed drugs.23 In particular, we allow payments to affect the physician's decision among
both branded and generic drugs. The physician's generic choice could be affected either by
more information about generic molecules or by increased valuation of efficacy relative to
other drug characteristics. Thus, our key dependent variable is a weighted average of the
efficacy of drugs the physician prescribes in the class (including generics), where the weights
are the days supply of that drug by that physician in that month. This measure characterizes
the overall efficacy of a physician's prescribing in a therapeutic class.
    Since we are interested in the overall efficacy of prescribing in a therapeutic class, we
use as our key independent variable an indicator for whether the physician has received
a payment from any drug in the therapeutic class.24 We find that 36% of antipsychotics
prescribing arises from prescribers who have received a payment from at least one of the
drugs in that class. The corresponding figures for statins and ARBs are 21% and 16%
respectively.25
    Our estimation equation is given by

                           efficacy pct =          DocPaid pc r + pc + ct +       pct                        (2)
                                            r=-1


where efficacy pct is our measure of efficacy, DocPaid pc indicates whether physician p will be
paid by some drug in therapeutic class c at some point in our sample, r denotes the time
period relative to the time the physician is paid (if ever), pc is a set of fixed effects for each
combination of physician and therapeutic class, ct is a set of class by month fixed effects,
and pct is a random error term. We normalize -1 to zero, making the month preceding the
   23
      We cannot use our original model, Equation (1), for this question because efficacy is a time-invariant
property of a molecule. In Appendix Figure A.4 and Table A.2, we evaluate the impact of payments on
expenditure and the number of patients using the three therapeutic classes where we have efficacy measures.
We confirm that overall, physicians respond to payments in these TCs much as they do in the general case ­
by increasing total expenditure on the paying drug and increasing the number of patients taking the paying
drug.
   24
      In the statin and ARB classes, most of the payments over the time period arise from Crestor and
Benicar, respectively. In the antipsychotics class, there are six drugs actively making payments over the
time period.
   25
      As in our main equation, only physicians who receive a first payment in 2014 or 2015 contribute to
identification. As in the overall sample, about half of the physicians who are paid at all are paid for the first
time in 2014 or 2015.



                                                       20
payment the reference period. With these sets of fixed effects, we are effectively running the
event-study specifications separately for each therapeutic class and then aggregating across
the different classes. To create a measure of efficacy comparable across classes, we standardize
each therapeutic class's efficacy measure to a z-score and interpret our point estimates, r , as
standard deviation changes in the efficacy measure.26 In addition to estimating equation (2)
with all three classes, we also estimate the equation independently for each therapeutic class.
Because we need only focus on the three classes for which we have efficacy information, we
are able to estimate this model using the full dataset, rather than the 50% random sample
of physicians used in the expenditure analysis.
    We present our main event study results in Figure 9, with summary coefficients in Ap-
pendix Table A.3. Prior to the payment, there does not appear to be any differential trend
in efficacy. Immediately after the payment, there appears to be a small decline in efficacy
which is sustained in the following twelve months. However, the economic magnitude is
extremely small. Based on these estimates, we can reject an average effect in the twelve
months following a payment any larger than a 0.01 standard deviation reduction in average
efficacy.
    To explore whether there is important heterogeneity in these effects across our three
classes, we present the class-by-class event study results in Figure A.5. In each case, the
estimates suggest that there were not large changes in average efficacy following a payment
from a pharmaceutical firm. Although there is some evidence of a pre-trend in two of the
figures, there is no large deviation from that trend following the payment that might suggest
a reduction in efficacy.
    Overall, we do not find evidence that payments lead to economically large reductions in
the average quality of drugs that patients are prescribed. Nor do we find meaningful increases
in average quality following a payment. Although we can not rule out the possibility that no
patients were put onto less (or more) effective drugs, we can rule out large average negative
(or positive) effects of payments on the quality of prescribing.


5.2     Payments and the Transition to Generics
In Part D, patients typically pay higher out-of-pocket prices for a branded drug when there
exists a generic equivalent; therefore, physicians acting as good agents for their patients
should transition patients to generics as soon as possible. At the same time, patent expiries
represent substantial revenue losses to branded drug firms. Finding that physicians who
receive payments from a drug firm disproportionately keep patients on the firm's brands
   26
      More specifically, for the therapeutic class, we subtract the average efficacy (weighted by total days
supply in Part D) of drugs within that class and then divide by the standard deviation of that measure.


                                                    21
would be evidence that physicians were privileging the drug firms' interests over their pa-
tients.27 Previous research using distance to a drug firm's headquarters as an instrument for
a physician's detailing exposure found that detailing causes physicians to shift away from
generic drugs and towards branded versions of the same molecule (Engelberg et al., 2014).
Such behavior would be clear evidence of payments reducing patient welfare and increasing
public costs with no corresponding benefit.
    We choose five major drugs that lost patent protection and faced new generic competition
over our sample period: Abilify, Namenda, Celebrex, Evista, and Zyvox. Details of the five
drugs are recorded in Table 5. These five drugs alone accounted for 5.5 percent of Medicare
Part D expenditure in 2013, and all five were making payments to physicians over the
time period. We use the full sample of physicians for this analysis because we only need
to incorporate information about these five drugs and their competitors. As reported in
Huckfeldt and Knittel (2011), we confirm that drug firms dramatically reduce the number
of physicians receiving payments prior to generic entry.28
    We calculate the generic efficiency rate for physicians who ever receive payments for the
branded version of the drug and those who never did in the first six months after the onset of
generic competition. The generic efficiency rate is the standard measure of the penetration
of generic drugs in a market and is simply the ratio of the days supply from generic suppliers
and the total days supply of the molecule. Generic efficiency is zero prior to generic entry
and generally rises quickly as generic substitution takes place.
    Figure 10 shows the generic efficiency rate over the first six months of generic competition
for the five case studies. For example, in panel (a), we see that the share of the days supplied
of aripiprazole that is generic rises sharply from 0 in April 2015, leveling out at about 70
percent six months later. Panels (b)-(e) show similar findings for the four other drugs which
lost patent protection during our sample. While we do not attempt to explain why generic
efficiency does not rise to one,29 it is clear that generic efficiency rises at least as quickly
among paid physicians as it does among physicians who were never paid. In four of five
  27
      Physicians can override automatic substitutions of a generic for the name-brand drug by marking
the prescription "Dispense as Written" (see Hellerstein, 1998). Patients can also elect to override generic
subsitution at the pharmacy.
   28
      The number of payments over the entire sample period is reported for all five drugs in Appendix Figure
A.6. For Celebrex, Evista, and Zyvox, payments drop sharply to zero right around the time of generic entry.
For Namenda, which as discussed below was trying to extend its drug line via Namenda XR, payments for
original Namenda fell to essentially zero about a year earlier. While payments for Abilify fall by about three-
quarters, they do not reach zero over the sample period. Over the sample period Otsuka Pharmaceuticals
was promoting a once-monthly injectable formulation of aripiprazole, Abilify Maintena, and it is possible
that some encounters related to Abilify Maintena were described as Abilify in the Open Payments dataset.
   29
      Generic efficiency may remain below one if either patients or physicians do not view the generic as
perfectly substitutable.



                                                      22
cases, paid physicians transition more quickly than physicians who were never paid.
    A drug firm facing generic entry will sometimes use direct-to-physician marketing to sup-
port a "line extension" strategy by which they heavily promote a newly-introduced distinct
drug formulation just prior to generic entry in the original drug. Individuals who are taking
the new formulation are not subject to automatic generic substitution at the pharmacy. For
example, Actavis30 introduced an extended-release formulation of Namenda (Namenda XR)
prior to the expiry of the original Namenda (Capati and Kesselheim, 2016). Namenda XR
needed to be taken only once per day, while the original formulation needed to be taken twice
per day.31 While promotional activities were greatly reduced for original Namenda over our
sample period, leading to a low share of detailed physicians at expiry, Actavis detailed heav-
ily for Namenda XR. More than 11% of Namenda XR physicians received a payment related
to the drug over the sample period.
    We provide suggestive evidence on the line extension strategy for Namenda XR in Figure
11. We add the days supply of Namenda XR to the denominator of the generic efficiency
rate and report the share of all memantine prescribing that is generic memantine (Figure
11a) and the share that is Namenda XR (Figure 11b). These figures show that those who
were ever paid for Namenda or Namenda XR indeed prescribe more Namenda XR, and also
prescribe less generic memantine. By the end of 2015, the prescribing of those who were never
paid for Namenda or Namenda XR is approximately 6% branded Namenda, 37% Namenda
XR, and 57% generic menantine. Those who were paid for Namenda or Namenda XR are
actually prescribing less branded Namenda (3%), but are prescribing much more Namenda
XR (64%).
    This analysis does not use the physician fixed effects we used in our other analyses to ac-
count for the targeting of payments to physicians. However, Figure 11 does not compare the
overall prescribing volume of physicians who receive payments to those that do not; instead,
the figure shows how the composition of prescribing varies among three potential forms (orig-
inal brand, generic, and extended release brand). The higher prescribing of Namenda XR
among those who receive related payments could only be attributable to selection if Actavis
targeted physicians with an especially high preference for the convenience of a once-daily
formulation. Thus, we conclude that those who were ever paid for Namenda or Namenda
XR were more likely to prescribe extended formulations, consistent with the line extension
  30
      Forest Pharmaceuticals was the original maker of Namenda and introduced Namenda XR in 2014.
Actavis acquired Forest Pharmaceuticals later that year. For simplicity, we refer to Actavis, since they were
the patent holder at the time of memantine generic entry.
   31
      As noted, there was also an extended-release version of Abilify, Abilify Maintena. However, a once-
monthly injectable formulation does represent a distinct advantage over an oral daily formulation for a drug
where adherence is a significant challenge. Consequently, we focus our analysis on Namenda XR which still
required daily dosing.


                                                     23
strategy.


6    Conclusion
Activists who favor limiting physician and pharmaceutical industry interactions character-
ize these relationships as "bribes and kickbacks," while industry advocates simultaneously
describe such interactions as educational tools that benefit patients. Our analysis in this
papers suggests neither characterization is wholly accurate.
    Using detailed information on the timing of payments and accounting for the selection
of payments to physicians, we find that physicians who are paid by a drug firm have similar
prescribing trends to unpaid physicians prior to the payment, but increase the number of
patients and expenditures on the marketed drug after the payment occurs. This increase
in drug usage that occurs after a payment is substantial, representing a 4% increase in
expenditures. If a physician receiving a payment for one drug also receives a payment for a
competing drug, it partially offsets the estimated increase.
    We examine whether these expenditure changes are accompanied by reductions in drug
quality. First, for three large classes of drugs, we collected data from the medical literature
on a unidemensional quality measure, such as the reduction in LDL cholesterol observed in
clinical trials, for each drug. Using this efficacy measure, we find that drug firm interactions
reduce drug quality, but that this effect is very small. Our confidence intervals allow us to
rule out reductions in quality larger than 1/100th of a standard deviation, indicating that
such quality changes are unlikely to be clinically meaningful. We also examine whether
physicians who are paid by a pharmaceutical company keep their patients on the branded
version of a molecule even when a generic version becomes available. We find no evidence
that paid physicians transition their patients to generics more slowly, although we do see
that they are more likely to put their patients on (branded) extended release versions of a
molecule when a patent expiry occurs for the original version.
    Overall, our results suggest that costs do increase as a result of marketing encounters
between drug firms and physicians. At the same time, our results on drug quality are mixed;
we do not find clear evidence that such payments are harmful to patients, only that they do
not seem to be obviously helpful. The extent to which physician and drug firm interactions
are actually welfare reducing represents a potentially useful area for future research.




                                              24
References
Adair, R. F. and L. R. Holmgren (2005). Do drug samples influence resident prescribing
 behavior? a randomized trial. The American journal of medicine 118 (8), 881­884.

Agha, L. and D. Zeltzer (2019, October). Drug diffusion through peer networks: The influ-
  ence of industry payments. Working Paper 26338, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Alpert, A. E., W. N. Evans, E. M. Lieber, and D. Powell (2019, November). Origins of
  the opioid crisis and its enduring impacts. Working Paper 26500, National Bureau of
  Economic Research.

Andersen, M., J. Kragstrup, and J. Søndergaard (2006). How conducting a clinical trial
 affects physicians' guideline adherence and drug preferences. JAMA 295 (23), 2759­2764.

Bagwell, K. (2007). The economic analysis of advertising. In M. Armstrong and R. K. Porter
  (Eds.), Handbook of Industrial Organization, Volume 3, pp. 1701­1844. Elsevier.

Becker, M. H., P. D. Stolley, L. Lasagna, J. D. McEvilla, and L. M. Sloane (1972). Differential
  education concerning therapeutics and resultant physician prescribing patterns. Academic
  Medicine 47 (2), 118­27.

Campbell, E. G., R. L. Gruen, J. Mountford, L. G. Miller, P. D. Cleary, and D. Blumenthal
  (2007). A national survey of physician­industry relationships. New England Journal of
  Medicine 356 (17), 1742­1750.

Capati, V. C. and A. S. Kesselheim (2016). Drug product life-cycle management as an-
  ticompetitive behavior: The case of memantine. Journal of Managed Care & Specialty
  Pharmacy 22 (4), 339­344.

Ching, A. T. (2010). Consumer learning and heterogeneity: Dynamics of demand for pre-
 scription drugs after patent expiration. International Journal of Industrial Organiza-
 tion 28 (6), 619­638.

Ching, A. T. and M. Ishihara (2010). The effects of detailing on prescribing decisions under
 quality uncertainty. Quantitative Marketing and Economics 8 (2), 123­165.

Ching, A. T. and M. Ishihara (2012). Measuring the informative and persuasive roles of
 detailing on prescribing decisions. Management Science 58 (7), 1374­1387.

Chintagunta, P. K., R. L. Goettler, and M. Kim (2012). New drug diffusion when forward-
 looking physicians learn from patient feedback and detailing. Journal of Marketing Re-
 search 49 (6), 807­821.

Chintagunta, P. K., R. Jiang, and G. Z. Jin (2009). Information, learning, and drug diffusion:
 The case of cox-2 inhibitors. QME 7 (4), 399­443.

Consumer Reports (2014). Find out if your doctor takes payments from drug companies.
  Technical report, Consumer Reports.

                                              25
Datta, A. and D. Dave (2017, 4). Effects of physiciandirected pharmaceutical promotion on
 prescription behaviors: Longitudinal evidence. Health Economics 26 (4), 450­468.

de Bakker, D. H., D. S. Coffie, E. R. Heerdink, L. van Dijk, and P. P. Groenewegen (2007).
  Determinants of the range of drugs prescribed in general practice: a cross-sectional anal-
  ysis. BMC health services research 7 (1), 132.

Dolovich, L., M. Levine, R. Tarajos, and E. Duku (1999). Promoting optimal antibiotic ther-
 apy for otitis media using commercially sponsored evidence-based detailing: A prospective
 controlled trial. Drug Information Journal 33 (4), 1067­1077.

Engelberg, J., C. A. Parsons, and N. Tefft (2014). Financial conflicts of interest in medicine.
  Available at SSRN 2297094 .

Epstein, A. J. and J. D. Ketcham (2014). Information technology and agency in physicians'
  prescribing decisions. The RAND Journal of Economics 45 (2), 422­448.

Federal Register (2013). Affordable care act section 6002 final rule. Technical report, De-
  partment of Health and Human Services.

Fischer, M. and S. Albers (2010). Patient-or physician-oriented marketing: What drives
  primary demand for prescription drugs? Journal of Marketing Research 47 (1), 103­121.

Flewell, M. (2006, 08). Pharmaceutical sales reps: Value beyond samples. Advance for Nurse
  Practitioners 14, 18.

Freemantle, N., R. Johnson, J. Dennis, A. Kennedy, and M. Marchment (2000, February).
  Sleeping with the enemy? a randomized controlled trial of a collaborative health au-
  thority/industry intervetion to influence prescribing practice. British Journal of Clinical
  Pharmacology 49 (2), 174­179.

Fugh-Berman, A. and S. Ahari (2007). Following the script: how drug reps make friends
  and influence doctors. PLoS Medicine 4 (4), 621.

Gold, R. (2001, August). States battling high drug costs appeal to doctors. The Wall Street
 Journal , B.1.

Grennan, M., K. Myers, A. Swanson, and A. Chatterji (2018). Physician-industry interac-
  tions: Persuasion and welfare. Technical report, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Haayer, F. (1982). Rational prescribing and sources of information.          Social science &
  medicine 16 (23), 2017­2023.

Hellerstein, J. K. (1998). The importance of the physician in the generic versus trade-name
  prescription decision. The RAND Journal of Economics 29 (1), 108­136.

Henry, D. (2010, November). Doctors and drug companies: Still cozy after all these years.
  PLoS Medicine 7 (11), 1­2.



                                              26
Huckfeldt, P. and C. Knittel (2011, May). Pharmaceutical use following generic entry: Paying
 less and buying less. NBER Working Paper No 17046.

Iizuka, T. and G. Z. Jin (2005). The effect of prescription drug advertising on doctor visits.
   Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 14 (3), 701­727.

Janakiraman, R., S. Dutta, C. Sismeiro, and P. Stern (2008). Physicians' persistence and
  its implications for their response to promotion of prescription drugs. Management Sci-
  ence 54 (6), 1080­1093.

Johnson, N. J., C. M. Mills, and M. Kridgen (2018). Prescription drug rebates and part d
  drug costs. Technical report, Milliman.

Kaiser Family Foundation (2019, January). 10 essential facts about medicare and prescrip-
 tion drug spending. available online at https://www.kff.org/infographic/10-essential-facts-
 about-medicare-and-prescription-drug-spending/.

Kazmierczak, R. and K. Coley (1997). Impact of `dear doctor' letters on prescribing: Eval-
 uation of the use of tramadol hcl. Formulary 32 (9), 968.

KRC Research (2011). Survey of physicians about pharmaceutical and biotech research
 company activities and information. Technical report, KRC Research.

Larkin, I., D. Ang, J. Steinhart, M. Chao, M. Patterson, S. Sah, T. Wu, M. Schoenbaum,
  D. Hutchins, T. Brennan, and G. Loewenstein (2017). Association between academic
  medical center pharmaceutical detailing policies and physician prescribing. Journal of the
  American Medical Association 317 (17), 1785­1795.

Liu, Q., S. Gupta, S. Venkataraman, and H. Liu (2015). An empirical model of drug detailing:
  dynamic competition and policy implications. Management Science 62 (8), 2321­2340.

Manchanda, P. and P. K. Chintagunta (2004). Responsiveness of physician prescription
 behavior to salesforce effort: An individual level analysis. Marketing Letters 15 (2-3),
 129­145.

Mizik, N. and R. Jacobson (2004). Are physicians easy marks? quantifying the effects of
 detailing and sampling on new prescriptions. Management Science 50 (12), 1704­1715.

Muijrers, P. E., R. P. Grol, J. Sijbrandij, R. Janknegt, and J. A. Knottnerus (2005). Differ-
 ences in prescribing between gps. impact of the cooperation with pharmacists and impact
 of visits from pharmaceutical industry representatives. Family Practice 22 (6), 624­630.

Narayanan, S., R. Desiraju, and P. K. Chintagunta (2004). Return on investment impli-
  cations for pharmaceutical promotional expenditures: The role of marketing-mix interac-
  tions. Journal of marketing 68 (4), 90­105.

Narayanan, S. and P. Manchanda (2009). Heterogeneous learning and the targeting of mar-
  keting communication for new products. Marketing Science 28 (3), 424­441.


                                             27
Narayanan, S., P. Manchanda, and P. K. Chintagunta (2005). Temporal differences in the
  role of marketing communication in new product categories. Journal of Marketing Re-
  search 42 (3), 278­290.
Pew Charitable Trust (2013, November). Persuading the prescribers: Pharmaceutical indus-
  try marketing and its influence on physicians and patients.
Publicis Touchpoint Solutions (2012). What physicians want! survey. Technical report,
  Publicis Touchpoint Solutions.
Robinson, J. (1933). Economics of Imperfect Competition. MacMillan and Co., London.
Schwartz, L. M. and S. Woloshin (2019). Medical marketing in the united states, 1997-2016.
  JAMA 1 (321), 80­96.
Sears, J. (2008). Industry funding of medical education: Report of an AAMC task force.
  Association of American Medical Centers Report.
Shapiro, B. (2018a). Informational shocks, off-label prescribing and the effects of physician
  detailing. Management Science 64 (12), 5925­5945.
Shapiro, B. (2018b). Positive spillovers and free riding in advertising of prescription phar-
  maceuticals: The case of antidepressants. Journal of Political Economy 126 (1), 201­231.
Sinkinson, M. and A. Starc (2019). Ask your doctor? direct-to-consumer advertising of
  pharmaceuticals. Review of Economic Studies 86, 836­881.
Soumerai, S. B., J. Avorn, S. Gortmaker, and S. Hawley (1987). Effect of government and
  commercial warnings on reducing prescription misuse: the case of propoxyphene. American
  Journal of Public Health 77 (12), 1518­1523.
Spingarn, R. W., J. A. Berlin, and B. L. Strom (1996). When pharmaceutical manufacturers'
  employees present grand rounds, what do residents remember?. Academic Medicine 71 (1),
  86­8.
Spurling, G. K., P. R. Mansfield, B. D. Montgomery, J. Lexchin, J. Doust, N. Othman, and
  A. I. Vitry (2010, October). Information from pharmaceutical companies and the quality,
  quantity, and cost of physicians' prescribing: A systematic review. PLoS Medicine 7 (10),
  1­22.
Stigler, G. (1961). The economics of information. Journal of Political Economy 69 (3),
  213­225.
Sullivan, H. W., A. C. O'Donoghue, and K. J. Aikin (2014). primary care physicians'
  use of fda-approved prescription drug labels. Journal of the American Board of Family
  Medicine 27 (5), 694­698.
Turner, E. H., A. M. Matthews, E. Linardatos, R. A. Tell, and R. Rosenthal (2008). Selective
  publication of antidepressant trials and its influence on apparent efficacy. New England
  Journal of Medicine 358, 252­260.

                                             28
Wazana, A. (2000). Physicians and the pharmaceutical industry: is a gift ever just a gift?
 Journal of the American Medical Association 283 (3), 373­380.




                                           29
                                          Figure 1: Summary Statistics: Distribution of Payments by Type and Amount


                                                                                         500+
                                                      1
                                                            Other
    Percent of Payments or of Dollar Value of Payments


                                                                                       [50, 500)

                                                                                        [20,50)
                      .4          .6        .8




                                                                       Other                               500+
             .2




                                                                                                         [50, 500)
                                                                                                          [20,50)

                                                            Food        Food            (0,20)             (0,20)
   0




                                                          N Payments   $ Value        N Payments          $ Value


This figure depicts the share of payments that are an in-kind transfer of food or beverage (first bar) vs. all
other payment types. The second bar weights the payments by the dollar value. The third bar shows the
share of payments in each of four size categories, and the fourth bar shows the same shares when weighted
by dollar value.




                                                                                 30
                                           Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                                                       % of
                                                                % of                % of
                                                                                                       Prescribing
                                           % of Part D          Expenditure         Prescribing
 Drug               Indication                                                                         Physicians
                                           Expenditure          Affected by         Physicians
                                                                                                       First Paid in
                                                                Payments            Ever Paid
                                                                                                       14 or 15
   All Drugs In Analytic Dataset                   63                  21                  22                14
 Lantus         Diabetes                           3.3                 24                  16                 9
 Harvoni        Hep C                              2.3                 18                  23                23
 Crestor        High Cholesterol                   2.3                 23                  18                 9
 Advair         Asthma/COPD                        2.2                 10                  10                10
 Spiriva        Asthma/COPD                        1.9                 26                  21                11
 Abilify        Mental Illness                     1.9                 28                  24                 8
 Januvia        Diabetes                           1.6                 19                  21                15
 Sovaldi        Hep C                              1.3                 21                  21                 9
 Lyrica         Nerve Pain                         1.3                 25                  18                 9
 Novolog        Diabetes                           1.2                 27                  27                17
 Levemir        Diabetes                           1.2                 37                  37                21
 Humira         Immune Conds                       1.1                 45                  66                27
 Namenda        Dementia                           1.1                  2                   1                 0
 Enbrel         Immune Conds                       1.1                 39                  50                19
 Xarelto        Blood Clots                          1                 44                  45                24
 Zetia          High Cholesterol                     1                 16                  18                13
 Gleevec        Cancer                              .9                  6                  13                 5
 Symbicort      Asthma/COPD                         .9                 30                  28                15
 Oxycontin      Pain                                .8                 23                  21                12
 Humalog        Diabetes                            .8                 26                  29                15

This table describes the prevalence of payments in Part D overall and for the twenty drugs with the largest total
expenditure over the sample period. The third column describes the share of Part D expenditure. The next column
describes the share of expenditure where the physician has received a payment for the drug at the time of prescribing.
The next column describes the share of those who ever prescribe the drug who ever receive a payment for the drug.
Finally, we report the share of prescribing physicians who are first paid in 2014 or 2015, since these physicians identify
our estimates given fixed effects.




                                                     31
Figure 2: Summary Statistics: Share of Prescribing Affected by Payments and Number of
Paying Products in the Therapeutic Class
                                              .4
    Share of Prescribing Affected by Payments
   .1            .2              .3




                                                   1   3         5            7          9         11   13+
                                                           Number of Drugs in TC Making Payments


The x-axis in this figure counts the number of drugs in each therapeutic class that are making payments to
any prescriber. The y-axis in this figure measures the average share of prescribing of those drugs that is
affected by payments (i.e., where a prescriber has received a payment prior to prescribing). The size of the
marker is the total expenditure represented by the observation. The least squares line (weighted by
expenditure) and its 95% CI (shaded area) are also reported.




                                                                         32
                      Figure 3: Impact of a Payment on Drug Expenditure
  30
  20
  10
  0
  -10




        -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12


Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from estimation of Equation 1 are presented. The dependent
variable is the total expenditure by a physician's patients on a drug in a given month. The omitted time
period is the month prior to the payment.




                                                   33
           Figure 4: Impact of a Payment on Number of Patients Taking the Drug
  .04
  .02
  0
  -.02




         -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12


Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from estimation of Equation 1 are presented. The dependent
variable is the physician's number of patients filling a prescription for a drug in a given month. The
omitted time period is the month prior to the payment.




                                                   34
                            Table 2: Estimated Impacts of Payments

                                  Expenditure                           Number of Patients
                                      (1)                                     (2)
 Months 0 - 5                       5.67**                                 0.016***
                                    (2.42)                                  (0.004)
 Months 6 - 12                     12.47***                                  0.005
                                    (3.68)                                  (0.008)

 Mean dep. var.                       $238                                       1.25

 No. physicians                     494,525                                    494,525
 Observations                     190,511,352                                190,511,352
Dependent variable is given in column heading. Estimates are linear combinations of event study estimates
presented in Figures 3 and 4. The month prior to the payment is the reference group. Standard errors are
clustered by physician.




                                                   35
                                Figure 5: Impact of a Payment by Competing Drug




                                                                                .05
 20
 10
 0




                                                                                0
 -10
 -20
 -30




                                                                                -.05
       -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



                         (a) Expenditure                                                            (b) Number of Patients

This figure reports the impact on drug d outcomes of receiving a payment from a competing drug d in the
therapeutic class, represented by the  coefficients in Equation 1. The dependent variables are total
expenditure on drug d (Panel a) and number of patients taking drug d (Panel b). The x-axis measures the
months before and after the payment from drug d . Estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are
presented. The omitted time period is the month prior to the payment.




                Table 3: Estimated Impacts on Drug d of a Competing Drug's Payment

                                                 Expenditure                                                 Number of Patients
                                                      (1)                                                           (2)
 Months 0 - 5                                        -1.91                                                        -0.005
                                                    (3.52)                                                       (0.006)
 Months 6 - 12                                    -10.53***                                                       -0.015
                                                    (5.30)                                                       (0.009)

 Mean dep. var.                                        $238                                                              1.25

 No. physicians                                    494,525                                                           494,525
 Observations                                    190,511,352                                                       190,511,352
Dependent variable is given in column heading. Estimates are linear combinations of event study estimates
presented in Figure 5. The month prior to the payment is the reference group. Standard errors are clustered
by physician.




                                                                           36
                  Figure 6: Impact of a Payment on Drug Expenditure by Payment Size




                                                                                 .04
 30
 20




                                                                                 .02
 10




                                                                                 0
 0




                                                                                 -.02
 -10




        -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



            (a) Expenditures, Payment < $500                                                  (b) # Patients, Payment < $500
                                                                                 .4
 600
 400




                                                                                 .2
 200




                                                                                 0
 0




                                                                                 -.2
 -200




                                                                                 -.4
 -400




                                                                                 -.6




        -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



            (c) Expenditures, Payment  $500                                                   (d) # Patients, Payment  $500

Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from the estimation of Equation 1 are presented. The dependent
variable is the total expenditure by a physician's patients on a drug in a given month. The omitted time
period is the month prior to the payment. Estimates based on payments that were less than $500 are
presented in panel (a); estimates based on payments that were at least $500 are presented in panel (b).




                                                                            37
                                     Figure 7: Impact of a Payment by Payment Type




                                                                                   100
  30
  20




                                                                                   50
  10




                                                                                   0
  0




                                                                                   -50
  -10




                                                                                   -100

          -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



  (a) Impact of Food Payment on Expenditure                                    (b) Impact of Other Payment on Expenditure
   .04




                                                                                      .2
                                                                                      .1
   .02




                                                                                      0
   0




                                                                                      -.1
   -.02




                                                                                      -.2




          -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12                 -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



   (c) Impact of Food Payment on # Patients                                         (d) Impact of Other Payment on # Patients

Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from the estimation of Equation 1 are presented. The dependent
variable is the total expenditure (panels a and b) or number of patients (panels c and d) for a
physician-drug-month. The omitted time period is the month prior to the payment. Panels a and c report
estimates based on food-related payments. Panels b and d report estimates based on all other payments
excluding food, primarily speaking at continuing medical education events, consulting, and travel.




                                                                              38
                          Figure 8: Impact of a Payment in Low Competition Classes



                                                                                 .06
  60
  40




                                                                                 .04
  20




                                                                                 .02
  0




                                                                                 0
  -20




                                                                                 -.02
  -40




        -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



                          (a) Expenditure                                                           (b) Number of Patients

Estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are presented. The dependent variable is the total
expenditure by a physician's patients on a drug in a given month. The omitted time period is the month
prior to the payment. Estimates based on payments made in therapeutic classes where few (five or fewer)
other products are marketed.




                                                                            39
                   Table 4: Heterogeneity in Estimated Impacts of Payments

                                                                      Expenditure        Number of
                                                                                          Patients
                                                                            (1)             (2)
 Panel A: Payment < $500
 Months 0 - 5                                                            5.88**            0.016**
                                                                         (2.39)            (0.004)
 Months 6 - 12                                                          11.18***            0.005
                                                                         (3.66)            (0.008)
 Mean dep. var.                                                           $236               1.24

 Panel B: Payment  $500
 Months 0 - 5                                                             -22.95             -0.03
                                                                         (82.57)            (0.06)
 Months 6 - 12                                                          242.10***            -0.05
                                                                         (91.60)            (0.08)
 Mean dep. var.                                                            $233              1.31

 Panel C: Food payment
 Months 0 - 5                                                            6.03**           0.016***
                                                                         (2.47)            (0.005)
 Months 6 - 12                                                          11.03***            0.005
                                                                         (3.78)            (0.008)
 Mean dep. var.                                                           $238              1.24

 Panel D: Other payment
 Months 0 - 5                                                             -15.57             0.005
                                                                         (12.54)           (0.024)
 Months 6 - 12                                                             -3.14            -0.028
                                                                         (16.07)           (0.024)
 Mean dep. var.                                                            $236              1.29

 Panel E: Low competition class (5 or fewer paying drugs)
 Months 0 - 5                                                           16.46***          0.030***
                                                                         (4.28)            (0.008)
 Months 6 - 12                                                          32.88***          0.026***
                                                                         (5.13)            (0.011)
 Mean dep. var.                                                         $206.18              1.76
Dependent variable is given in column heading. Estimates are linear combinations of event study estimates
presented Figures 6, 7, and 8.




                                                   40
                      Figure 9: Impact of a Payment on Average Efficacy
  .01
  .005
  0
  -.005
  -.01




          -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12


Estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals are presented. The dependent variable is the
standardized efficacy measure for a physician in a given therapeutic class and month. The omitted time
period is the month prior to the payment.




                                                   41
                                 Table 5: Generic Entry Case Studies

 Brand     Molecule               Drug            Indication           % of 2013 Part D        % Physicians Generic
 Name                             Maker                                  Expenditure            Ever Paid     Onset
 Abilify  aripiprazole           Otsuka        Mental Illness                 2.2                 18.3       2015m4
 Namenda memantine               Actavis         Dementia                     1.7                  1.4       2015m6
 Celebrex  celecoxib              Pfizer            Pain                      1.0                 16.7      2014m11
 Evista    raloxifene            Eli Lilly     Osteoporosis                   0.5                  1.0      2014m3
 Zyvox      linezolid             Pfizer     Bacterial Infection              0.1                 11.5       2015m5

This table provides details for the five case studies of generic entry evaluated in Section 5.2.




                                                      42
  .8
            Figure 10: Generic Efficiency in the First Six Months After Patent Expiry




                                                                    1
                                                                    .8
  .6




                                                                    .6
  .4




                                                                    .4
  .2




                                                                    .2
  0




                                                                    0
  2015m4     2015m5    2015m6    2015m7          2015m8   2015m9    2015m6          2015m7    2015m8    2015m9         2015m10   2015m11

                         Paid         Not Paid                                                  Paid        Not Paid



                       (a) Abilify                                                           (b) Namenda
  1




                                                                    1
  .8




                                                                    .8
  .6




                                                                    .6
  .4




                                                                    .4
  .2




                                                                    .2
  0




                                                                    0




  2014m11    2014m12   2015m1    2015m2          2015m3   2015m4    2014m3          2014m4    2014m5    2014m6         2014m7    2014m8

                         Paid         Not Paid                                                  Paid        Not Paid



                       (c) Celebrex                                                           (d) Evista
                                .8
                                .6
                                .4
                                .2
                                0




                                2015m5           2015m6   2015m7     2015m8         2015m9    2015m10

                                                            Paid         Not Paid



                                                          (e) Zyvox

Each figure shows the generic efficiency, measured as the share of days supply for each molecule supplied in
the generic form, for the first six months of generic competition for each of five molecules experiencing
generic entry during the sample period. Physicians who previously received a payment for the branded
drug are represented by the solid green line; physicians who never received a related payment are
represented by the dashed gold line. 95% confidence intervals are reported in gray.
                                                               43
          Figure 11: Generic Memantine and Namenda XR as a Share of All Memantine
  .6




                                                                   .8
                                                                   .6
  .4




                                                                   .4
  .2




                                                                   .2
  0




                                                                   0




       2013m7    2014m1   2014m7   2015m1        2015m7   2016m1        2013m7    2014m1   2014m7   2015m1        2015m7   2016m1

                           Paid       Not Paid                                              Paid       Not Paid


                         generic Memantine                                                    NamendaXR
       (a)   generic Memantine+ Namenda + Namenda XR                    (b)   generic Memantine+ Namenda + Namenda XR


This figure reports the distribution of all days supplied of the molecule memantine across three forms:
branded Namenda, branded Namenda XR, and generic memantine. Panel a reports the share of days of
generic memantine in the total prescribing of the molecule, separately for physicians ever receiving a
payment for Namenda or Namenda XR (solid green) and physicians who never receive such a payment
(dashed gold). Panel b reports the share of days of Namenda XR in the total days supplied of the
molecule, separately for paid and unpaid physicians. 95% confidence intervals are reported in gray.




                                                              44
Appendices
A.   Additional Figures and Tables




                          45
Figure A.1: Impact of a Payment or Competing Firm's Payment on the Total Days Supplied
of the Drug
   2




                                                                                 2
                                                                                 1
   1




                                                                                 0
   0




                                                                                 -1
   -1




                                                                                 -2
   -2




        -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12             -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



                (a) Impact of Own Payment                                         (b) Impact of Competing Firm's Payment

Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from the estimation of Equation 1 are presented. The dependent
variable is the physician's total number of days of the drug supplied in a given month. The omitted time
period is the month prior to the payment.




                   Table A.1: Estimated Impacts of Payments on Total Days Supplied


                                               Impact of Own Payment                           Impact of Rival Payment
                 Months 0 - 5                         0.743***                                         -0.356*
                                                       (0.194)                                         (0.210)
                 Months 6 - 12                        0.753***                                        -0.835***
                                                       (0.244)                                         (0.285)

                 Mean dep. var.                                53.42                                            53.42

                 No. physicians                             494,525                                          494,525
                 Observations                             190,511,352                                      190,511,352
Dependent variable is physician's total number of days of the drug supplied in a given month.
Estimates are linear combinations of event study estimates presented in Figure A.1. The month
prior to the payment is the reference group. Standard errors are clustered by physician.




                                                                            46
               Figure A.2: Impact of a Payment on Drug Expenditure by Payment Value




                                                                                60
 20




                                                                                40
 10




                                                                                20
                                                                                0
 0




                                                                                -20
                                                                                -40
 -10




       -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12


                           (a) Under $20                                                                     (b) $20-$49
                                                                                100
 100




                                                                                50
 50




                                                                                0
 0




                                                                                -50
 -50




                                                                                -100




       -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12


                             (c) $50-$99                                                                   (d) $100-$499

Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from the estimation of Equation 1 are presented. Each panel
compares physician-drug pairs receiving a payment in the stated range with those receiving no payment.
The dependent variable is the total expenditure by a physician's patients on the drug in a month. The
omitted time period is the month prior to the payment.




                                                                           47
Figure A.3: Impact of a Payment on Expenditure and Patients: High Competition Classes
   40




                                                                                  .05
   20




                                                                                  0
   0
   -20




                                                                                  -.05
   -40
   -60




                                                                                  -.1




         -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



                           (a) Expenditure                                                           (b) Number of Patients

Estimated coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from the estimation of Equation 1 are presented are
presented for therapeutic classes with more than five drugs making payments over the sample period. The
dependent variable is the total expenditure of a physician's patients on a drug (panel (a)) and the number
of patients on that drug (panel (b)) in a given month. The omitted time period is the month prior to the
payment.




                                                                             48
Figure A.4: Impacts of Payments on Expenditure and Patients: Therapeutic Classes for
Efficacy Analysis
   60




                                                                                  .1
   40




                                                                                  .05
   20
   0




                                                                                  0
   -20




                                                                                  -.05
   -40




         -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



                           (a) Expenditure                                                           (b) Number of Patients

Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from the estimation of Equation 1 are presented for the three
therapeutic classes used in the efficacy analysis in Section 5.1. The dependent variable is the total
expenditure of a physician's patients on a drug (panel (a)) and the number of patients on that drug (panel
(b)) in a given month. The omitted time period is the month prior to the payment.




Table A.2: Impacts of Payments on Expenditure and Patients: Therapeutic Classes for
Efficacy Analysis

                                                  Expenditure                                                  Number of Patients
                                                      (1)                                                            (2)
 Months 0 - 5                                       12.17**                                                       0.0296***
                                                     (5.02)                                                        (0.009)
 Months 6 - 12                                      22.51**                                                       0.034***
                                                     (9.77)                                                        (0.013)

 Mean dep. var.                                        $249.3                                                               1.90

 No. physicians                                      228,261                                                            228,261
 Observations                                       20,932,596                                                         20,932,596
Dependent variable is given in column heading. Estimates are linear combinations of event study estimates
presented in Figure A.4. The month prior to the payment is the reference group. Standard errors are
clustered by physician.




                                                                             49
  Figure A.5: Impact of a Payment on Average Efficacy by Individual Therapeutic Class




                                                                                 .02
 .05




                                                                                 0
 0




                                                                                 -.02
 -.05




                                                                                 -.04
 -.1




        -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



                         (a) Antipsychotics                                                                    (b) ARBs
                                         .1
                                         0
                                         -.1
                                         -.2




                                               -12-11-10 -9 -8 -7 -6 -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12



                                                                     (c) Statins

Coefficients and 95% confidence intervals from the estimation of Equation 2 are presented independently
for each therapeutic class. The dependent variable is the raw efficacy measure for each therapeutic class
(PANSS for antipsychotics, reduction in blood pressure for ARBs, and reduction in LDL for statins). The
omitted time period is the month prior to the payment.




                                                                            50
                        Table A.3: Impact of Payments on Drug Efficacy


                       Overall Drug        Anti-psychotics        Statins (%          Angiotensin II
                       Efficacy (Std       (Improvement          Reduction in            Receptor
                       Deviations)           in PANSS)              LDL)                 Blockers
                                                                                      (Reduction in
                                                                                       Systolic BP)
 Months 0 - 5             -0.0018               0.0022               -0.0172              -0.0026
                         (0.0017)              (0.0115)             (0.0161)             (0.0053)
 Months 6 - 12          -0.0062***             0.00027             -0.0663***             -0.0026
                         (0.0019)              (0.0149)             (0.0176)            (0.0.0058)

 Mean dep. var.                                  13.92                37.44                 9.22

 No. physicians          496,834               210,249              421,989               316,760
 Observations           18,128,779            3,172,059            8,672,558             6,284,162
Dependent variable is given in column heading. Estimates are linear combinations of event study estimates
presented in Figure A.5. The month prior to the payment is the reference group. Standard errors are
clustered by physician.




                                                   51
                                                Figure A.6: Number of Payments Around Patent Expiries

                                                                                                                                      800
                       8000




                                                                                                                                      600
  Number of Payments




                                                                                                                 Number of Payments
                       6000




                                                                                                                                      400


                       4000



                                                                                                                                      200



                       2000


                                                                                                                                       0
                          2013m7       2014m1      2014m7                         2015m1     2015m7    2016m1                           2013m7    2014m1      2014m7   2015m1   2015m7   2016m1




                                                 (a) Abilify                                                                                               (b) Namenda
                       10000
                                                                                                                                      600



                        8000
  Number of Payments




                                                                                                                 Number of Payments




                                                                                                                                      400
                        6000




                        4000

                                                                                                                                      200


                        2000




                              0                                                                                                        0
                              2013m7   2014m1      2014m7                         2015m1     2015m7    2016m1                           2013m7    2014m1      2014m7   2015m1   2015m7   2016m1




                                                (c) Celebrex                                                                                                (d) Evista

                                                                                 2500




                                                                                 2000
                                                            Number of Payments




                                                                                 1500




                                                                                 1000




                                                                                 500




                                                                                   0
                                                                                    2013m7    2014m1    2014m7                         2015m1    2015m7      2016m1




                                                                                                       (e) Zyvox

Each figure shows the number of payments recorded for five molecules experiencing generic entry over the
full sample period. The vertical dashed line denotes the month of patent expiry.




                                                                                                            52
