                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          CENTRAL BANK DIGITAL CURRENCY:
                             CENTRAL BANKING FOR ALL?

                                   Jesús Fernández-Villaverde
                                         Daniel Sanches
                                         Linda Schilling
                                          Harald Uhlig

                                       Working Paper 26753
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26753


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




The contribution of Linda Schilling has been prepared under the Lamfalussy fellowship program
sponsored by the ECB. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the ECB, the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, or the Federal
Reserve System. The project was partially written during a research stay of Linda Schilling at the
Simons Institute at UC Berkeley. T The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do
not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26753.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Daniel Sanches, Linda Schilling, and Harald Uhlig. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Central Bank Digital Currency: Central Banking For All?
Jesús Fernández-Villaverde, Daniel Sanches, Linda Schilling, and Harald Uhlig
NBER Working Paper No. 26753
February 2020
JEL No. E58,G21

                                          ABSTRACT

The introduction of a central bank digital currency (CBDC) allows the central bank to engage in
large-scale intermediation by competing with private financial intermediaries for deposits. Yet,
since a central bank is not an investment expert, it cannot invest in long-term projects itself, but
relies on investment banks to do so. We derive an equivalence result that shows that absent a
banking panic, the set of allocations achieved with private financial intermediation will also be
achieved with a CBDC. During a panic, however, we show that the rigidity of the central bank's
contract with the investment banks has the capacity to deter runs. Thus, the central bank is more
stable than the commercial banking sector. Depositors internalize this feature ex-ante, and the
central bank arises as a deposit monopolist, attracting all deposits away from the commercial
banking sector. This monopoly might endangered maturity transformation.

Jesús Fernández-Villaverde                       Linda Schilling
Department of Economics                          Ecole Polytechnique CREST
University of Pennsylvania                       5 Avenue le Chatelier
The Ronald O. Perelman Center                    Palaiseau, Fran 91120
for Political Science and Economics              France
133 South 36th Street Suite 150                  and CEPR
Philadelphia, PA 19104                           lin.schilling@gmail.com
and CEPR
and also NBER                                    Harald Uhlig
jesusfv@econ.upenn.edu                           Dept. of Economics
                                                 University of Chicago
Daniel Sanches                                   1126 E 59th Street
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia             Chicago, IL 60637
Ten Independence Mall                            and CEPR
Philadelphia, PA 19106-1574                      and also NBER
Daniel.Sanches@phil.frb.org                      huhlig@uchicago.edu
1       Introduction
    Recent advances in cryptographic and distributed ledger techniques (von zur Gathen,
2015; Narayanan et al., 2016) have opened the door to the widespread use of digital currencies.
While the lead in the introduction of these currencies came from private initiatives such as
Bitcoin, Ethereum, and Libra, researchers and policymakers have explored the possibility
that central banks can also issue their own digital currencies, aptly called a central bank
digital currency (CBDC).1
    The introduction of a CBDC can represent an important innovation in money and bank-
ing history. Besides its potential role in eliminating physical cash, a CBDC will allow the
central bank to engage in large-scale intermediation by competing with private financial in-
termediaries for deposits (and, likely, engaging in some form of lending of those deposits). In
other words, a CBDC amounts to giving consumers the possibility of holding a bank account
with the central bank directly.
    Defenders of a CBDC have been rather explicit about this implication. For instance,
Barrdear and Kumhof (2016, p. 7) state: "By CBDC, we refer to a central bank granting
universal, electronic, 24x7, national-currency-denominated and interest-bearing access to its
balance sheet." In this paper, we will use these authors' definition as the working concept of
a CBDC.2
    Similarly, Bordo and Levin (2017) propose that either a "an account-based CBDC could
be implemented via accounts held directly at the central bank" [p. 7], or "CBDC could be
provided to the public via specially designated accounts at supervised commercial banks,
which would hold the corresponding amount of funds in segregated reserve accounts at the
central bank" [p. 8], and which is now often referred to as a synthetic CBDC. In this formu-
lation, the differences between a CBDC held directly at the central bank or at a commercial

    1
      See, as examples and without trying to be exhaustive, Adrian and Mancini-Griffoli (2019), Agur et al.
(2019), Barontini and Holden (2019), Berentsen and Schar (2018), Brunnermeier et al. (2019), Barrdear and
Kumhof (2016), Bordo and Levin (2017), Danezis and Meiklejohn (2015), Dyson and Hodgson (2016), Ketterer
and Andrade (2016), Mancini-Griffoli et al. (2018), Rogoff (2014), and Wadsworth (2018). In terms of cen-
tral banks, the BIS has circulated numerous position papers on CBDCs, the Sveriges Riksbank has studied
this issue in detail with its E-krona project, and the Bank of Japan has reported on the legal issues re-
garding CBDCs. See https://www.bis.org/cpmi/publ/d174.pdf and https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/
payments--cash/e-krona/ and http://www.boj.or.jp/en/research/wps_rev/lab/lab19e03.htm/.
    2
      Notice, therefore, that the sense in which most economists have defined a CBDC as an account-based
currency goes well beyond a basic notion of central bank-issued electronic money (which may or may not
fully replace physical cash). To focus our investigation, we will avoid the discussion of the relative merits
of other forms of central bank-issued electronic money, such as a token-based central bank cryptocurrency
or traditional electronic reserves. Conversely, one could consider situations where the central bank opens its
account facilities to all citizens, even in the absence of a CBDC. As we will see in Section 2, this opening has
occurred often in history, and it was defended in the 1980s by Tobin (1987, p. 172) as "deposited currency."
Nearly all of the analysis in our paper carries over to a "deposited currency" environment.

                                                       1
bank with segregated reserves are mostly inconsequential for our analysis, for they have the
same implications for financial intermediation.
    We could be, thus, at a juncture where changes in technology ­namely, the introduction
of digital currencies­ may justify a fundamental shift in the architecture of a financial system,
a central bank "open to all." As argued by Friedman and Schwartz (1986) in a classic paper,
external forces ­in this case, technological innovations­ might shape how we think about the
role of government in setting up monetary and financial institutions and make us opt for
alternative arrangements.
    These considerations are already relevant to monetary policy. In June 2018, Swiss voters
turned down the sovereign-money (Vollgeld ) initiative that would have given the central bank
a monopoly on issuing demand deposits, an idea motivated in part by the possibility of a
Swiss CBDC. Despite the Vollgeld initiative being soundly defeated at the ballot box, similar
designs are bound to be widely discussed during the coming years.
    What effects will the introduction of a CBDC and the opening of central bank facilities
have on financial intermediation? Will a CBDC impair the role of the financial system in
allocating funds to productive projects? Or can we reorganize the financial system in such a
way that a CBDC will still allow the right flow of funds between savers and investors? Will
a CBDC make bank runs disappear and stabilize the financial system?
    In this paper, we investigate the implications of a CBDC on financial intermediation by
building on the classic model by Diamond and Dybvig (1983), augmented by the presence
of a central bank. We select this model because it emphasizes the role of banks in maturity
transformation: banks finance long-term projects with demand deposits, which may be with-
drawn at a shorter horizon. We find that exploring how a CBDC will interact with maturity
transformation is a first-order consideration that has not been thoroughly examined by the
literature, often more interested in questions such as the consequences of a CBDC for interest
rates, tax evasion, or anonymity (for a review of that literature, see Beniak, 2019). Further-
more, the model by Diamond and Dybvig (1983) allows us to easily explore how bank runs
might change with the introduction of a CBDC and to compare those results with previous
findings in the literature.
    More concretely, we consider a framework in which the CBDC takes the form of demand
deposit accounts of the public at the central bank. Like a commercial bank, the central bank
holds assets to fund these liabilities, but in contrast to commercial banks, we assume that the
central bank cannot invest in long-term projects itself. This might be due to the central bank
not having a good technology to screen, monitor, and liquidate productive projects. The
central bank can, instead, rely on investment banks to engage in wholesale loans. We derive
an interesting equivalence result that shows that the set of allocations achieved with private


                                               2
financial intermediation (which, in the Diamond-Dybvig framework delivers an ex-ante first
best allocation) can also be achieved with a CBDC, provided competition with commercial
banks is allowed.
    This equivalence result might seem to vindicate the views of proponents of a CBDC: the
socially optimal amount of maturity transformation can still be produced in an economy
where the central bank has been opened to all. But our equivalence result has a sinister
counterpart. If the competition from commercial banks is impaired (for example, through
some fiscal subsidization of central bank deposits or, as we will discuss below, by changes in
the structure of possible bank runs), the central bank has to be careful in its choices to avoid
creating havoc with maturity transformation.
    While the central bank is capable of offering the socially optimal deposit contract, just as
commercial banks do, we demonstrate that the rigidity of the central bank's contract with
the investment banks leads to different allocations during banking panics. The loan to the
investment bank is not callable. This implies that the central bank's indirect investment in
the long asset is protected from early liquidation by this, either completely deterring runs on
the central bank or making central bank runs less likely than runs on the commercial banking
sector. Depositors internalize this feature and exclusively deposit with the central bank. That
is, due to the rigidity of the central bank's contract with the investment banks, the central
bank becomes the monopoly provider of deposits. This monopoly power can endanger the
supply of the first-best amount of maturity transformation in the economy by allowing the
central bank to deviate from offering the socially optimal deposit contract.
    Our paper is related to several important branches of monetary economics. In terms of
money and banking theory, we are, obviously, closest to Diamond and Dybvig (1983), and
all the subsequent literature that follows this seminal paper. Our main equivalence result
resembles some aspects of Brunnermeier and Niepelt (2019), who show the equivalence of
private and public monies in quite a different environment without maturity transformation.
By contrast, we highlight, in particular, the equivalence of financial arrangements in terms
of maturity transformation, a novel result in the literature.
    There is also an emerging literature on CBDC. In Keister and Sanches (2019), banks are
financially constrained. Since both central bank money and private bank deposits can be used
in exchange, a liquidity premium on bank deposits appears in equilibrium. This premium
affects the level of aggregate investment. While a CBDC promotes efficiency in exchange,
it also crowds out banks' deposits, raises banks' funding costs, and decreases investment.
Related ideas are also explored by B¨ oser and Gersbach (2019). This paper distinguishes itself
from Brunnermeier and Niepelt (2019), Keister and Sanches (2019), and B¨      oser and Gersbach
(2019) by also discussing allocations under banking panics.


                                               3
    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 frames the current discussion
within the historical background. Central banks have been involved before in the business of
allowing deposits and by extending loans to the public. In fact, the sharp separation between
central banks and the members of the public is a relatively recent phenomenon. Section 3
introduces our model of a central bank open to all. Section 4 defines and characterizes the
equilibrium of the economy. Section 5 analyzes bank runs. Section 6 presents some discussion
of the robustness of our results. Section 7 offers concluding remarks.


2    Historical Background
    Historically, many central banks have allowed deposits by and extended loans to firms
and private citizens at large. Often, these activities were considered more important for the
central banks than the conduct of monetary policy, both in terms of daily operations and
the priorities of the top management. Indeed, many governments saw the positive impact on
economic growth of a central bank's commercial activities ­namely, the supply of demand
deposits, the creation of credit, the integration of payment systems, etc.­ as the motivation
for the creation of such institutions in the first place.
    Perhaps the most famous case of a central bank engaged in commercial activities is the
Bank of England. This institution, established in 1694 as a privately owned limited-liability
corporation, was given "the right to maximise its profits through undertaking a general bank-
ing business, including through issuing paper money, taking deposits, lending on mortgages
and dealing in bills of exchange as well as gold and silver" (Kynaston, 2017, p. 5). The
Bank of England vigorously pursued such a goal for over two centuries, encroaching on the
business of other commercial banks through direct competition and the lobbying effort with
Parliament at Westminster for additional legal privileges to protect its private businesses
against potential competitors.
    In the U.S., both the First and Second Banks of the United States participated actively
in the borrowing and credit markets (Cowen, 2000, and Knodell, 2017). In fact, the bank
war between Andrew Jackson and Nicholas Biddle was linked directly to the operations of
the Second Bank of the United States with firms and merchants, which Jackson considered
favored his political rivals (Remini, 2017).
    Sometimes, the commercial activities of central banks were so large that they became the
dominant players in the borrowing and lending markets. For example, in 1900, the Bank of
Spain (Banco de Espa~   na ), with 58 branches that covered all major towns across the nation,
held 68% of total assets and 73% of all demand deposits in the Spanish financial sector
(Mart´in-Ace~na, 2017, 2018). In Figure 1, we plot the assets and liabilities of the Bank of


                                              4
                                3000



                                2500




              Million pesetas
                                2000



                                1500



                                1000



                                 500



                                  0
                                  1874   1876   1878   1880   1882   1884   1886   1888   1890   1892   1894   1896   1898   1900   1902   1904   1906   1908   1910   1912   1914

                                                Total assets           Private portfolio           Public portfolio            Metallic reserves: gold and silver


                                                                                          (a) Assets
                                2500




                                2000
              Million pesetas




                                1500




                                1000




                                 500




                                  0
                                  1874   1876   1878   1880   1882   1884   1886   1888   1890   1892   1894   1896   1898   1900   1902   1904   1906   1908   1910   1912   1914
                                                                 Paid-up capital             Banknotes in circulation               Current account


                                                                                      (b) Liabilities

                    Figure 1: Banco de Espa~
                                           na, Assets and Liabilities, 1874-1914.



Spain from 1874 to 1914. Panel 1a shows how, by the start of the 20th century, the bank's
private portfolio of loans was larger than the public portfolio of treasury bonds. We can also
appreciate, in panel 1b, the large size of the current accounts (i.e., demand deposits) on the
liabilities side of the bank.
    A related development was the existence of postal savings systems. The first such system
was the Post Office Savings Bank (POSB) in the United Kingdom, which opened in 1861.
In the U.S., such a system operated from 1911 to 1967, reaching by the end of World War
II around 10% of assets of the commercial banking sector. These postal savings systems
took advantage of the already-existing network of post offices to offer government-backed
deposit accounts and other financial services such as easy and cheap money transfers to
private citizens. If we think about a consolidated public-sector balance sheet, deposits at a
postal savings system are fully equivalent to deposits at a central bank: they are deposits


                                                                                                    5
in two different agencies of the same public sector. Political-economic constraints, however,
may make such full equivalence break down in practice (for instance, if a government treats
profits and losses from a postal savings systems differently from profits and losses from a
central bank).3
    The sharp distinction between a central bank operating only with primary depository
institutions and commercial banks dealing with members of the public at large is, to no
small extent, a post-WWII development. This move was induced, among other reasons, by
the governments's desire to directly control discretionary monetary policies once the gold
standard had disappeared.4
    These new economic conditions led to the nationalization of many central banks, such
as the Bank of England in 1946 and the Bank of Spain in 1962, regardless of the political
inclination of governments (left-leaning in the U.K. in 1946, right-wing authoritarian in Spain
in 1962). But, even today, one can trade shares of many central banks on stock exchanges,
including the Swiss National Bank (see Figure 2 for the daily price of this stock since 2001)
and the Bank of Japan. Although these shares come with severe voting rights limitations,
their active trading is proof that central banks used to be engaged in a very different set of
activities from the pure conducting of conventional monetary policy.
                         7000

                         6500

                         6000

                         5500

                         5000

                         4500
           Price (CHF)




                         4000

                         3500

                         3000

                         2500

                         2000

                         1500

                         1000

                          500


                            2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015   2016   2017   2018   2019   2020




                                            Figure 2: Swiss National Bank daily share price


   3
      Governments across the world also often own controlling stakes in commercial banks. However, those
banks keep a separate corporate structure subject to regular private law and, thus, are not equivalent to
postal systems, which are usually integral parts of the public sector and subject to public law.
    4
      Also, as economies grew, maintaining central bank facilities open to the public at large became increas-
ingly challenging from an operational perspective. This was, let us remember, the time before the arrival of
the internet and cheap computing. Commercial banks, in comparison, found that economic growth allowed
them to gain size and offer more attractive terms to a wide range of consumers, eroding the role of central
banks in providing retail services and payment facilities.

                                                                                           6
   The arrival of digital money has reopened the debate about the role of central banks. First,
CBDCs have become feasible. Second, the internet allows a central bank to skip building
an extensive network of branches, either directly or in cooperation with existing commercial
banks. Both factors suggest that we can, and very likely will, revisit the sharp separation
wall between central banks and the public at large. But, for such an endeavor, we require a
formal economic model.


3    A Model of Banking
    Our benchmark economy builds on the canonical banking model by Diamond and Dybvig
(1983). This framework is particularly suitable for our investigation because it places the role
of banks as providers of valuable maturity transformation services at the very center of the
model. Thus, we can use our environment to investigate how the presence of a CBDC, and
the subsequent opening of central bank deposits to the public at large, affects such financial
intermediation and the bank runs that might break it down.
    However, we will depart from the standard version of the model, as presented in Allen
and Gale (2009), on two points. First, less importantly, we will introduce a distinction be-
tween commercial and investment banks. Second, more relevantly, we will add a government-
controlled central bank.
    Why do we distinguish between commercial and investment banks? This distinction will
be convenient to clarify our results, and nothing of substance beyond some intuition is lost
by eliminating it (we could rework our main propositions by allowing a richer set of contracts
between banks and depositors and interbank loans). Also, dealing separately with each type of
bank opens the door to simple extensions of the model where there are differences in regulation
between commercial and investment banks, a feature of many regulatory frameworks across
time.
    Why do we need to introduce a central bank? Mechanically, since we are interested in
CBDCs, we need a central bank. But there is a more subtle point at play. One primary
purpose of our analysis is to verify that the implementation of an efficient allocation can
be accomplished in an arrangement in which a government-controlled institution competes
with private banks for deposits. Such discussions could be logically separated from any
consideration of digital money, even if digital money makes the discussion more salient by
overcoming previous logistic hurdles that opening central bank balance sheets to the public
could bring. The potential equivalence result that can emerge from our analysis can be viewed
as an implementation exercise that we think is relevant for the discussions regarding the role
of central banks in the provision of deposit accounts to the public at large.


                                               7
    Let us then introduce the main blocks of our model. There are three periods indexed by
t = 0, 1, 2. In each period, there is a single good that can be used for either consumption or
investment. The economy is populated by consumers, commercial and investment bankers,
and a central bank. Let us now describe each type of agent in turn. Subsections 3.1 and
3.2 are essentially as described in Allen and Gale (2009), except for introducing investment
banks in subsection 3.2.


3.1    Consumers
  There is a [0, 1]-continuum of ex-ante identical consumers, each of whom has an endow-
ment of one unit of the good in period 0. The consumer's utility function is defined by:

                                           u (c1 ) with probability ,
                        U (c1 , c2 ) =
                                         u (c2 ) with probability 1 - ,

where c1  R+ denotes consumption in period 1 and c2  R+ denotes consumption in period
2. In other words, with probability   (0, 1), an agent is an early (impatient) consumer who
values consumption in period 1; with probability 1 - , an agent is a late (patient) consumer
who values consumption in period 2. The utility function u : R+  R+ is strictly increasing,
strictly concave, and continuously differentiable.
    This setting has an interpretation where ex-ante identical agents are subject to idiosyn-
cratic consumption shocks in t = 1. Each consumer learns her type (i.e., whether she is an
early or late consumer) in period 1, which is private information. This informational asym-
metry will prevent banks from discriminating among consumers. In period 1, agents can visit
a central location, which occurs sequentially in random order.
    Finally, the consumer has access to a storage technology that carries one unit of the good
from period 0 into one unit of the good in period 1 and, similarly, one unit of the good from
period 1 into one unit of the good in period 2. This technology allows the patient consumer
to withdraw her deposit from the bank in period 1 even if she prefers to consume in period
2. This feature will become relevant when we talk about bank runs.


3.2    Banks
   There are a large number of banks that make investments on behalf of consumers. Banks
have access to two types of investment technologies: a short- and a long-term technology. The
short-term technology (or short asset ) is a constant-returns-to-scale technology that takes one
unit of the good at date t = 0, 1 and converts it into one unit of the good at date t + 1. One



                                                8
can think about this technology as storage, such as the vault in the basement of a bank.5
    The long-term technology (or long asset ) is a risk-free constant-returns-to-scale technology
that takes one unit of the good in period 0 and transforms it into R > 1 units of the good in
period 2. If the long-term technology is liquidated prematurely in period 1, then it pays off
  (0, 1) units of the good for each unit invested. One can think about this technology as a
productive project that requires some time to yield its fruits, and that is subject to an early
liquidation cost.
    There are two types of banks: commercial banks and investment banks. Both types
of banks can always be found in the central location. In what follows, we use the terms
"banker" and "bank" interchangeably. Commercial (also called retail) banks offer demand
deposit contracts (to be described momentarily) to consumers and use the proceedings to
invest in short and long assets.
    In comparison, investment bankers, while also having access to the storage technology
and the long assets, only offer contracts contributing non-negative profits in period 2. To
put it differently: investment banks do not provide liquidity by offering demand deposits
to consumers. All future cash flows from investment banks to a contracting partner (such
as the central bank) are already determined in t = 0, and the contracting partner cannot
spontaneously demand payments in t = 1, as is the case with demand deposits at commercial
banks. Consequently, and since the long asset return dominates the short asset returns,
investment bankers choose only to operate the long-term technology and maximize period-2
profits.
    We include in our interpretation of investment banks not only financial institutions that
call themselves by that name, but also industrial banks (historically common in Continental
Europe, Japan, and South Korea), and any other investment vehicles, such as retirement
funds, whose goals are centered around long-term returns.

3.2.1    Deposit contracts

   A commercial bank offers a deposit contract (^      ^2 )  R2
                                                  c1 , c      + to consumers. If the consumer
accepts a banker's contract, then she is required to deposit one unit of the good with the
banker in period 0. The banker invests a portion y of the goods in the short-term technology,
and the remaining portion 1 - y is invested in the long-term technology.
   The banker promises to pay either c   ^1 units of the good to a consumer on demand in
period 1 or the lower of the amount c  ^2 and the resources available to the banker, which

   5
     Notice that this storage technology is the same as the one available to consumers. Banks, however, have
the advantage that they can pool the risks of early and late consumers, while individual consumers cannot
sign insurance contracts among themselves against their idiosyncratic liquidity risk.

                                                     9
are equally divided across all remaining depositors in period 2. The banker is committed
to paying c ^1 units to consumers arriving in period 1 either by using the returns from the
short-term investment or by liquidating long-term projects until all resources are exhausted.
Any leftover resources in period 1 are invested in the short-term investment technology. The
banker consumes any leftover resources in period 2.
    We assume that the banker's consumption cannot be negative and that bankers maximize
their period-2 consumption per their choice of the deposit contract. Finally, we also assume
that bankers are in Bertrand competition when offering deposit contracts to consumers and,
thus, make zero profits.
    Note that closing the model here, before the introduction of a central bank, would result
in the same allocation as in the standard Diamond-Dybvig setup. In equilibrium, the bankers
would consume nothing and the expected utility of the consumers is maximized, subject to the
feasibility constraints arising from the problem above. As a result, the equilibrium allocation
would be first-best efficient ex-ante (even if subject to possible runs ex-post ). We refer to the
contract associated with the first-best efficient allocation as (c       
                                                                    1 , c2 ). Appendix A provides
the details.


3.3     The central bank
   The central bank in our model is a government-controlled institution that has access to
the short-term investment technology, but no access to the long asset. The central bank
may, however, contract with investment banks. Furthermore, the central bank cannot rely
on independent sources of taxation.

3.3.1    Four properties of the central bank

    The definition above has four components that we need to unpack. First, the central bank
is a government-controlled institution. Our definition highlights who effectively controls the
central bank, the government, and not who owns the bank legally. Many central banks have
complex ownership structures that are a product of historical accidents and political-economic
bargainings (think about the convoluted structure of the Federal Reserve System in the U.S.).
However, in practice, all central banks in the advanced economies behave similarly regardless
of their ownership due to governance rules that place them firmly under the control of the
public sector. This is true even if the central banks may enjoy operational independence in
the pursuit of goals such as price stability laid down by the legislative branch.6

   6
    For evidence on the irrelevance of ownership structures among 35 OECD central banks, see Bartels et al.
(2016).

                                                    10
    Second, we allow the central bank to have access to the short-term asset. All central banks
have access to storage technologies: a simple visit to the gold vault at the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York verifies this point.7 Scaling up such storage facilities could be costly, but
certainly is well within the capabilities of modern states.
    Third, we do not allow the central bank to have access to the long-term asset. This
assumption captures the idea that private banks have a comparative advantage in moni-
toring loans to extract their full return (or, in an alternative formulation, in liquidating
non-performing loans `  a la Diamond and Rajan, 2001). It is reasonable to assume that a
central bank does not have access to the same investment opportunities as private banks do,
the latter having developed over decades an expertise in screening, monitoring, and liqui-
dating productive projects.8 The assumption also makes the economics of our paper more
interesting: the central bank cannot be just a simple clone of a commercial bank on a larger
scale.
    Fourth, the central bank is not fiscally backed, either directly, for example, through the
proceeds of seigniorage, or indirectly through independent sources of taxation, such as a
subsidy from the general-government budget. In other words, the central bank has access only
to goods provided by consumers in period 0 or the proceeds from investments in the short-term
technology or (as we will see soon) with the investment banks. Conversely, the commercial
banks are not taxed by any special levy that might make their deposits unattractive (an
actuarially fair deposit insurance does not violate this condition, though, as it does not
change the expected value of the deposits at a commercial bank).
    This fourth assumption will be key for our analysis and, yet, at the same time, the most
fragile. If a central bank had fiscal backing, it would have an advantage with respect to
commercial banks that would render the rest of the analysis somewhat trivial. At the same
time, political-economic considerations are likely to be a first-order consideration in the actual
running of a central bank open to all. Many political groups will lobby the bank to change
its borrowing and lending policies so as to achieve the group's preferred outcomes, even if
this action requires fiscal backing.9 Similarly, considerations about the ownership structure

   7
      In fact, such a visit verifies the existence of the storage technology regarding an important but subtle
point: the vault allows for the storage of a real good, gold. The Diamond-Dyvig model is built around real
goods, not nominal contracts.
    8
      The assumption could be relaxed by allowing the central bank to have access to the long-term asset with
a return R < R. Since we will show an equivalence result where, under certain circumstances, the central
bank can circumvent its investment limitations, such an extension would only strengthen our argument.
    9
      An example of such lobbying, even with the current more limited scope of actions by central
banks, is the recent open letter of a group of academics and social groups to Christine Lagarde
asking the ECB to act on climate change through a commitment "to gradually eliminating carbon-
intensive assets from its portfolios" (see http://www.positivemoney.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/11/
Open-Letter-to-Christine-Lagarde-on-climate-change.pdf).

                                                     11
of central banks and dividend payments, which we argued above are mainly inconsequential
at the moment, might resurface.

3.3.2   Deposits at the central bank

    The central bank can offer the same kind of deposit contract (d1 , d2 ) described above to
consumers, i.e., it competes for deposits with the commercial banks. Specifically, in exchange
for one unit of the good at date 0, the central bank allows depositors to withdraw either
d1  R+ units in period 1 or d2  R+ units in period 2.
    From our previous discussion, it is clear the central bank is in a disadvantaged position to
compete with the commercial banks. Lacking access to long-term investment opportunities,
a central bank might seem less capable of engaging in liquidity transformation. We will show
that, in spite of this disadvantage, the central bank can still compete in the retail deposit
market by contracting with the investment banks to access the long-term technology, referred
to as wholesale deposits. Implicit in this step is the assumption that a central bank will not
face frictions in the wholesale deposit market (such as a lack of information or the expertise
to operate in it). Given that central banks already participate in this market, for example,
with repo operations, this assumption is empirically plausible.
    In period 0, all bankers and the central bank play a simultaneous game, referred to as
the demand deposit game, when offering both retail and wholesale deposit contracts. After
observing the contracts posted by all bankers and the central bank, all consumers make their
deposit decisions. The central bank then deposits a portion 1 - x of each deposited unit with
the investment banks, investing the remainder x  [0, 1] in the short-term technology.
    Let 2 be the contract between the central bank and the representative investment bank.
That is, 2 describes the real liabilities of the investment bank per unit of goods received by
the central bank in period 0. The private investment bank commits to investing all funds
received by the central bank in the long asset.
    In period 2, an investment bank receives the proceeds from investing in the long-term
technology and makes its second-period payment 2  R+ to the central bank per unit
deposited by the central bank in period 0. Investment banks only offer contracts 2 to the
central bank, if they result in non-negative profits, i.e., if

                                             2    R.                                        (1)

   Let f  [0, 1] denote the fraction of consumers who deposit with the central bank in
period 0. Because each consumer deposits one unit, the central bank receives f units from all
depositors. Let   [0, 1] denote the fraction of depositors who decide to withdraw in period


                                                 12
1. The budget constraints for the central bank in periods 1 and 2 are:

                                            d1  x                                             (2)

and
                               (1 - ) d2      2 (1   - x) + x - d1 ,                          (3)

respectively.
    Note that in our description of the central bank's behavior, we are not assuming a particu-
lar objective function (such as profit or social welfare maximization) beyond the requirement
that the central bank satisfies its budget constraints (i.e., no fiscal backing). In the tradition
of public finance, we will postulate below an equilibrium that is indexed by the central bank
choice of deposit contract (regardless of how it is determined) and characterize it for a class
of relevant contracts.


3.4    The consumer's problem
    Consider now the consumer's problem. An individual consumer must decide whether to
deposit with the central bank, consuming either c1 = d1 upon withdrawal in period 1 or
c2 = d2 in period 2, or with a commercial bank, consuming either c1 = c      ^1 upon withdrawal
in period 1 or c2 = c ^2 in period 2. Consumers choose the contract that delivers the highest
ex-ante expected utility. If both contracts offer the same utility, then some fraction f will
pick the central bank, and the remaining fraction will pick the commercial banks. In that
case, the fraction f is indeterminate.
    To complete the description of consumer behavior in period 0, we need to specify deposit
decisions in the initial period and withdrawal strategies in the intermediate period. Let
hi  {0, 1} denote the deposit decision of consumer i  [0, 1], where hi = 0 represents
depositing with a commercial bank and hi = 1 represents depositing with the central bank.
Let h = {hi }i[0,1] denote the profile of deposit choices in the initial period.
    A withdrawal strategy for consumer i is a variable i  {1, 2} that indicates the date at
which consumer i withdraws from the banking system. An early consumer always withdraws
in the intermediate period with probability one. A late consumer may choose to withdraw
early, depending on her beliefs about other patient consumers' actions. Let  = {i }i[0,1]
denote the complete profile of withdrawal strategies, and let -i denote the profile of strategies
for all investors except i. In period 1, consumer i selects a best response i in the withdrawal
game, given her expectations of other agents' strategies -i .




                                               13
4      Equilibrium
   We are now in a position to formally define an equilibrium for the economy with a central
bank. In particular, we restrict attention to symmetric equilibria, where all investment banks
and all commercial banks use the same contract.

Definition 1 An equilibrium is a contract 2 between the central bank and the representative
investment bank, a demand-deposit contract (^    c1 , c
                                                      ^2 ) for the representative commercial bank,
a demand-deposit contract (d1 , d2 ) for the central bank, deposit decisions h  {0, 1} in the
initial period, a strategy profile   {1, 2} for the withdrawal game in the intermediate period,
a fraction   [0, 1] of depositors who withdraw in period 1, and a fraction f  [0, 1] of
consumers depositing with the central bank such that:

    1. In period 0, given the contracts (^     ^2 ) and (d1 , d2 ), each consumer i  [0, 1] optimally
                                          c1 , c
       deposits one unit of the good with a financial institution by selecting the contract that
       offers the highest expected utility. The strategy profile  is a Nash equilibrium of the
       withdrawal game in period 1.

    2. Each commercial bank chooses the contract (^
                                                  c1 , c
                                                       ^2 ) to maximize profits in period 2, given
       (d1 , d2 ).

    3. Each investment bank offers the contract       2,   provided it satisfies the non-negative profit
       condition (1).

    4. The budget constraints (2) and (3) for the central bank hold with equality, given the
       strategy profile  .

    5. Withdrawals in period 1 satisfy  = 1 -       {i[0,1]:i =2}
                                                                    di.

    6. Initial deposits f at the central bank satisfy f =        hi di.

    The previously described economy represents an arrangement with a central bank that
does not necessarily act as a self-interested agent. In our analysis, the central bank competes
with the private banks for deposits from consumers and can access the long-term technology
by contracting with the investment banks. The existence of a non-profit-maximizing entity
in the competition for demand deposit contracts could lead private banks to behave in a
different way than what would be expected from them with standard Bertrand competition.
In particular, 0 < f < 1 can only occur if consumers are indifferent between depositing at
the central bank or at a commercial bank.



                                                 14
    Nevertheless, we next show that the central bank is capable of replicating the socially
optimal contract by correspondingly investing in the investment banking sector (recall that
Appendix A characterizes the socially optimal contract commercial banks offer in the absence
of a central bank).

Lemma 4.1 (Replication of the Optimal Contract) The central bank replicates the so-
cially optimal commercial bank contract by setting x = y  , d1 = c                
                                                                  1 , d2 = R(1 - y )/1 - .
To offer this optimal contract, the central bank requires l2 = R, implying zero profits to
investment banks.

    Proof. [Lemma 4.1] The allocation x = y  , d1 = c                  
                                                       1 , d2 = R(1 - y )/1 -  with l2 = R is
feasible by (1), (2), and (3) and with  =  and optimal by (A.4), (A.5) and (A.6).
    Our next result shows that, in equilibrium, the socially optimal contract is always offered
by some bank.

Proposition 4.1 In equilibrium, the socially optimal contract is offered either by the com-
mercial banks or the central bank or both. If both the central bank and the commercial bank
have customers, f  (0, 1), then both banks are offering the optimal contract.

   Note that if only commercial banks offer the optimal contract, they absorb the entire
deposit market f = 0. Vice versa, if only the central bank offers the optimal contract
f = 1. If, however, both kinds of banks offer the optimal contract, then by indifference, every
f  [0, 1] is an equilibrium.
   Proof. [Proposition 4.1] We first show that, in equilibrium, all commercial bankers that
have depositors as customers make zero profits and offer the socially optimal contract.
   Let  denote the commercial bank's profit. Consider the following depositor utility max-
imization problem, which guarantees profit  :

                          V ( ) =      max          [u (c1 ) + (1 - ) u (c2 )]
                                    (y,c1 ,c2 )R3
                                                +



subject to 0  y  1, c1  y , and

                             (1 - ) c2  R (1 - y ) + y - c1 -  .

Let (y ( ) , c1 ( ) , c2 ( )) denote the solution to this problem. The value function V ( ) gives
the maximum expected utility for the consumer for each profit level   R+ for the banker.
Given our assumptions on preferences and technologies, we obtain a unique interior solution
characterized by:
                                       y           R (1 - y ) - 
                                   u      = Ru                     ,
                                                       1-

                                                     15
which implicitly defines y ( ). Then, we have c1 ( ) = y(  )
                                                             and c2 ( ) = R[1-   y ( )]-
                                                                                1-
                                                                                         .
    The envelope theorem implies V ( ) < 0 for any  > 0. All depositors contract only
with those banks that offer the highest utility-yielding contract. All commercial banks in-
ternalize that the banks that offer the best contract absorb the entire market of deposits.
If the commercial banker's profit is non-zero  > 0, then any banker who offers a contract
(y ( ) , c1 ( ) , c2 ( )) with 0 <  <  will end up attracting all depositors and, therefore,
make non-zero profits. Due to this price competition, we can only obtain an equilibrium for
  0. The result follows by (y ( ) , c1 ( ) , c2 ( ))  (y  , c       
                                                               1 , c2 ) pointwise: if f < 1, then
the commercial banks with customers offer the optimal contract. Fix V   lim 0 V ( ), the
value implied by the optimal contract.
    What if the central bank also attracts some, and potentially all customers, f  (0, 1]? We
next show that in this case, the central bank must also be offering the optimal contract.
    By Lemma 4.1, the central bank is capable of offering the socially optimal commercial
bank contract. Since the central bank does not have access to better technology, and by
l2  R (otherwise the investment banking sector runs losses) and   , the central bank
cannot offer a contract better than the socially optimal commercial bank contract.
    Suppose the central bank offers a contract (d1 , d2 ) subject to the feasibility constraints
(1), (2), and (3). Such a contract will result in the expected utility u (d1 ) + (1 - ) u (d2 )
for the consumer. Because V ( ) is continuous, and decreasing, there exists a profit c  0
such that the commercial bank can replicate the central bank contract V (c ) = u (d1 ) +
(1 - ) u (d2 ). If c = 0, the central bank is offering the socially optimal contract. In that
case, the commercial bank can make the central bank customers indifferent by also setting
the optimal contract, achieving by this any f  [0, 1] in equilibrium. If c > 0, then the
central bank is not offering the socially optimal contract. Thus, the commercial bank can
lure the central bank's customers away (f = 0) by offering a contract that implies a profit
 < c . Other commercial banks can further undercut the profit and again the socially
optimal contract is offered in equilibrium as   0 via Bertrand competition. Further, since
the central bank anticipates this competition, it may set the socially optimal contract in the
first place.
    The previous result shows how competitive forces act to limit the extent to which the
investment banks can extract surplus from the central bank. For any l2 < R, the central bank
fails to offer the socially optimal contract. Due to Bertrand competition with the commercial
banking sector, the central bank attracts zero deposits, which leads to zero initial investment
in the investment banking sector. The competition between the commercial banking sector
and the central bank for deposits disciplines the investment banking sector.
    A central bank could break such an arrangement by insisting on accepting only the best


                                               16
investment bank contracts or even by contracting with commercial banks. However, we could
imagine political circumstances preventing a central bank from proceeding in such a manner,
and we have not insisted on this in our definition of the equilibrium.
    Lemma 4.1 and Proposition 4.1 show that, since a central bank is capable of replicating
the socially optimal contract by relying on the investment banking sector, the presence of
a CBDC (or, more generally, of a central bank "open to all") can still deliver the same
maturity transformation that commercial banks do in its absence. Moreover, if the socially
optimal contract is offered and if all depositors behave according to their types (i.e., consumers
withdraw if and only if impatient), then the socially optimal contract is indeed attained. This
result holds independently of whether the contract is offered by the commercial bank or the
central bank.
    This equivalence result backs up some of the statements of the defenders of a CBDC: in
equilibrium, we still obtain the socially optimal amount of maturity transformation. However,
as we discussed in the introduction, this equivalence result has a sinister counterpart. If the
conditions behind Lemma 4.1 and Proposition 4.1 are broken, for instance, because the central
bank receives fiscal backing, the competitive forces that create the right amount of maturity
transformation disappear and the central bank must tread carefully in deciding how to avoid
creating suboptimal levels of maturity transformation. While the central bank can do so,
nothing in the model is ensuring such an outcome. In particular, there is the threat that,
in the absence of the counterbalancing forces of competition, political-economic mechanisms
might lead the central bank to outcomes that are clearly suboptimal.


5     Runs
    In the previous section, we show a fundamental equivalence result between the deposit
contracts of commercial and central banks. Nevertheless, the payments written in the deposit
contract were feasible only if depositors behaved according to their types. But what if they
do not do so?
    The contract offered by the central bank is not identical in functionality to the contract
offered by the commercial banks. The central bank contract is more rigid, since the central
bank cannot call its loan to the investment bank to liquidate early. In other words, the central
bank is constrained to serve up to the returns of the short asset and not more.
    In comparison, the commercial bank has direct control over its investment: the commercial
bank can serve depositors in the interim period on demand by liquidating not only the short
but also the long asset. Hence, once we allow for banking panics where depositors mimic the
impatient type and withdraw early to secure their deposits, the rigidity of the central bank


                                               17
contract has implications for depositor incentives and equilibrium outcomes.10


5.1     Commercial bank runs
      Following Diamond and Dybvig (1983), we now show how commercial banks are prone
to self-fulfilling runs. Consider a depositor who has deposited with the commercial bank.
By Proposition 4.1, we know that this bank must be offering the socially efficient contract
(c      
   1 , c2 ). Assume that, at t = 1, this depositor learns that she is patient. Since her type
is unobservable, she may nevertheless act as if she was impatient and decide to withdraw.
When would she do this?
      If only a measure  =  of depositors withdraw, the payoffs are exactly as in her contract.
If, however, patient depositors also withdraw, i.e.,   (, 1], the payoffs to rolling over
and withdrawing deviate from the payoffs promised in the contract. This is because the
commercial bank has committed to paying the short-term coupon c       1 to every depositor who
demands back her deposit in t = 1. To finance withdrawals above , the commercial bank
needs to liquidate the long-term asset, which reduces payoffs to those depositors who roll
over.
      We say that a run on the commercial bank occurs if the commercial bank is forced to
liquidate not only its investment in the short-term but also its investment in the long-term
asset to satisfy short-term withdrawals. That is, if c                 
                                                        1 > y + (1 - y ), or equivalently if


                  {Run on Commercial Bank}                     {( - ) c          
                                                                       1 > (1 - y )}                        (4)

     In the case of a run, depositors who roll over receive zero, and depositors who withdraw
receive the payoff c  1 only with a certain likelihood due to rationing. The interpretation
here is that  >  depositors queue at the commercial bank to receive their deposit back.
As explained above, the bank serves depositors by using short assets and liquidating long-
term assets. If there are not enough long-term assets to liquidate, the commercial bank
                                           -y  )k
chooses a random subset of agents y +(1  c
                                                  in the queue to whom it serves the payment
                                           1
c1.
    11
       Conditional on no run, the depositors' payoffs are as in the original contract.
     The payoff matrix is, then:


  10
      We are implicitly assuming here that commercial banks cannot replicate the rigidity of the central bank
contract by depositing in the investment banks and using interbank loans. In that way, the commercial banks
would be indirectly investing in the long asset, while committing not to liquidate the long asset in the interim
period. While this is an interesting avenue of investigation, in practice, most regulatory systems severely
limit the ability of commercial banks to build this class of commitment devices.
   11
      Goldstein and Pauzner (2005) make this assumption about which depositors receive payments to avoid
the possible complications of a sequential service constraint pointed out by Wallace (1988).

                                                      18
                 Event/ Action         withdraw                    roll-over
                                                                R[(1-y  )-(-)c1 /]
                  no run,                 u(c1)             u            1-
                                   y  +(1-y  )k
                  run                  c
                                                  · u(c1)              0
                                         1



    Thus, we find a classic strategic complementarity in actions: conditional on a bank run,
the payoff from withdrawing exceeds the payoff from rolling over and withdrawing deposits
is optimal. Vice versa, if only a few consumers withdraw,  = , then the payoff from rolling
over is larger, c     
                 1 < c2 (recall Appendix A); thus, for a patient depositor it is optimal to roll
over her deposit. We summarize this idea in the proposition below.

Proposition 5.1 (Commercial Bank Multiple Equilibria: Diamond and Dybvig (1983))
The withdrawal game of commercial bank depositors has two pure equilibria. There is a good
equilibrium in which all patient depositors roll over their deposit,  = , and the socially
optimal contract is attained. But there is also a bank run equilibrium, where all patient de-
positors panic and withdraw,  = 1. In the latter case, the socially optimal contract is not
attained.


5.2    Central bank runs
    Runs on central banks are, in contrast, a very different entity. During a bank panic,
the central bank cannot call the loan to the investment bank and can, therefore, only serve
withdrawals up to the returns stemming from the short asset. In other words, the contract
offered by the central bank is not a demand-deposit contract: it exhibits rigidity.
    This constraint has two consequences. First, the payoffs under a run on the central bank
differ from payoffs under a run on the commercial bank. In the social optimum, the central
bank invests y  = c                                                
                      1 in the short asset and the remaining 1 - y in the investment bank
loan. Thus, the central bank cannot serve more than a measure y  of cash withdrawals, while
the commercial bank can serve up to measure y  + (1 - y  ), financed via early liquidation
of the long asset.
    Second, the incident that triggers a run on the central bank differs from the triggering
event for a run on a commercial bank. A run on the central bank occurs if c              
                                                                                    1 > y or,
equivalently, if:
                           {Run on Central Bank}  { > }                                   (5)

     In the incident of a run, the central bank can allocate only real goods of quantity y  to
measure  of agents. As in the commercial bank case, we assume that depositors queue and
receive the original claim of c 1 units if and only if they are sufficiently early in the queue,
i.e., with likelihood /. Since the central bank cannot liquidate the investment in the long

                                                  19
asset, how do we treat the remaining depositors who were not served so far? There are two
ways the central bank can proceed from here.12

5.2.1    Punishment

    The central bank can decide to punish depositors who contribute to the run. More con-
cretely, the central bank will not pay any depositors beyond measure  who try to withdraw,
and all returns earned in t = 2 will go exclusively to depositors who roll over. Then, the
payoff matrix becomes:

                     Event/ Action                withdraw                    roll-over
                                                                                  R(1-y  )
                       no run,  =                    u(c1)                u         1-
                                                                                  R(1-y  )
                       run,  >              
                                            
                                               · u(c1) + 1 -    
                                                                
                                                                   ·0     u         1-


   The rigidity of the contract achieves the result that, under higher withdrawals, a depositor
who rolls over is rewarded when withdrawals are high, since she shares the total returns with
fewer depositors. For  > ,

                                     R(1 - y  )              R(1 - y  )
                                 u                  >u                        .                         (6)
                                      1-                      1-

In addition, during a run, due to punishment and queuing, a withdrawing depositor receives
c1 only with a certain likelihood:
                                        
                                        u(c ) < u(c1 ).                                (7)
                                        1
                           R(1-y )   
Last, we know c       
                1 < c2       1-
                                   , since the utility function is concave and by R > 1 and
equation (A.6). Altogether, for  > :

                                                       R(1 - y  )
                                        u(c ) < u                                                       (8)
                                         1              1-

    Under punishment, the resulting payoff structure deters a run from happening, and the
strategic complementarity of actions is broken. To patient depositors, rolling over is dominant,
and, in equilibrium, only impatient depositors withdraw. Formally, we have the following
proposition.

Proposition 5.2 (Central Bank Equilibria: No Run under Punishment) If the cen-
tral bank punishes depositors who contribute to a run, then the withdrawal game of central
  12
     Recall that the central bank does not have fiscal backing and, this being a real model, it cannot issue
fiat money to meet depositors. Fern´andez-Villaverde et al. (2020) relax the latter assumption by building a
nominal model of CBDCs.

                                                    20
bank depositors has a unique equilibrium. All patient depositors roll over, and only impatient
depositors withdraw. Runs on the central bank do not occur. The socially optimal contract is
always attained when offered.

    The effect of the contract's rigidity is reminiscent of a regulatory intervention such as a
mandatory stay for depositors that enforces a halt of service. Diamond and Dybvig (1983)
already show that the combination of punishment and a regulatory intervention (here the
contract rigidity) can deter runs from happening.

5.2.2   Equal treatment

    Now assume instead that the central bank does not punish depositors who contribute
to the run. Instead, depositors beyond measure  who could not be served in the interim
period are treated as if they had rolled over their deposit. Consequently, the payoff to rolling
over becomes independent of what other depositors do. Then, the resulting payoff matrix
becomes:

              Event/ Action                  withdraw                      roll-over
                                                                            R(1-y  )
               no run,  =                      u(c1)                   u      1-
                                                            R(1-y  )        R(1-y  )
               run,  >           
                                 
                                    · u(c1) + 1 -   
                                                    
                                                       ·u     1-
                                                                       u      1-


   As before, the rigidity of the contract prevents runs from happening. We still have that
           R(1-y  )
c     
 1 < c2      1-
                    and, again, rolling over is dominant if the depositor is patient. The new
proposition becomes as follows.

Proposition 5.3 (Central Bank Equilibria: No Run under Equal Treatment) Assume
the central bank does not punish depositors who contribute to the run, but treats them as if
they had rolled over their deposit. Then, the withdrawal game of central bank depositors has
a unique equilibrium. All patient depositors roll over and only impatient depositors withdraw.
Runs do not occur. The socially optimal contract is always attained when offered.


5.3     Deposit monopoly
   Given that depositors anticipate outcomes before depositing with the commercial or the
central bank, we obtain our next result:

Proposition 5.4 (Central Bank Deposit Monopoly) If the central bank offers the so-
cially optimal contract, then independently of whether it punishes depositors for contributing
to a run or not, it will attract all deposits in the market away from the commercial banking
sector.

                                              21
     The intuition for the result is: even if the commercial banking sector offers the socially
optimal contract to compete with the central bank, the commercial bank cannot prevent the
bad bank run equilibrium from occurring. Thus, the commercial bank cannot guarantee the
allocation under the optimal contract while the central bank can.
     However, since depositors internalize that the central bank contract is run-proof, the
central bank enjoys a kind of market power. If the central bank decides to exploit such
market power, it can offer a different deposit contract from the socially optimal one, and
still obtain a monopoly of all deposits.13 When the central bank behaves in such a way
(perhaps due to political economy forces), the economy will not achieve the first-best amount
of maturity transformation. The resilience of central banks to runs is a double-edged sword:
it avoids financial panics, but it destroys the competitive forces that discipline central banks
that are "open to all."


6        Robustness
   Our benchmark model can be extended in many different directions to better reflect the
possible advantages and disadvantages of a CBDC. In the interest of space, we focus on the
robustness of our primary results to fundamental runs due to asset risk and the presence of
central bank regulation.


6.1      Fundamental runs due to asset risk
    Our benchmark model has considered a long-term, illiquid asset that exhibits no aggregate
risk. The long asset pays return R for sure in t = 2. We have shown that in this case, there
exist equilibrium runs on the commercial bank due to panics, but no runs on the central
bank.
    We now relax the assumption of a risk-free, high-return asset. For instance, we want to
consider bank loans that are subject to the risk that the borrower (the long-term project in
the context of our model) fails to repay for some exogenous reason (credit risk). If information
reaches markets that a borrower may not repay, i.e., that the bank has issued a bad loan,
a run on the bank may occur that is not driven by panic, but by information (Chari and
Jagannathan, 1988, and Goldstein and Pauzner, 2005, hereafter GP).

    13
      To see this, let U1 the expected utility from the socially optimal but run-prone commercial bank deposit
contract and U2 the expected utility from the socially optimal but run-proof central bank deposit contract. If
runs occur at the commercial bank with a strict positive likelihood along the equilibrium path (the relevant
case for our argument), it holds that U1 < U2 . Thus, the central can find a c1 < c 1 such that U1 <
U (c1 ) < U2 . In words, a lower c1 maintains the run-proofness, while lowering the utility of the depositor and
generating positive profits for the central bank.

                                                      22
    To model information-driven runs, assume that the asset return R is only paid with
likelihood p() and otherwise zero where   U [0, 1] is the random state of the economy and
p(·) is a strictly increasing, differentiable function of the state with p(0) = 0. Assume further
that bank depositors observe noisy, private and correlated signals about the return likelihood
before making their decision i =  + i , i  U [-, ] where the noise terms i are i.i.d. and
independent of the state distribution.
    The payoffs at the commercial bank then become:

                 Event/ Action       withdraw                        roll-over
                                                                   R[(1-y  )-(-)c1 /]
                  no run                u(c1)             p() u             1-
                                   (1-y  )
                  run              (-)c
                                              · u(c1)                     0
                                          1



    In a global games environment, GP show that a run on the commercial bank continues
to exist under these circumstances. Further, it is straightforward to see that under aggregate
risk, the central bank will also be subject to runs. Consider the case of equal treatment under
aggregate risk:


         Event/ Action                        withdraw                              roll-over
                                                                                         R(1-y  )
          no run,  =                             u(c1)                           p() u     1-
                                                                  R(1-y  )               R(1-y  )
          run,  >            
                             
                                · u(c1) + 1 -    
                                                 
                                                        · p() u     1-
                                                                                 p() u     1-



   Then, for sufficiently low state realizations, i.e.,   [0, ], with  such that:

                                                        R(1 - y  )
                                  u(c1 ) = p( )u                      ,                             (9)
                                                         1-

withdrawing is a dominant action. In that case, a fundamental run on the central bank
occurs. Unlike the case for the commercial bank described in GP, the game structure for
the central bank here is not a coordination game. In equilibrium, all impatient depositors
withdraw, and, thus,  cannot be realized below . Therefore, every patient depositor is
pivotal: If she withdraws, she triggers a run on the central bank. But since the investment
in the long asset is protected from liquidation by the rigidity of the contract, for every  > ,
it is dominant to roll over the deposit.
     The lower dominance region for commercial bank runs is determined by the same threshold
 given by condition (9). However, due to miscoordination, the range of state realizations for
which commercial bank runs occur is larger. There exists a critical state b  (, 1] such that
commercial bank runs occur for all states in [0, b ).

                                                  23
    Consequently, there exists an interval of state realizations (, b ) for which runs occur
on the commercial bank, but not on the central bank under equal treatment. Depositors
internalize that the central bank is safer ex-ante, and solely deposit with the central bank
(giving the central bank, as before, monopoly power that can exploit to deviate from the
socially optimal deposit contract).
    We characterize bank runs in the next proposition under the assumption that the central
bank offers the socially optimal deposit contract, a natural benchmark for our investigation,
and which generates a deposit monopoly.

Proposition 6.1 (Deposit Monopoly under Asset Risk and Equal Treatment) If the
central bank offers the socially optimal deposit contract, under asset risk and equal treatment,
central bank runs occur for state realizations in [0, ], but do not arise for states [, 1]. Ex-
ante, runs on the central bank occur less often than runs on commercial banks and, therefore,
the central bank attracts all deposits.

    In the case of a run on the central bank, however, we do not get the optimal allocation if,
for instance, the asset fails to pay or if an impatient depositor is forced to wait until the long
asset matures. Also, as we mentioned above, while the proposition is driven by the rigidity
of the contract, the main result resembles a setting where a commercial bank invests in the
risky asset directly and a regulator has the authority to stop runs to protect asset liquidation
once a critical measure of depositors have withdrawn. For further details on this mechanism,
see Schilling (2018).
    Now let us return to the case where the central bank punishes depositors who contribute
to the run under asset risk. The payoff matrix now becomes:

                 Event/ Action             withdraw                 roll-over
                                                                          R(1-y  )
                  no run,  =                  u(c1)             p() u       1-
                                                                          R(1-y  )
                  run,  >            
                                     
                                        · u(c1) + 1 -   
                                                        
                                                           ·0   p() u       1-



   Consider the state  defined by condition (9). First, we can verify that for all [, 1], it is
dominant to roll over. This is because, in equilibrium, all impatient types withdraw   .
Therefore, we get again:

                                            R(1 - y  )                  R(1 - y  )
                u(c )  u(c1 )  p( ) u                       p() u                            (10)
                 1                           1-                          1-

   Now consider the range [0, ). Under equal treatment, it is dominant for consumers to
withdraw for state realizations in [0, ). Under punishment, however, this is not true. To see

                                               24
this, assume the state is realized in   (0, ). Then, p() > 0. Because the pro rata share
       -y  )
u R(1 1-
             goes to infinity for   1 and because 
                                                   · u(c                 
                                                        1 )  [u(c1 ), u(c1 )] is bounded, there
exists a measure of withdrawals () >  such that:

                                                         R(1 - y  )
                                    u(c ) < p() u                                                      (11)
                                     1                    1-

for all  > (). That is, for every low state realization (0, ), rolling over is optimal if
withdrawals are sufficiently high.
    We can formalize this argument in the next proposition, again under the assumption that
the central bank offers the socially optimal deposit contract.

Proposition 6.2 (Deposit Monopoly under Asset Risk and Punishment) If the cen-
tral bank offers the socially optimal deposit contract, under asset risk, a central bank that pun-
ishes depositors for contributing to runs is at least as stable as the central bank that applies
equal treatment. Therefore, under asset risk, the central bank is always more stable than the
commercial banking sector and attracts all deposits away from the commercial banks.

    The intuition for this result is simple. The punishment of depositors who contribute to
a run implies a reward for depositors who roll over. Moreover, the rigidity of the contract
protects depositors who roll over from receiving nothing.14 Hence, as soon as sufficiently
many other depositors withdraw, the reward for rolling over is large enough to compensate
for a bad outlook of the asset. The rigidity of the contract paired with the punishment-reward
scheme self-regulates withdrawals and deters runs.
    The deterrence of runs is always optimal and efficient if the long asset is free of risk.
Under aggregate risk, however, early asset liquidation is efficient if the assets' continuation
value p()R falls short of the liquidation value , (Allen and Gale, 1998). In this situation,
the rigidity of the central bank contract can cause harm and inefficient investment during a
recession.


6.2     Central bank regulation
    Our analysis has focused on the setting where the central bank can invest in both the
storage technology and a loan to the investment bank. Since the central bank cannot call the
loan, we have a rigidity that ultimately leads to the central bank being more stable than the
commercial banking sector.

  14
    The likelihood that the state is realized at  = 0 has zero probability. Thus, the asset always pays with
some probability.

                                                    25
    In principle, however, nothing prevents the central bank from investing in a demand-
deposit contract with a commercial bank to conduct maturity transformation. Unlike the
rigid contract with the investment bank, the commercial bank serves deposit withdrawals in
the interim period on demand. As depositors start withdrawing from the central bank, the
central bank withdraws from the commercial bank to finance those demands from its deposits.
Since the commercial bank may liquidate the entire long asset in the interim period, depositors
who roll over at the central bank may receive a zero payment. As depositors internalize this
feature, central bank runs become more likely ex-ante in comparison to the case where the
central bank abstains from investing in the commercial bank and only uses the investment
bank. Moreover, a run on the central bank may trigger a run on the corresponding commercial
bank and vice versa. Our analysis suggests the usefulness of prohibiting the central bank
from investing in maturity-transforming institutions. In that way, we can prevent a bank run
cascade (contagion). For related ideas, check Dasgupta (2004).
    Recall, also, that the central bank can only offer the socially optimal contract when
having access to the long, high-return asset, even if indirectly through the investment bank.
However, as we have shown, investment in the long asset exposes the central bank to runs
if the long asset is risky. If, by regulation, the central bank only invests in the short asset
(i.e., highly liquid assets), central bank runs do not occur, but the socially optimal contract
is only offered by the commercial banking sector. As we found before, central banks face a
trade-off between offering the socially optimal contract and being run-proof.


7    Conclusions
    In this paper, we have investigated the implications of an account-based central bank
digital currency (CBDC), focusing on its potential competition with the traditional maturity-
transforming role of commercial banks, as in Diamond and Dybvig (1983). The central bank
cannot invest in long-term projects itself, but instead has to rely on the expert knowledge of
investment banks to do so. We have derived an equivalence result that shows that the set of
allocations achieved with private financial intermediation will also be achieved with a CBDC,
provided competition with commercial banks is allowed and if depositors do not panic.
    Nevertheless, our equivalence result has a sinister counterpart. If the competition from
commercial banks is impaired (for example, through some fiscal subsidization of central bank
deposits), the central bank has to be careful in its choices to avoid creating havoc with
maturity transformation. Furthermore, we have shown that the rigidity of the central bank's
contract with investment banks deters runs. In equilibrium, depositors internalize this feature
and exclusively deposit with the central bank such that the central bank arises as a deposit


                                              26
monopolist, attracting deposits away from the commercial banking sector. But this monopoly
power eliminates the forces that induce the central bank from delivering the socially optimal
amount of maturity transformation.
   In closing, recall that the analysis in this paper has been entirely real: all contracts are
denominated in real quantities. We pursue the implications of a CBDC in a nominal setting
and its inter-relations with more traditional monetary policy in Fern´ andez-Villaverde et al.
(2020).




                                              27
References
Adrian, T. and T. Mancini-Griffoli (2019): "The rise of digital money," FinTech Notes
 19/001, International Monetary Fund.

Agur, I., A. Ari, and G. Dell'Ariccia (2019): "Designing central bank digital curren-
 cies," Working Paper 19/252, International Monetary Fund.

Allen, F. and D. Gale (1998): "Optimal financial crises," Journal of Finance, 53, 1245­
 1284.

------ (2009): Understanding Financial Crises, Clarendon Lectures in Finance, Oxford Uni-
  versity Press.

Barontini, C. and H. Holden (2019): "Proceeding with caution - a survey on central
 bank digital currency," BIS Papers 101, Bank for International Settlements.

Barrdear, J. and M. Kumhof (2016): "The macroeconomics of central bank issued
 digital currencies," Bank of England Working Paper 605, Bank of England.

Bartels, B., B. Eichengreen, and B. Weder (2016): "No smoking gun: Private
 shareholders, governance rules and central bank financial behavior," CEPR Discussion
 Papers 11625, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.

Beniak, P. (2019): "Central bank digital currency and monetary policy: a literature re-
 view," MPRA Paper 96663, University Library of Munich, Germany.

Berentsen, A. and F. Schar (2018): "The case for central bank electronic money and
 the non-case for central nank cryptocurrencies," Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review,
 100, 97­106.

Bordo, M. D. and A. T. Levin (2017): "Central bank digital currency and the future of
 monetary policy," Working Paper 23711, National Bureau of Economic Research.

 ¨ ser, F. and H. Gersbach (2019): "A central bank digital currency in our monetary
Bo
 system?" Mimeo, Center of Economic Research at ETH Zurich.

Brunnermeier, M. K., H. James, and J.-P. Landau (2019): "The digitalization of
 money," Working Paper 26300, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Brunnermeier, M. K. and D. Niepelt (2019): "On the equivalence of private and public
 money," Journal of Monetary Economics, 106, 27­41.


                                            28
Chari, V. V. and R. Jagannathan (1988): "Banking panics, information, and rational
 expectations equilibrium," Journal of Finance, 43, 749­761.

Cowen, D. J. (2000): The Origins and Economic Impact of the First Bank of the United
 States, 1791-1797, Garland Publishing.

Danezis, G. and S. Meiklejohn (2015): "Centrally banked cryptocurrencies," CoRR,
 abs/1505.06895.

Dasgupta, A. (2004): "Financial contagion through capital connections: A model of the
 origin and spread of bank panics," Journal of the European Economic Association, 2, 1049­
 1084.

Diamond, D. W. and P. H. Dybvig (1983): "Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity,"
 Journal of Political Economy, 91, 401­419.

Diamond, D. W. and R. G. Rajan (2001): "Liquidity risk, liquidity creation, and financial
 fragility: A theory of banking," Journal of Political Economy, 109, 287­327.

Dyson, B. and G. Hodgson (2016): "Digital cash: Why central banks should start issuing
 electronic money," Tech. rep., Positive Money.

Ennis, H. M. and T. Keister (2009): "Bank runs and institutions: The perils of inter-
 vention," American Economic Review, 99, 1588­1607.

Ferna´ ndez-Villaverde, J., D. Sanches, L. Schilling, and H. Uhlig (2020): "Cen-
 tral bank digital currency in a nominal model of banking," Tech. rep., CREST, Polytech-
 nique.

Friedman, M. and A. J. Schwartz (1986): "Has government any role in money?" Jour-
 nal of Monetary Economics, 17, 37­62.

Goldstein, I. and A. Pauzner (2005): "Demand­deposit contracts and the probability
 of bank runs," Journal of Finance, 60, 1293­1327.

Keister, T. and D. R. Sanches (2019): "Should central banks issue digital currency?"
 Working Paper 19-26, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.

Ketterer, J. A. and G. Andrade (2016): "Digital central bank money and the un-
 bundling of the banking function," Discussion Paper IDB-DP-449, Inter-America Devel-
 opement Bank.



                                           29
Knodell, J. E. (2017): The Second Bank of the United States: "Central" Banker in an Era
 of Nation Building, 1816-1836, Routledge.

Kynaston, D. (2017): Till Time's Last Sand: A History of the Bank of England, 1694-2013,
 Bloomsbury Publishing.

Mancini-Griffoli, T., M. S. M. Peria, I. Agur, A. Ari, J. Kiff, A. Popescu,
 and C. Rochon (2018): "Casting light on central bank digital currencies," IMF Staff
 Discussion Notes 18/08, International Monetary Fund.

Mart´
    in-Acen ~ a, P. (2017): "The Banco de Espa~
                                              na, 1782-2017. The history of a central
 bank," Tech. Rep. 73, Banco de Espa~
                                    na.

------ (2018): "Money in Spain. New historical statistics. 1830-1998," Working Paper 1806,
  Banco de Espa~na.

Narayanan, A., J. Bonneau, E. Felten, A. Miller, and S. Goldfeder (2016):
 Bitcoin and Cryptocurrency Technologies, Princeton University Press.

Remini, R. V. (2017): Andrew Jackson and the Bank War, W. W. Norton & Company.

Rogoff, K. S. (2014): "Costs and benefits to phasing out paper currency," Working Paper
 20126, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Schilling, L. (2018): "Optimal forbearance of bank resolution," Becker Friedman Institute
  for Research in Economics Working Paper.

Tobin, J. (1987): "The case for preserving regulatory distinctions," Proceedings - Economic
 Policy Symposium - Jackson Hole, 167­205.

von zur Gathen, J. (2015): CryptoSchool, Springer.

Wadsworth, A. (2018): "The pros and cons of issuing a central bank digital currency,"
 Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 81, 1­21.

Wallace, N. (1988): "Another attempt to explain an illiquid banking system: the Dia-
 mond and Dybvig model with sequential service taken seriously," Federal Reserve Bank of
 Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 3­16.




                                            30
                                       Appendix

A     The Commercial Bank Deposit Contract
   In this appendix, we derive the banking solution to the liquidity insurance problem,
provided there are only commercial banks and depositors behave according to their type. The
optimal contract will take the form of a standard demand deposit contract (i.e., a depositor
can choose to withdraw from the bank either in period 1 or 2). Bertrand competition among
the banks forces them to maximize the expected utility of consumers subject to feasibility
conditions.
   Formally, the private banking arrangement solves:

                                    max        u (c1 ) + (1 - ) u (c2 )                  (A.1)
                               (y,c1 ,c2 )R3
                                           +



subject to
                                               0  y  1,

                                                 c1  y ,                                 (A.2)

and
                              (1 - ) c2  R (1 - y ) + y - c1 .                           (A.3)

where y is the fraction of deposits invested in the short-term technology and the remainder
1 - y is invested in the long-term technology.
   With this contract, it is optimal for all patient consumers to withdraw only in period 2,
provided all other patient consumers do so, i.e.,  =  is an equilibrium. This withdrawal
behavior is also the first-best solution to the social planning problem where the planner knows
the type of each agent.
   Because of the properties of the utility function, the banking allocation when patient
consumers withdraw only in period 2 is given by:

                                                        y
                                                 c1 =     ,                              (A.4)
                                                        

                                                  R (1 - y  )
                                          c2 =                ,                          (A.5)
                                                    1-
                                     y                   R (1 - y  )
                                u              = Ru                    .                 (A.6)
                                                           1-
This allocation coincides with the efficient allocation derived in the planner's problem. Thus,

                                                    31
the private banking arrangement provides an efficient way to insure against the idiosyncratic
liquidity risk in the economy (i.e., the event of being an early consumer).
    It is well known in the literature that, since types are unobservable and unverifiable and
consumers have access to the storage technology, the previously described banking arrange-
ment also features a bank run equilibrium, where  = 1. If we assume that the bank is
required to liquidate all of its assets to satisfy the demand of depositors, and if all depositors
withdraw, then, for c  1 > 1, the bank cannot serve all depositors. Since depositors know the
potential of a liquidity squeeze ex-ante, a self-fulfilling run can occur in equilibrium with late
consumers withdrawing early and storing the good because they believe others will withdraw
early. Ennis and Keister (2009) refer to an economy that admits a bank run equilibrium such
as this one as an economy with a fragile banking system.
    Obviously, the bank run equilibrium is suboptimal compared to the first-best solution. It
is interesting to consider second-best planning problems for comparison, but this is not the
purpose of this paper.




                                               32
