                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               SOCIAL GROUPS AND THE EFFECTIVENESS OF PROTESTS

                                        Marco Battaglini
                                       Rebecca B. Morton
                                       Eleonora Patacchini

                                       Working Paper 26757
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26757


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Formal Theory & Comparative Politics
Workshop at Yale University, Princeton University's Political Economy Seminar Series, Boston
University, the Maastricht Behavioral and Experimental Economics Symposium (M-BEES), and
the Asia-Pacific Meetings of the Economic Science Association. We thank Nejla Asimovic,
Alizeh Batra, Irina Bolgari, Alexander Demin, Nicholas Haas, Arusyak Hakhnazaryan, Giacomo
Lemoli, Taylor Mattia, Tereza Petrovicova, and Massimo Pulejo for their extremely helpful
assistance. All errors remain the authors'. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Marco Battaglini, Rebecca B. Morton, and Eleonora Patacchini. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Groups and the Effectiveness of Protests
Marco Battaglini, Rebecca B. Morton, and Eleonora Patacchini
NBER Working Paper No. 26757
February 2020
JEL No. D72,D78

                                          ABSTRACT

We present an informational theory of public protests, according to which public protests allow
citizens to aggregate privately dispersed information and signal it to the policy maker. The model
predicts that information sharing of signals within social groups can facilitate information
aggregation when the social groups are sufficiently large even when it is not predicted with
individual signals. We use experiments in the laboratory and on Amazon Mechanical Turk to test
these predictions. We find that information sharing in social groups significantly affects citizens'
protest decisions and as a consequence mitigates the effects of high conflict, leading to greater
efficiency in policy makers' choices. Our experiments highlight that social media can play an
important role in protests beyond simply a way in which citizens can coordinate their actions; and
indeed that the information aggregation and the coordination motives behind public protests are
intimately connected and cannot be conceptually separated.

Marco Battaglini                                 Eleonora Patacchini
Department of Economics                          Department of Economics
Uris Hall                                        Cornell University
Cornell University                               430 Uris Hall
Ithaca, NY 14850                                 Ithaca, NY 14853
and EIEF, CEPR                                   and CEPR
and also NBER                                    ep454@cornell.edu
battaglini@cornell.edu

Rebecca B. Morton
New York University
NYC and Abu Dhabi
19 West 4th St. 2nd Floor
New York, NY 10012
rebecca.morton@nyu.edu
1         Introduction
Even in democratic systems, most common decisions are delegated to one or a few repre-
sentatives who have monopoly power over decision-making. These include elected o¢ cials
in the public sector, or boards of directors and CEOs in the private sector. In these
contexts, a very common way to inuence the decision maker'
                                                         s choices is to organize a pe-
tition, such as an explicit petition with signatures, a walkout or some other form of public
protest. Only in the past two years, we have seen many prominent examples of these
phenomena: in October 2017, a thousand economists signed a petition to call upon the
American Economic Association to drop job search site Economics Job Market Rumors,
which was accused of sexism; in January 2018, over 50,000 people signed a petition calling
YouTube to cancel controversial video blogger Paul Logan'
                                                        s channel; in March 2018, tens
of thousands of students organized a walkout from school to petition for gun control after
the mass shooting in Parkland, Florida.1 These activities are becoming more common
since a number of websites are exclusively dedicated to providing the infrastructure for
online petitions such as Change.org, ipetitions.com, Gopetitions.com and many others. On
March 8, 2018 the magazine Elle UK published an article entitled: "5 Feminist Petitions
                                                                         2
You Can Sign In Under 5 Minutes To Commemorate International Women'
                                                                  s Day."
        The di¤usion of petitions and public protests as ways to inuence decision makers is
often linked to the di¤usion of social media and this perception is inuencing how govern-
ment and private companies respond to these phenomena. As social media has expanded
throughout the world a number of governments, worried about the use of social media
during times of unrest and protests from citizens over public policies, have instituted mea-
sures to limit access as in for example China, India, Iran, Turkey, and Uganda.3 Similarly,
    1
     For the ...rst example, see Morath in the Wall Street Journal, 26 October 2017; for the second, see
Agerholm in the Independent, 3 January 2018; for the third, see Heim and Lang in the Washington Post,
14 March 2018.
   2
     See O' Malley in Elle UK, 8 March 2018, retrieved on 19/03/2018 from http://www.elleuk.com/life-
and-culture/culture/news/a42205/feminist-petitions-international-womens-day/.
   3
     See for example Simon Denyer, "China'   s scary lesson to the world: Censoring the internet works,"
The Washington Post, May 23, 2016; Emily Dreyfuss, "Uganda'        s regressive social media tax stays, at
least for now," Wired, July 19, 2018; Sophie Hutchinson, BBC News, "Social media plays major role in
Turkey protests,"June 4, 2013; Krishna Pokharel and Newley Purnell, "India Temporarily Pulls Plug on
Mobile Services in Delhi to Curb Protests," The Wall Street Journal, December 19, 2019; and Marilia
Brocchetto and Dakin Andone, "Iran restricts social media as anti-government protests enter 4th day,"
CNN, Sept. 4, 2018.



                                                    2
private companies have responded to employees'activism by restricting the information
that can be shared in internal web forums.4 Most think of social media communications
during protests as a way of coordinating disparate individuals who are already convinced.
But social media interactions are also a way in which social groups share concerns and
information about public policies among each other when they are still uncertain in their
opinions. These facts raise a number of questions. What is the relationship between
public activism and social media? Does the coordination and information sharing that
protesters do in social media lead to better or worse outcomes?
      In this paper, we investigate the e¤ects of information sharing in social groups on
protest choices theoretically and using controlled experiments, both in the laboratory and
on Amazon Mechanical Turk. By conducting an experiment, we are able to control for
the exact events observed by the policy maker before choosing an action and the informed
agents'private information, to an extent that would be impossible with conventional ...eld
data.
      We ...nd that information sharing can lead to individuals making protest decisions
based on the experiences of the majority in their group rather than simply their own
personal experiences. When citizens protest to reect the overall experience of their
social groups, then their protests can be more e¤ective in conveying information to policy
makers, particularly those whose ex ante policy preferences may be signi...cantly di¤erent
from citizens'such that they are not easily persuaded. In this way, information sharing
within social groups can result in more informationally e¢ cient protest choices by citizens
and to more e¢ cient public policies as a consequence. Banning social media use during
times of unrest may not only limit the ability of protesters to coordinate their actions but
also the extent that their actions convey useful information to policy makers.
      In the theoretical model, the players are one policy maker and a ...nite number n of
citizens. The policy maker is faced with the problem of choosing one of two policies, A
or B . The optimal policy depends on the state of the world, a variable that may take
two values, a or b. The players have the same prior over the two states and they agree
  4
    In November 2019, for example, Google has suspended two employees involved with the walkout of
November 2018 for sharing information in the company web forum. One of the suspended employees has
also claimed that Google deleted critical questions and memes that employees had posted to company
wide forums. See Los Angeles Times [2019].



                                                3
that policy A is better in state a and policy B is better in state b. They, however, have
di¤erent payo¤s in the two states: the policy maker, absent any other signal would choose
B ; the citizens would choose A. Essentially, the conict between the players relies on
the fact that citizens and the policy maker face di¤erent type I (choose A in state b) and
Type II (choose B in state a) errors, so they are willing to choose di¤erent actions at
the ex ante or interim stage. A fraction of the citizens receive an informative signal on
the true state. When there is no information sharing within social groups of citizens, the
Baseline game, after signals are privately observed and before the policy action is selected,
citizens independently choose to protest or sign a petition. In the information sharing
game, citizens choose to protest after observing the entire vector of signals in their group.
In both cases, the policy maker chooses the policy after observing the citizens'actions.
      The theory shows that there are two factors determining whether information aggre-
gation is possible: the ...rst, perhaps unsurprisingly, is the conict in the preferences of
the policy maker and the citizens; the second is the precision of the citizens'individual
signals. No matter what the size of the population is, information aggregation is possible
only if, for a given precision of the individual signals, the conict in ex ante preferences
is su¢ ciently small; or, for a given level of conict, the precision of the individual signals
is su¢ ciently high. Even in cases in which information aggregation is impossible with
independent agents, however, we show that information aggregation is achievable when
agents can share information through social groups before taking actions. For any level
of precision of the individual signals, the larger is the social group, the easier it is to
aggregate information through protests and petitions.
      The reason why protests may fail to achieve information aggregation is that the policy
maker cannot commit to a decision rule. Indeed, if the decision maker could commit to
change policy after a given turnout of protesters, then protests would work as elections
and information aggregation would generally be guaranteed, as in the classic results on
information aggregation in elections à la Condorcet.5 Without commitment, the problem
for information aggregation can be described as follows. In equilibrium, there must be
a threshold over which the policy maker changes policy from B to A. Importantly, and
di¤erently from an election, at this threshold, the policy maker must be willing to choose A
  5
    See Austen-Smith and Banks [1996], Fedderesen and Pesendorfer [1996, 1997, 1999] and for a more
speci...c discussion Battaglini [2016].


                                                4
given the observed signals. At the same time, citizens must be willing to use a separating
strategy (that is a strategy that depends on the signal). A necessary condition for signaling
to happen is that citizens with the signal least favorable to A are willing to not protest
conditional on being pivotal (that is on being able to a¤ect the policy maker'
                                                                             s decision).
Roughly speaking, conditioning on being pivotal means that the citizens condition on
the event in which the number of protesters is close to the number that is su¢ cient to
convince the policy maker to choose A. But if this number is su¢ ciently large to convince
the policy maker who is biased against A, then it is going to also strictly convince the
citizen that A is the best option if the individual signal received by the citizen is not
su¢ ciently precise. In this case, an informative equilibrium is impossible: the endogenous
informative content of the pivotal event is so strong that citizens are willing to disregard
their private informative signal.
   Sharing information in social groups helps in achieving information aggregation be-
cause it relaxes the incentive compatibility constraint for revealing the signals informa-
tively. The intuition for this phenomenon is that when citizens can share signals in a
group, it is as if the group receives one, single but more informative signal with an associ-
ated number of realizations equal to the number of members of the group. The precision
of the aggregate information of the social group may indeed be su¢ ciently high to coun-
terbalance the reasoning described above: even if in the pivotal event the policy maker is
willing to select A, groups with su¢ ciently precise information in favor of B are willing
to refrain from being active.
   In our experiments we ...rst examine the extent that conict can lead to failure in
information aggregation through protests when there is no information sharing within
groups. While we ...nd that citizens tend to use strategies that are more informative
than predicted by the theory (a behavioral phenomenon that is typical in experiments of
signaling games as ours), we ...nd strong support for our theoretical prediction that high
conict will lead to citizens' protests being less informative and policy makers paying
less attention to protests in both data samples. We also ...nd evidence in support of our
prediction that conict decreases e¢ ciency of policy maker choices, signi...cantly so in our
data from Mechanical Turk and qualitative evidence in our lab sample.
   When we add information sharing through social groups, we ...nd strong support for our


                                             5
prediction that when citizens share information within social groups prior to making their
protest decisions the e¤ects of high conict are mitigated. With information sharing, the
protests are signi...cantly more informative in both data samples, policy makers pay more
attention to protests (in both samples when the citizen population is small), and policy
makers make more informationally e¢ cient choices (in the Mechanical Turk sample).
       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the following subsection we
discuss the related literature. In Section 2 and 3 we present our model and theoretical
analysis. In Section 4 we discuss our experimental design and predictions. In Sections 5
and 6 we present our experimental results. We conclude in Section 7 with a discussion of
the results and of future research.

1.1       Related literature
Much of the previous literature on protest has modelled protests as coordination games in
which protest are successful only if an exogenous threshold of participation is reached.6 In
this context protests do not convey information on the quality of the policy to the decision
makers: the focus is instead on whether citizens can coordinate on passing the threshold,
whether multiple equilibria are possible, and the extent to which the probability of protests
depends on the fundamentals. On the contrary, the focus of our theory and related
experiments is on information aggregation of dispersed information concerning the quality
of alternative policies, and thus on the impact of protests on the quality of the policy
maker'
     s beliefs and decisions, an issue that we feel is important but still understudied, both
theoretically and empirically. The two issues (coordination and information aggregation)
are naturally interconnected. Indeed, our work shows that the issue of coordination can
not be separated from the issue of information aggregation in the presence of heterogenous
signals, and vice-versa. Membership to a social group induces citizens to share signals
and thus coordinate actions; it also relaxes the incentive compatibility constraints for
information transmission with the policy-maker. These results emerge because we provide
an explicit modelling of the policy-maker'
                                         s response to the protests.
   6
     See Olson [1965], Tullock [1971] and Shelling [1971] for classic results. More recently, see Boix and
Slovik [2009], Edmond [2013], Shadmehr and Bernhardt [2011], Barbera and Jackson [2018] and Ananyev
et al. [2019] among others. Another line of research is presented by Passarelli and Tabellini [2017] who see
protests are an emotional reaction to unfair treatment and study the implication of this on policy-making.



                                                     6
       The idea that petitions and public protests can allow the aggregation of informa-
tion dispersed among citizens was ...rst suggested by Condorcet [1785] as a normative
theory of elections, in light of which elections work as mechanisms to aggregate infor-
mation dispersed in the electorate, and in its modern form, by Austen-Smith and Banks
[1996], Feddersen and Pesendorfer [1996, 1997, 1999] and others. The idea was applied to
study public protests or polls by Lohmann [1993,1994], Banerjee and Somanathan [2001],
Battaglini and Benabou [2003], Morgan and Stocken [2008], Battaglini [2016] and a num-
ber of follow up papers.7 This literature, however, so far has been exclusively theoretical.
The theoretical framework presented here is inspired by Battaglini [2016], but, contrary
to this work, it is designed to be implementable in an experiment with a ...nite number of
players.8
       From an empirical point of view, information aggregation with protests has not been
extensively studied because it is di¢ cult to conclusively establish a causal e¤ect of the
size of public activism on politician beliefs and policy choices with ...eld data. Labora-
tory experiments allow us to control for otherwise unobserved private signals: this is the
reason why we have chosen this tool to test the predictions of our model. A related com-
plementary work that highlights the importance of this line of research is Wouters and
Walgrave [2017]. They present an experiment in which they expose Belgian national and
regional politicians to manipulated television news on public protests. They identify a
number of features of protests that a¤ect the politicians'attitudes toward the issues the
protests are about (notably size and whether protesters agree with themselves). Contrary
to our work, these authors do not have a theoretical model and sharp hypothesis to test,
other that the generic fact that politicians respond to how the protests are portrayed on
television. These authors, moreover, do not look at the e¤ect of social groups on the
e¤ectiveness of protests in terms of policy choices; and can not assess the welfare e¤ects
of public activism.
       In addition to the works cited above, our paper is related to two other strands of
   7
     For recent related contributions on this front see, among others, Ali and Bohren [2019], Eckmecki
and Lauermann [2019], Salas [2019].
   8
     In Battaglini [2016] it is assumed that the number of voters is a realization from a Poisson distribution
with mean n. This implies that the number of players is with positive probability arbitrarily large
independently from its expected value. In the model presented below we assume there are n + 1 players,
where n is a ...nite number.



                                                      7
literature. First, it is related to a recent strand of empirical papers proposing original
identi...cation strategies to study the causal e¤ect of social media on the occurrence of
public protest using ...eld data. Enikolopov, Makarin and Petrova [2016] showed that the
penetration of the Russian social network VK increased the probability of protests; and
Manacorda and Tesei [2016] showed that mobile phones are instrumental to mass mobi-
lization during economic downturns. Our theory and experiments extend and complement
these results by providing a theoretical background of why social media makes protests
more e¤ective, and by using lab experiments to test the theory in ways that would be
impossible using ...eld data.
    Second, our work is related to the experimental literature on information aggrega-
tion in elections (see Guarnaschelli, McKelvey and Palfrey [2000], Battaglini Morton and
Palfrey [2007, 2008, 2010] among others). This literature aims at studying with labora-
tory experiments whether elections aggregate information as predicted in the Condorcet
Jury Theorem and related results. This literature has been recently extended to allow
for preplay communication of voters in networks by Buechel and Mechtenberg [2019] and
Pogorelskiy and Shum [2019]. Compared to these papers, we consider simpler social
networks and communication mechanisms in the networks, but we study information ag-
gregation in a di¤erent and more complex setting in which a decision is not determined
by a voting rule, but by a policy-maker without commitment.


2     Model
Consider a model in which a policy maker has to choose between two policies, A and B
and there are two possible states of the world. The policy maker believes that policy A
is optimal in state a and policy B is optimal in state b. Formally, the policy maker'
                                                                                    s
preference is V (p; ), where p = A; B is the policy and        = a; b is the state of the
world. The prior probability that the state is    is ( ) with (a) = 1=2. If we de...ne
V ( ) = V (A; )    V (B; ) to be the net expected bene...t of A in state , then V (a) > 0
and V (b) < 0. The policy maker is willing to choose A if

                                 V =    V (a)=V (b)   1.




                                            8
We assume that V < 1, so that, with no additional information, the policy maker chooses
B.
     There is a population of n citizens. Citizens'utilities are described by v (p; ), where
p is the policy and     is the state of the world. If we de...ne v ( ) = v (A; )   v (B; ), we
assume v (a) > 0 and v (b) < 0. This implies that citizens agree that A is the best policy
in state a and B is the best policy in state b. A citizen is willing to choose A if

                                         v=   v (a)=v (b)   1.

We assume that the policy maker and the citizens have di¤erent willingness to choose
A. Speci...cally, we assume v > V . Citizens are therefore more predisposed to choosing
A than the policy maker is. The di¤erence between v and V provides a natural way to
measure the conict of interest between the policy maker and the citizens.
     Citizens observe a private informative signal t with distribution r(t; ), support T = f0; 1g.
We assume that r(0; b) = r(1; a) = r > 1=2 and r(0; a) = r(1; b) = 1 r. This signal there-
fore satis...es a standard monotone likelihood ratio property, implying that the posterior
 (a; t) of a citizen with signal t is increasing in t.
     After observing the private signal, each citizen chooses whether to protest against the
policy maker'
            s default policy B or to stay home. The policy maker observes the number
of protesters and then chooses a policy that maximizes her utility.
     In Section 5 we discuss how we model social networks in this environment. Until then,
we assume that citizens act independently. In this case, a strategy for the policy maker
is a function from the observed number of protesters to a probability of choosing A, i.e.,
  : N ! [0; 1]. A strategy for a citizen is a function from the signal to a probability of
protesting, i.e.,   : T ! [0; 1].
     Given the strategies described in the previous section, the probability that a citizen
protests in state     when the strategy is      is:

                               ( ; ) = r(0; ) (0) + r(1; ) (1) :

From Bayes'rule, the posterior probability that the state is a if Q citizens protest is then:

                                                 Bn (Q; (a; ))
                              n (a; Q;   )= P                       .                      (1)
                                                 =a;b Bn (Q; ( ; ))



                                                  9
                           n
where Bn (Q; ( ; )) =             (a; )Q (1  (a; ))n Q is a binomial distribution with
                           Q
n trials, and probability of success ( ; ). The public protest game described above
always has an equilibrium in which the policy maker ignores the protesters and chooses B
with probability one: in such an equilibrium citizens use uninformative, state-uncontingent
strategies.9 In the following we study the conditions under which the policy maker'
                                                                                  s de-
cision is inuenced by the "wisdom of the crowd," i.e., the citizens'actions. We assume
that with complete information the policy maker would change his mind if she observed
a su¢ ciently large number of signals pointing at a. A su¢ cient condition for this is that
 n (a; Q;    ) > 1=(1 + V ), that is:

                                                        1
                                          r>r=                                                       (2)
                                                    1 + V 1=n

Note that (2) is very easily satis...ed for r > 1=2, since V 1=n converges very quickly to one
as n increases. We assume (2) is satis...ed for the remainder of the paper.
       With asymmetric information, citizens'protests can a¤ect the policy maker'
                                                                                s action
only if they are informative on the state of the world. We say that ;                  is an informa-
tive equilibrium if citizens use informative strategies and so the probability of protesting
is higher in state a, the state in which the policy maker'
                                                         s default policy is incorrect:
  (a; ) >      (b; ). In this case the probability of a is increasing in Q and there is a Q
such that the policy maker is willing to choose A if and only if Q > Q .10
       Informativeness of an equilibrium is only a minimal requirement for public protests to
be useful: even if public protests are informative, information transmission can be minimal
and the policy maker'
                    s mistake can be signi...cant; even when the population is arbitrarily
large, informativeness may converge to zero as n ! 1. The probability of a mistake
in an informative equilibrium ; , is M ( ; ) = (1                  ) Pr (A; b; ; ) +    Pr(B; a; ; ),
where Pr(p; ; ; ) is the probability that policy p is chosen in state . We say that full
information aggregation is achievable if there is a sequence of informative equilibria             n;   n

for environments with population n such that M (             n;   n)   converges to zero as n ! 1.
   9
    An example will be presented in Section 2.1.
  10
    We can also have informative equilibria in which citizens "protest" to show support to the policy
maker and stay home to signal their disagreement: in this case (a; ) < (b; ). There is no loss
of generality to focus on the most natural case in which a protest is interpreted as a sign that citizens
protests to induce a change in the policy maker's action.



                                                   10
3     Theoretical predictions
In Section 2.1 we provide a characterization of the equilibrium strategies. In Section 2.2.
we use the characterization to study when an informative equilibrium exists. In Section
2.3 we present numerical examples that we will use in the experimental analysis.

3.1    Equilibrium characterization
The policy maker'
                s optimal choice depends on his posterior belief              n (a; Q;   ) given the
citizens'strategy . When citizens use informative strategies,           n (a; Q;    ) is increasing in
Q and the policy maker always ...nds it optimal to follow a cut-o¤ rule. Let Qn ( ; ) be
the minimal Q such that:
                                             n (a; Q;    )   :                                    (3)

The policy maker strictly prefers B if Q < Qn ( ; ) and A if Q > Qn ( ; ); if Q =
Qn ( ; ) the policy maker is indi¤erent if Qn ( ; ) satis...es (3) with equality and strictly
prefers A otherwise. To account for the possibility of the policy maker using mixed
strategies, it is convenient to represent the policy maker'
                                                          s strategy           n   (Q) as a function
of a threshold qn on the real line:
                                         8
                                         <       0   Q < bqn c
                                  n (Q) =   dqn e qn Q = bqn c .                                  (4)
                                          :
                                                 1   Q > bqn c
where bxc and dxe are, respectively, the largest integer less than or equal to x and the
smallest integer greater than x. When qn is an integer, (4) describes a simple cut-o¤ rule
for action in pure strategies: type qn is the smallest number of protesters that induces
the policy maker to choose A with probability one; so that B is chosen if and only if less
than qn citizens protest. When qn is not an integer, then dqn e is the smallest number
of protesters that induces the policy maker to choose A with probability one. A policy
maker that observes bqn c chooses A with probability dqn e              qn ; a policy maker that
observes less than bqn c chooses B with probability one. Following a strategy described
by (4) is optimal for a policy maker if and only if qn 2 [Qn ( ; ) ; Qn ( ; ) + 1], with
qn = Qn ( ; ) if     n (a; Qn   ( ; ); ) >      . In this case we say that qn is optimal given the
citizens'strategy.


                                                    11
     The citizens'strategies depend on their posterior belief, conditioning on being pivotal,
i.e. conditioning on being able to a¤ect the policy maker'
                                                         s decision. To evaluate the
citizens'decision, de...ne 'n ( ; ; ) to be the pivot probability in state given an expected
population size n and the strategies                   ; . The pivot probability is the increase in the
probability that A is chosen, as induced by a citizen'
                                                     s decision to protest. The pivot
probability in state        is:

                                                  n    Bn 1 (Qn ( ; ) 1; ( ; ))
                       'n ( ; ; ) =                                                          ,                  (5)
                                               +(1      n ) Bn 1 (Qn ( ; ) ; ( ; ))

where       n   is the probability that A is chosen if Qn ( ; ) citizens are protesting and, recall,
Bn 1 (Qn ( ; )          1; ( ; )) is the binomial with n                1 draws, Qn ( ; )        1 successes and
probability of success ( ; ). A citizen is pivotal in only two events, when Qn ( ; ) 1 or
Qn ( ; ) other citizens are protesting (corresponding, respectively, to the ...rst and second
term in (5)). In the ...rst event, a citizen'
                                            s protest increases the probability of A from zero
to     n;   in the second event, a citizen'
                                          s protest increases the probability of A from                     n   to
one.
     A citizen chooses to protest if the expected bene...t of the protest is non negative:

                          v (a)'n (a; ; ) (a; t) + v (b)'n (b; ; ) (b; t)               0.                      (6)

We can rewrite this condition as:
                                  (a; t)        v (b)'n (b; ; )    'n (b; ; )
                                                                =              .                                (7)
                                  (b; t)        v (a)'n (a; ; )   v 'n (a; ; )
The monotone likelihood assumption on citizens'signals implies that there is a tn ( ; ) 2
[0; 1] such that only citizens with t                 tn ( ; ) ...nd it optimal to protest and citizens with
t < tn ( ; ) ...nd it strictly optimal not to protest; if tn ( ; ) satis...es (7) with equality
then citizens with t = tn ( ; ) are indi¤erent and are willing to randomize their action. As
with the policy maker, a citizen'
                                s equilibrium strategy                     n   can be conveniently represented
as a continuous function of a threshold                  n   2 [0; 2] as follows:
                                       8
                                       <                    0         t<b      nc
                             n ( t ) =   d               n e      n   t=b      nc   .                           (8)
                                       :
                                                            1         t>b      nc

Following a strategy described by (8) is optimal for a citizen if and only if

                                           n   2 [tn ( ; ) ; tn ( ; ) + 1] ;

                                                             12
with   n   = tn ( ; ) if (7) is strict at          = tn ( ; ). In this case, we say that       n   is optimal
given qn .
   The representations of the strategies in (4) and (8) allow to characterize an equilibrium
in terms of two real numbers and simple cut-o¤ strategies:

Proposition 1. An informative equilibrium is characterized by a pair of thresholds                      n ; qn

such that qn is optimal given           n,   and    n   is optimal given qn .

   It is easy to see that an equilibrium of this game always exists. For example, (t) = 1=2
for all t and (Q) = 0 for all Q is an equilibrium. In this case the probability of a protest
is the same in both states:        (a; ) =         (b; ) = 1=2. This implies that the policy maker'
                                                                                                  s
posterior     n (a; Q;   ) is independent from Q, implying that                   (Q) = 0 is optimal. Since
the policy maker is unresponsive to Q,                  (t) = 1=2 is optimal for the citizens as well.

3.2     Information aggregation with public protests
The key question we intend to study is when informative public protests are possible. Our
...rst result is an impossibility condition that characterizes an upperbound on the precision
of the signals below which information aggregation is impossible.
   Assume an informative equilibrium exists. Then there must be a threshold Qn such
that the policy maker is willing to choose A if and only if the number of protesting
citizens Q is at least Qn . At this threshold the policy maker'
                                                              s posterior probability must
be su¢ ciently large:      n (a; Qn ;    )         . This inequality can be rewritten as:
                                             P (Qn ; (a;       n ))   1
                                                                        ,                                 (9)
                                             P (Qn ; (b;       n ))   V
The equilibrium, however, is informative only if there is separation of the citizens'types.
This is possible only if, at the very minimum, the citizens with the lowest signal are willing
to be inactive. By condition (7), we must have:
                                   'n (a; ; )            1        1
                                                                            1 .                         (10)
                                   'n (b; ; )            v       (a; 0)
where recall that (a; 0) is the posterior probability of state a of a citizen who observes
the lowest signal, t = 0. An informative equilibrium exists only if both (9) and (10) are
satis...ed. We now show that when conict is su¢ ciently high and/or the precision of the
individual signals is su¢ ciently low, these conditions are incompatible.

                                                          13
       The left hand sides of (9) and (10) are intimately connected. The left hand side of
(9) is the ratio between the probabilities of having Qn protesters in, respectively, state
a and in state b. The left hand side of (10) is the ratio of the pivot probabilities in,
respectively, state a and b. As can be seen from (5), the pivot probability in state                             is a
convex combination of the probabilities that Qn and Qn                               1 citizens are active in state
                                                                    11
(since a citizen is pivotal only in these two events).                     There is therefore, a well de...ned
relationship between the left hand sides of (9) and (10). As formally shown in the proof
of Lemma 1, the relationship between them can be bounded as follows:

                               'n (a;   n; )     Bn (Qn ; (a;       n ))         1
                                                                                        1 .                     (11)
                               'n (b;   n; )     Bn (Qn ; (b;       n ))         r

Using (11) we can now connect (9) and (10) and obtain the following necessary condition
for information aggregation:

                1        1                     'n (a; ; )   Bn (Qn ; (a;                 n ))   1
                                  1                                                                 1
                v       (a; 0)                 'n (b; ; )   Bn (Qn ; (b;                 n ))   r
                                               1 1
                                                        1
                                               V r

The ...rst and last inequality follow from (9)-(10), the second inequality follows from
(11). We conclude that an informative equilibrium does not exist in our example if V <
                    1      2
V (v; r) = v (r          1) . Remarkably, when this condition is not satis...ed, an informative
equilibrium does not exist even if the number of informed citizens is arbitrarily large. We
have:

Proposition 2. No informative equilibrium exists if:

                                                                1            2
                                        V < V (v; r) = v r               1       :                              (12)


       Proposition 1 highlights a key di¤erence between our public protests game and the
voting games studied in the Condorcet Jury Theorem literature in which the policy maker
can commit to a response function, the voting rule. In these cases, as ...rst shown by Fed-
dersen and Pesendorfer [1996], not only does an informative equilibrium exist, but full
information aggregation is achieved as the size of the population increases, independently
  11
    The weights in the convex combination depend on the policy-maker'
                                                                    s strategy (the probability of
choosing A with Qn protesters).


                                                      14
from the cut-o¤ rules that are used. Conversely, when the policy maker cannot commit to
a response plan, the fact that citizens receive informative signals is not su¢ cient for infor-
mation transmission. Indeed when the condition of Lemma 1 is satis...ed, no information
is transferred at all, no matter how large the number of informed citizens is.
       In what situations will public protests be useful and allow the policy maker to improve
her choice when conict is su¢ ciently small? The following result characterizes a simple
su¢ cient condition for the existence of an informative equilibrium.

Proposition 3. An informative equilibrium exists if:
                                                                 1
                                                       1
                                V    V (v; r) = v r        1   1 1=n
                                                                       :                       (13)

       It is easy to verify that V (v; r) is positive, larger than V (v; r) and smaller than v .
This condition implies that if conict is su¢ ciently small, information transmission is
possible for any population size.12 As the precision of the individual signals increases,
                   1
moreover, v (r         1) converges to zero, so the condition of Proposition 2 is satis...ed for
any V .
       The next result establishes that full information aggregation is possible if (13) is sat-
is...ed.

Proposition 4. If V          V (v; r) we achieve full information aggregation as n ! 1.

       Proposition 4 rationalizes the belief in "the power of the numbers"according to which
large protests can help signi...cantly improving policy outcomes, but it quali...es the result
highlighting that the result requires conict to be su¢ ciently low and or the precision of
the individual signals to be su¢ ciently high.

3.3        Social groups
We model the e¤ect of social media assuming that each citizen is a¢ liated to one of
m groups of size G, so the size of the population is n = Gm. Citizens in a group can
communicate and share their signals.
       Consider the problem faced by the citizen in a social group. When citizens share their
information, each citizen in a group receives an informative signal corresponding to the
  12
    Recall that V < v and jV v j is a measure of the conict between citizens and the policy maker: a
larger V , therefore, corresponds to a smaller conict.

                                                15
number of citizens with a t = 1 (instead of t = 0) realization. This aggregate signal e
                                                                                      t has
        e = f0; ::; Gg and distribution rG (t; ) = BG (t; ), where BG (t; ) is a binomial
support T
with mean rG when the state is a, i.e. BG (t; rG); and the binomial with mean (1          r)G
when the state is b, i.e. BG (t; (1   r)G).
    The game with social groups can be analyzed using the results of the previous sections.
Given the strategies of the policy maker, citizens in a social circle ...nd it optimal to
truthfully share their information and coordinate their actions as if they were a single
player since they have no conict. Similarly, the policy maker ...nds it optimal to treat
each group as an individual agent if all groups act in a coordinated way. This implies that
the extended game with m groups of size G can be treated as a game with m individual
with signal rG (t; ). We have:

Proposition 4. With a social group of size G , an informative equilibrium exists if
                       1    G
V     VG (v ) = v (r       1) .

    The intuition for Proposition 4 is as follows. When the size of groups is G and their
members share signals, the likelihood ratio of receiving e
                                                         t signals is now r(e
                                                                            t; a)=r(e
                                                                                    t; b) =
 1 r G 2e
        t
  r
          .   As g increases, the posterior probability that the state is a after signals e
                                                                                          t=0
converges to zero: these groups are going to be willing to abstain from protesting even
when there is a very large conict.
    A drawback of having social groups (at least as described above) is that each group now
behaves as a single player: all members are predicted to protest or not protest together.
The number of independent signals that are available to the policy maker is not smaller.
Of course this is still an advantage when the policy maker would be unable to get any
information by citizens acting independently.

3.4     Discussion
In this section we discuss some key assumptions of the model.

Signal precision and overcon...dence. In the previous analysis we have assumed
that the signals are only partially informative, that is the likelihood ratio r(t; a)=(t; b) is
bounded for any signal t. Consider now a version in which the signal is continuous in
 t; t and, for example we have r(t; b)=(t; a) ! 1 as t ! t. In this case, citizens with
signals at or close to the lower bound would ...nd it optimal not to protest because they

                                              16
surely (or almost surely) know that the state is b. In this case we would always have
an informative equilibrium.13 The existence of arbitrarily precise signals is a theoretical
possibility, but probably not a realistic one: it is indeed natural to assume that citizens
are only imperfectly informed, indeed typically poorly informed. The case with highly
precise signals is, however, interesting for another, perhaps more plausible, reason: a
citizen may be overcon...dent regarding the precision of their signal, a phenomenon that is
well documented in the psychology literature (see for instance Kahneman et al. [1982]).
Su¢ ciently overcon...dent citizens would ...nd it optimal to act according to their signal
even if this is not justi...ed by Bayesian updating. This may be an important factor
determining the success of petitions and/or protests in aggregating information. We will
return to this aspect in Section 5 when we discuss the experimental results.

Direct costs/bene...ts of signing petitions. In the analysis above we have assumed
that the cost of signing a petition is zero, which seems a realistic assumption in all
examples discussed in the introduction. There are environments in which it may be natural
to assume that citizens face a direct cost/bene...t of signing a petition. The rational for a
direct bene...t from signing a petition is that citizens may receive utility from expressing
their opinion (see for example Brennan and Lomasky [1993]); the rationale for a cost is
that the act of signing a petition or participating to a protest may be time consuming
or it may involve a penalty (especially in a non democratic country). Allowing for a cost
of sending a message (i.e., the signature of the petition) naturally makes signalling easier
since it improves the ability of the informed agents to separate. Battaglini and Benabou
[2003] have studied the case of public protests with costly actions and they have shown
that a separating equilibrium always exists. Ekmecki and Lauermann [2018] have extended
the model in Battaglini to allow for cost/bene...ts of protesting. The interesting question,
however is the extent to which the amount of information transmitted is signi...cant when
the number of citizens is large and the precision of individual signals is not very high.
With many senders the probability of being pivotal is small and converges to zero as
n ! 1, so any citizen with a strictly positive cost, or a strictly positive bene...t of signing
a petition would act uninformatively. If any information is revealed, it must be revealed
  13
    Of course this possibility is contemplated in the statement of Proposition 1, since the case with
arbitrarily precise signals corresponds to a case with a large r (in which case condition 12 does not hold).



                                                    17
only by citizens who have a positive but arbitrarily small cost of sending the message, if
such types exist.14 In Battaglini it is shown that with a ...nite number of types (i.e. a
...nite number of possible cost/bene...t types of sending the message), the same results as in
Section 2.1-2.2 hold with essentially no modi...cations. It is easy to see that even assuming
continuous types and any number of citizens even (and especially) if arbitrarily large,
results remain necessarily qualitatively unchanged. In the original model by Battaglini
[2016] citizens are a realization of a Poisson random variable with mean n. In this case
we can technically speaking have an "informative" equilibrium even for low precision of
individual signals. This would happen only because with a Poisson there is a probability
that any arbitrarily large number of citizens exists: so even if the strategy used by the
citizens is very uninformative because only a tiny fraction of types are informative (those
marginally above zero), the policy maker may change policy if it happens that there is
a very large realization of the number of existing citizens (a technical problem with the
assumption of a Poisson number of citizens is that the Poisson is unbounded above). Even
in these cases, however, the probability that the policy maker is a¤ected by the citizens
would be arbitrarily small: these would be informative equilibria only by name. In the
model presented above, moreover, this possibility is not allowed because the number of
possible voters is not unbounded. In this case, for any number n of citizens, there is
always a threshold on individual informativeness below which no information is revealed
as in Proposition 1.

Instrumental vs. expressive preferences. Another key underlying assumption of the
model is that players have instrumental preferences, that is they care only about the pol-
icy outcome. This assumption has been criticized in the political science literature. It has
been argued that, in addition to caring about policies, voters may have direct preference
for expressing their opinion (Brennan and Lomasky [1993]), they may be motivated by
self-image considerations (Della Vigna et al. [2015]), or ethical concerns (Coate and Conlin
[2004], Feddersen and Sandroni [2006]).15 The theory presented above is not necessarily
excluding the presence of these factors: many di¤erent factors may concur in determining
equilibrium behavior. Some of these "behavioral"e¤ects are automatically controlled for
  14
     It is clear from the logic of Proposition 1 discussed in Section 3.2 that citizens with a negative cost
would be biased toward being uninformative even more than citizens with a zero cost.
  15
     See Feddersen [2004] for a survey.


                                                    18
in the experiment, for example self image considerations are controlled since the subjects
play anonymously. A behavioral factor that may be present and that is especially relevant
is the possibility of expressive preferences. Expressive preferences may be of two types ­
myopic expressiveness in which a citizen receives utility from protesting regardless of his
or her signal in order to express their preferences for a given state of the world or truthful
expressiveness in which a citizen receives utility for truthfully revealing the signal. If some
citizens are myopic expressive then obviously the possibility of information aggregation
decreases as the information received by policy makers becomes noisier. Truthful expres-
siveness can have the opposite e¤ect. As mentioned, expressive preferences have been
discussed in the political science literature. They are especially relevant in this context
because the communication game we are studying is a variant of a cheap talk game in
which there is one receiver (the policy maker), but many senders (the citizens). There
is ample evidence that senders in cheap talk game tend to reveal more information than
predicted in equilibrium, supportive of truthful expressiveness.16 Preferences for being
truthful may play an important role in our environment also because even if citizens have
instrumental preferences, they may have a hard time computing the pivot probabilities
(as documented by Du¤y and Tavits [2008]). If the citizens underestimate the probability
of being pivotal, then expressive preferences may dominate their decisions.


4      Experimental Design
4.1     Basic Procedures
In order to evaluate the theoretical predictions, we conducted two experiments, labeled
Exp 1 and 2 (both of which were approved prior to implementation by relevant university
institutional review board). In both experiments we varied the conict between the policy
maker and citizens as well as the existence of social groups among the protesters who share
information. Exp 1 was conducted at the Center for Experimental Social Science (CESS)
at New York University with 177 subjects in 21 sessions.17 Exp 2 was conducted via
  16
     See for example Dickhaut, McCabe, and Mukherji (1995), Blume, Dejong, Kim, and Sprinkle (1998;
2001), Cai and Wang (2006), Sanchez-Pages and Vorsatz (2007; 2009), Wang, Spezio, and Camerer
(2010), Battaglini and Makarov [2014] and Battaglini et al. [2019].
  17
     No subjects participated in more than one session. The subject pool at CESS is drawn from the
large and diverse undergraduate population at the university.


                                                19
Amazon Mechanical Turk with 721 subjects in 40 sessions.18 We conducted the sessions
on Mechanical Turk as it allowed us to have larger groups of potential protestors than
is feasible in the laboratory as well as providing a larger and more varied subject pool
than one can recruit to most laboratories in the same of period of time. A number of
studies have shown that behavior of subjects in similar games on Mechanical Turk are
comparable to behavior in more conventional laboratory experiments.19
       The experimental games followed the theory closely. In each game, subjects in a
session were assigned as either citizens or policy makers. However, we used a neutral
frame labeling citizens as "...rst movers" and policy makers as "second movers." Subject
identities and assignments were anonymous and all subject communication took place via
the internet.20 We conducted two types of sessions: small groups (21 sessions in Exp 1
and 37 sessions in Exp 2) and large groups (3 sessions in Exp 2). In the small group
sessions we recruited 5 protesters and 1-6 policy makers and in the large group sessions
we recruited 50 of each.
       Each policy maker'
                        s payo¤s depended purely on whether he or she chose the jar that
matched the true jar as described below. Hence, policy makers were not in a game with
each other, but made independent choices. Only one policy maker'
                                                               s choice determined the
payo¤s for the protesters, which was randomly determined after a session was completed.
We chose this procedure in order to increase the number of observations of policy maker
  18
      No subject participated in more than one session. We screened subjects such that they were based in
the US (and thus their identieis had been veri...ed by Amazon), had prior experience on Mturk, and an
evaluation score of 90% or higher. We also screen subjects such that if they had participated before, even
if they dropped o¤ before completing the experiment, they were not able to join the experiment again.
Subjects were further screened through an incentivized quiz that they took after reading the instructions
but before embarking on the experiment. That is, subjects were given 7 quiz questions about the game
structure. If a subject answered a question wrong they were shown a message which explained the
right answer and given a chance to answer the question again. If they answered the question wrong the
second time, they failed the quiz and were paid $1 for their participation but not allowed to continue
the experiment. The quiz was also incentivized. For every question they answered correctly the ...rst
time they received a reward of $0.10. In total 900 subjects started the experiment, of which 14 subjects
dropped out before the quiz and 151 took the quiz but failed it and were screened out. A further 12
subjects dropped o¤ after the quiz (probably due to internet issues). Two subjects' choices were not
recorded for all rounds due to computer failures. These subjects'choices if they completed some of the
game rounds are not included in the data as their choices could not be used for the experiment although
they were paid for their participation. Subjects who completed the entire experiment earned on average
$9.24 and took on average 15 to 20 minutes to complete the experiment.
   19
      See for example Berinsky et al. 2012 and Levay et al. 2016.
   20
      The experiment was programed in Javascript and Php. The program is available from the authors.
Screenshots are presented in the Supplemental Online Appendix.


                                                   20
behavior without changing the nature of the game. In Exp 1, since it took place in the
laboratory, all subjects were aware of the number of protestors in a session and the number
of potential policy makers. In Exp 2, all subjects in a session were aware of the number
of protesters in the session as well. However, in Exp 2 protesters were told that their
payo¤s depended on the choice of a single policy maker (which was truthful) and policy
makers were told that their choices determined the payo¤s for both themselves and all
the protesters in their session (which was not always truthful depending on whether they
were randomly chosen to so determine). Therefore, we engaged in a form of deception
by not revealing to the subjects in Exp 2 that the actual policy maker in the game was
drawn from a pool of policy makers and that not all the policy maker choices determined
the payo¤s of the protesters.
   Our experiments focus on two main aspects of the theory: the e¤ect of conict in
preferences on information aggregation through protests and the extent that information
sharing within social groups increases information aggregation through protests. We have
the following expectations: Holding signal quality constant, we expect that increasing
conict will reduce the likelihood of information aggregation and holding preferences
constant, we expect that when citizens share information in social groups, the likelihood
of information aggregation will increase.
   We therefore conducted two basic games in the sessions: Baseline and Social Informa-
tion, using a between subjects design in comparing game types. We describe the games in
more detail below. In order to evaluate the e¤ects of conict we conducted experiments
using the Baseline game, varying the payo¤s between Low and High Conict (as explained
below) using a medium signal quality of r = 0:60. In order to evaluate the e¤ects of Social
Information we used the High Conict payo¤s with the Social Information game which
allowed for sharing of information within social groups.

4.2    Baseline Game & Payo¤ Variations
In order to explain the structure of the games, we ...rst describe a session in Exp 1 in the
Laboratory in the Baseline game. Typically ten subjects were recruited to the laboratory
and received instructions on how the game worked for both roles, after which they took
a short quiz on the instructions. If they answered a question wrong, they were given a


                                            21
second chance and an explanation of the answer. They where then randomly assigned as
either citizens or policy makers (in the experiment they were referred to as First or Second
Movers). The subjects were shown on their computer screens two jars with 100 balls: a
Silver Jar with 60 silver and 40 gold balls and a Gold Jar had 60 gold and 40 silver balls.
They were told that the computer would randomly choose with 50-50% probability one
of the jars as the "True Jar." Subjects were not told the jar selected by the computer,
but shown a jar with colorless balls. Each Citizen then privately chose one of the balls to
reveal its color and thus receive an informative yet noisy signal as to the color of the True
Jar. The color shown was a random draw from the probabilities given by the jars such
that each protestor'
                   s signal was a new independent draw with replacement and did not
depend on the actual ball clicked on the computer monitor. After receiving their signals,
citizens were given the opportunity to send the following message to policy makers: "Do
not choose the Silver Jar."As will become evident below, with no additional information
other than the ex ante probabilities of the True Jar'
                                                    s color, the policy maker'
                                                                             s expected
payo¤s were maximized by choosing the Silver Jar. Hence, the message conveyed a protest
against the policy maker'
                        s expected payo¤ maximizing choice.
       After the citizens made their choices, the number of messages sent were revealed to
the policy makers who then chose either the Gold or Silver Jar. The True Jar was then
revealed and one of the policy maker'
                                    s choices was randomly chosen to determine the
payo¤s for the citizens. Subjects were then told the potential payo¤s for that round
depending on their role. The game was repeated for a total of 50 rounds with 4 periods
randomly chosen for payment at the end of the game.
       In Exp 2 on Mechanical Turk there were a number of modi...cations given the con-
straints of conducting the experiment online. On Mechanical Turk the citizens were
recruited ...rst and made choices for 30 periods without feedback.21 After all the citizens
  21
    We thus had 360 subjects as ...rst movers altogether play the game for 10,800 periods. Due to a
programming problem in which on a rare occasion the software did not record their choices, the data
for 21 of the periods for a few of the citizen subjects are missing with on average less than 1 choice in
1 period per session missing with no more than 4 choices in 4 periods in any one session missing (we
do not have missing data for policy makers). When such data was not recorded, then policy makers
were told the number of messages received only for the citizens whose choices were recorded. From the
user interface the software error was not noticeable. We excluded the periods with missing data entirely
from the empirical analysis reported below. As the subjects received no feedback between periods as to
the identify of the true jar, there is no reason to believe that the fact that these observations were not
recorded by the program had any a¤ect on behavior of the subjects in subsequent periods.


                                                   22
had chosen in all the periods, then policy makers were recruited to make choices. For
each period, the policy makers were told the sum of messages sent and then chose a jar
(Silver or Gold). As with citizens, there was no feedback between periods. After all the
policy makers had chosen in all 30 periods, one of the periods was randomly chosen for
payment. Payo¤s were determined and all subjects were given their payment.
      To study how behavior changes with incentives and thus the e¤ects of conict, we used
two di¤erent payo¤ combinations for the players in the Baseline game: Low and High
Conict. These payo¤s in dollars are presented below in Table 1. Note that in both the
Low and High Conict Treatments, the policy makers'ex ante payo¤s are maximized by
choosing Silver, while the citizens'ex ante payo¤s are maximized by choosing Gold. Yet,
the theory makes starkly di¤erent predictions about behavior in the two treatments. As
can be easily veri...ed using condition (12) in Proposition 2, in the High Conict Treatment
the unique equilibrium prediction is that the decisions to send messages (protest) are
independent of the colors of the balls (signals) observed by citizens and that policy makers
as a consequence in equilbrium should ignore the protests and always choose the Silver
Jar. In the Low Conict Treatment, on the contrary, an informative equilibrium exists in
which potential protesters respond to their signals in an informative manner and policy
makers respond accordingly to the messages received.22

                                  Table 1: Payo¤s in Baseline Games
                            Low Con     ict  True Jar is Gold True Jar is Silver
            Policy Makers Gold is Selected         $8                -2
                          Silver is Selected        -2                9
               Citizens   Gold is Selected         $10               -2
                          Silver is Selected        -2                8
                            High Con    ict  True Jar is Gold True Jar is Silver
            Policy Makers Gold is Selected         $1                -2
                          Silver is Selected        -2                8
               Citizens   Gold is Selected         $18               -2
                          Silver is Selected        -2                1



      As discussed in Section 3.5, in previous experiments on cheap talk games subjects have
shown a propensity for communicating even in situations in which it is not rational to do
 22
      This can be veri...ed using condition (13) in Proposition 3.

                                                      23
so, engaging in excessive informative communication. Hence, we expect that even in the
High Conict Baseline game, protesters will be more likely to send messages when they see
a Silver ball than when they see a Gold ball. Yet, we expect that information aggregation
(messages sent) and the reactions by policy makers to protesters will be greater in the
Low Conict game than in the High Conict game.

4.3    Social Information Game & Summary of Treatments
In order to evaluate Proposition 5 (the e¤ects of social information), we also conducted
sessions in which citizens were organized into groups who shared signals. That is, after
each citizen chose his or her ball and learned its color, the citizens also were told the
colors of the balls chosen by the other members of their social group. Note that we do
not endogenous information sharing among citizens as our focus is the e¤ects of such
sharing on information aggregation rather than the decision to share information. In our
design all citizens have the same preferences and thus they have no incentive not to share
information. Nevertheless, we believe that future research should allow for endogenous
information sharing among citizens and also the possibility of false information being
shared as well, especially given that our results demonstrate the value of information
sharing.
   In Exp 2, since citizens were not necessarily online simultaneously, in order to provide
this information all the draws for all the citizens within each social group were made when
the session was created and then randomly assigned to the citizens by period within each
social group. In Exp 1 we also used the same design to minimize di¤erences between the
two studies. After learning the distribution of signals in their social groups, citizens again
chose whether to send the message to the policy makers. Policy makers only learned the
number of messages sent, not the distribution of signals. In the Social Information game
we used the same payo¤s as in the High Conict game. As in the Baseline game, we
conducted two variants, one with 5 protesters and 1-5 policy makers and one with 50
of each. As in the Baseline game, one policy maker'
                                                  s choices was randomly chosen to
determine payo¤s. In both the 5 and 50 citizen sessions, the citizens were divided into
social groups of 5. Therefore in the smaller games, there was one social group, but in the
larger games there were 10 social groups. In the Social Information game we also used


                                             24
r = 0:60: Given the parameters in the Social Information game, there exists an informative
equilibrium in which citizens used the social information to convey informative messages
that are then responded to by the policy makers.
   Table 2 below summarizes the treatments conducted.

                          Table 2: Treatments and Sessions

                             Exp 2 Baseline Games
                             Policy
           Payo¤s Citizens               r   Groups Sessions Subjects
                            Makers
            Low      5          5      0.60    NA       10     100
            Low      50        50      0.60    NA       1      100
            High     5          5      0.60    NA       12     120
            High     50        50      0.60    NA        1     100
                         Exp 2 Social Information Games
            High     5        4-5      0.60     1       10      99
            High     50        51      0.60     10      1      100
                             Exp 1 Baseline Games
            Low      5          5      0.60    NA       6       60
            High     5        1-5      0.60    NA       4       36
                         Exp 1 Social Information Games
            High     5        1-5      0.60     1        9     67

4.4    Experimental Predictions
Our treatments allow us to evaluate a number of predictions concerning policy maker,
citizen behavior, and the e¤ectiveness of protests. We expect that when conict is high
in the Baseline games, citizens'protests will be less informative, that policy makers will
respond to protests less, and that policy makers will make less e¢ cient choices. In contrast,
we expect that when citizens share social information, citizens' protests will be more
informative, that policy makers will respond to protests more, and that policy makers
will make more e¢ cient chocies. Thus, with respect to citizens, we expect their signaling
behavior to be least informative in the High Conict Baseline games as compared to the
Low Conict Baseline games and the High Conict Social Information games. Similarly,
we expect that policy makers will respond to the protests of citizens the least in the High
Conict Baseline games as compared to the other two. Finally, as a consequence of the
behavior of citizens and policy makers, we expect that policy makers will make the least


                                             25
e¢ cient choices in the High Conict Baseline games as compared to the other two. These
predictions are summarized below:

Prediction 1 (E¤ect of Conict on Citizen Behavior) We expect that in the Base-
line games, citizens' protest behavior will be less informative in the High Conict games
than in the Low Conict games.

Prediction 2 (E¤ect of Conict on Policy Maker Behavior) We expect that in the
Baseline games, policy makers will be less likely to respond to protests in the High Con-
ict games than in the Low Conict games and will make less e¢ cient choices in the High
Conict games.

Prediction 3 (E¤ect of Social Information on Citizen Behavior) We expect that
in the Social Information games, citizens'protest behavior will be more informative than
in the Baseline games.

Prediction 4 (E¤ect of Social Information on Policy Maker Behavior) We expect
that in the Social Information games, policy makers will be more likely to respond to
protests than in the Baseline games and will make more e¢ cient choices in the Social
Information games.


5     Empirical Analysis of the E¤ects of Conict
We begin our analysis with an examination of the e¤ects of conict on citizen and policy
maker behavior and the extent that their choices support Predictions 1 and 2 above. First,
we consider how conict a¤ects citizen behavior.

5.1    Citizen Behavior and Prediction 1
Table 3 shows the raw data on citizen'
                                     s strategies representing the frequencies of protesting
conditioning in the individual signals by conict and number of citizens. We ...nd evidence
in support of Prediction 1. That is, we ...nd that while conict level appears to have little
e¤ect on the extent that citizens send messages when they receive a Gold signal, they
are much more likely to send message when receiving a Silver signal in the High Conict


                                            26
treatment. Thus, we ...nd that subjects' behavior does appear to be conditional on the
Conict level and the signal they receive.

         Table 3: Percent Citizens Send Messages in Baseline Game
     Experiment Number of Citizens Signal Type Low Con ict High Conict
       Exp 1           Five           Gold        89%          83%
                                      Silver      15%          35%
       Exp 1          Fifty           Gold        75%          82%
                                      Silver      14%          38%
       Exp 2           Five           Gold        92%          89%
                                      Silver      12%          40%


   But it is important to remember that the numbers in the table do not reect individual
subjects'signaling behavior, but their behavior in the aggregate, and do not control for
repeated observations by subject. Therefore, we conduct two types of analyses in order to
evaluate whether there are statistically signi...cant di¤erences across treatments in message
behavior: (1) We calculate the mean signaling behavior for each subject across rounds
and (2) We estimate probit equations of the probability a citizen sends a message in which
we control for repeated observations by clustering by subject and adding in controls for
the round of choice.
   In our ...rst approach, we calculate for each individual subject his or her messaging
strategy in terms of Mean Signal Di¤erence, M SDij for subject i in session j: To calculate
M SDij we estimate the mean message strategy for the player when receiving a Gold
Signal (and should send a message in the Low Conict Treatment) and the mean message
strategy for that player when receiving a Silver Signal (and should not send a message
in the Low Conict Treatment) and ...nd the di¤erence between the two. That is, if a
subject sends a message in a round we coded that choice with a 1 and if a subject did
not we coded that choice with a 0. We then calculated the average messaging strategy
for each subject for all the rounds that he or she received a Gold Signal and the average
for each subject for all the rounds that he or she received a Silver Signal. If the subject
always sent a message when she received a Gold Signal and never sent a message when
she received a Silver Signal, then the ...rst average equals 1, the second average equals 0
and the M SDij for that subject equals 1. Hence, the closer the M SDij is to 1, the more
informative the subject'
                       s signaling strategy.

                                             27
            Figures 1a,b: E¤ects of Treatment on Mean Signal Di¤erence
                                        (a) Exp 1 Results




                                        (b) Exp 2 Results




       Figures 1a,b below present the mean of the M SDij with con...dence intervals by treat-
ment and numbers of citizens. In our statistical comparisons we use both parameteric
(t statistic) and nonparametric (Mann-Whitney z statistic) measures. We ...nd that the
M SDij in the Low Conict treatment is signi...cantly greater than in the High Conict
treatment in all cases in both Exp 1 and Exp 2, supporting Prediction 1 (note that the
only slight exception is that the ...fty citizen case is signi...cant only in the nonparametric
test and for a one-tailed version of the parametric test).23
  23
    The t statistic for the comparison of Low Con    ict with High Con   ict for ...ve citizens in Exp 1 =
3.27, Pr = 0.00 and in Exp 2 is 3.12, Pr = 0.00 . The t statistic for the ...fty citizen comparison of Low
and High is 1.88, Pr = 0.06. The z statistics for the nonparametric tests = 2.71, Pr = 0.01; = 2.93, Pr
= 0.00; and 2.35, Pr = 0.02; respectively.

                                                   28
      In our second approach we estimate probit equations of the probability a citizen sends
a message in which we control for repeated observations by clustering by subject and
adding controls for rounds of choice which are reported in Tables B1 and B2 in the
Supplemental Online Appendix B and Figures 2a,b below. The null case in the probits
is the Low Conict treatment with a Silver Signal. For each treatment we measure both
the treatment and the e¤ect of the signal. In unreported analyses we estimated of the
...ve and ...fty citizen cases in Exp 2 separately and ...nd no di¤erences in the qualitative
relationships observed, so we report a combined estimation here.
      We ...nd that in the Low Conict treatment subjects are as expected signi...cantly more
likely to send a message if they receive a Gold Signal as compared to when they receive a
Silver Signal in both Exp 1 and Exp 2. We also ...nd that in the High Conict treatment
subjects are signi...cantly more likely to send messages with a Gold Signal, but that that
they are also signi...cantly more likely to send messages when they receive a Silver Signal
than those in the Low Conict treatment, as expected in both Exp 1 and Exp 2. Thus,
the messages of subjects in the High Conict treatment are more noisy and more messages
are sent in these treatments. We hence ...nd strong support for Prediction 1, our High
Conict treatment signi...cantly reduces the informativeness of citizens'protests.
      The fact that citizens use strategies that are more informative than predicted in equi-
librium is not surprising in light of the existing experimental literature on cheap talk.
The game we are studying is indeed a cheap talk game in which the citizens are senders
and the policy maker is the receiver. The experimental literature on cheap talk has been
unanimous in showing that in these games senders tend to be informative even when not
predicted by the theory, though the comparative statics of cheap talk games with respect
to the informativeness of the strategies is typically in line with theoretical predictions:
exactly what we ...nd here.24 The only di¤erence is that here we are considering a more
general game in which there are multiple (potentially an arbitrarily large number of)
senders, and the senders'signals and the policy space are binary.

           Figures 2a,b: E¤ects Estimated in Probits of Citizens'Choices
                                        (a) Exp 1 Results
 24
      See footnote 13 for references.




                                               29
             (b) Exp 2 Results (Five and Fifty Citizens Combined)




5.2     Policy Maker Behavior and Prediction 2
5.2.1   How Responsive are Policy Makers?

With protests less informative, how is policy maker behavior a¤ected? According to
Prediction 2, we expect policy makers to be less responsive to citizen protests and to
make less e¢ cient choices in the Baseline games when conict increases. If policy makers
are responsive to protests, then we expect them to be more likely to choose the Gold
Jar as the number of protests increases. If the policy maker is responsive, we expect
the relationship to be nonlinear: when the number of protesters is su¢ ciently small, the
marginal e¤ect of a protester is zero since the policy-maker remains on policy B , the ex
ante optimal policy; when the number of protesters is very high, the marginal e¤ect of a
protester is still zero, since the policy maker has already shifted to policy A. It is only



                                            30
for intermediate numbers of protesters that a marginal protester can have a large impact
on the probability of a decision.
   We have not explicitly computed the exact threshold on the number of protesters
at which the policy maker shifts from B to A since it is not necessary for us to test the
qualitative implication of the theory and it would be unrealistic to assume that the citizens
adopt the exact theoretical threshold: more realistically we should expect a distribution
of thresholds centered at the midpoints; and therefore to ...nd a small marginal e¤ect for
low and high levels of turnout; and a higher marginal e¤ect for intermediate values. We
therefore considered 3 regions: a low turnout region with 0 to 2 protesters with n = 5
and 0 to 24 with n = 50; a medium turnout region with 2 to 3 with n = 5 and 24 to
25 with n = 50; and the remaining high turnout region with 3 to 5 and 25 to 50 with
n = 50. We expect that the marginal e¤ect of a protester is higher for the intermediate
region: if we ...nd no e¤ect, it may be that we have selected the cuto¤ incorrectly and we
are underestimating the nonlinearity; if we ...nd the e¤ect, then we have evidence of the
nonlinear e¤ect discussed above. What we care showing in the experiment is that there is
evidence that the policy maker uses a threshold on the number of protesters and that this
threshold (i.e. the peacemaker'
                              s responsiveness) depends on the treatment as predicted.
   Figures 3a,b,c illustrate how the mean percentage of policy makers who choose the
Gold Jar changes as the sum of messages sent changes by Conict Level in both Exp 1
& 2. As the ...gures illustrate, we ...nd the nonlinear relationship expected. Furthermore,
we ...nd support for Prediction 2 in that policy makers are much more likely to respond
to protests as they increase in the Low Conict games than in the High Conict ones.
Hence, we ...nd strong evidence that policy makers are much less responsive to protests
when there is high conict in both experiments.
   The raw data supports our predictions, but are these di¤erences signi...cant? Since
we have repeated observations by subject and possible behavior changes over time, in
order to determine the statistical signi...cance of our results we estimate probit analyses
of the e¤ect of the number of messages sent by citizens in each treatment on the decision
to choose Gold (clustered by subject to control for repeated observations of subjects'
choices and adding in round variables). The results of the probit analyses are reported in
Tables B3,4 in the Supplemental Online Appendix B and shown in Figures 4a,b,c below.


                                             31
In the probit analyses, since we expect that the sum of messages will have a nonlinear
e¤ect on choices, we use a spline estimation procedure, estimating the e¤ects of increasing
the sum of messages on the probability a policy maker chooses gold for three separate
intervals. In the ...ve citizen case, we estimate the e¤ect of increasing the messages in each
treatment (Low and High Conict) in the interval 0 to 2 with the independent variables
Sum Msgs Low Conict 0-2 and Sum Msgs High Conict 0-2, respectively. We created
similar variables with the su¢ x 2-3 for the e¤ect of increasing the messages in the interval
2 to 3 and 3-5 for the e¤ect of increasing the messages in the interval from 3 to 5. For
the ...fty citizen case, we create similar variables with the intervals as 0 to 24, 24 to 26,
and 26 to 50.25 In the estimation the null case is when Sum Msgs Low Conict 0-2 = 1
or Sum Msgs Low Conict 0-24 = 1.
  25
    While the ...ve citizen case the best placement of the intervals is easy, in the ...fty citizen case we
compared di¤erent intervals with similar qualitative relationships as is reported here. We also investigated
other intervals in the ...fty citizen case, but more than three intervals resulting in high collinearity across
independent variables and other breakpoints had lower goodness of ...t.




                                                      32
 Figures 3a,b,c: E¤ect of Conict on Policy Makers'Responses to Protests
                                     (a) Exp 1 Results




                                 (b) & (c) Exp 2 Results




   As expected, we ...nd that the responses to the sum of messages sent by the policy
makers is highly nonlinear in the Low Conict case. The function of response can be
interpreted as representation of the empirical strategy    n   (Q) described in (4). We ...nd that
for both ...ve and ...fty citizens, the size of the e¤ect of moving from 0 to 2 messages received
is always signi...cantly smaller than the e¤ect of moving from 2 to 3 for all treatments.




                                               33
Figures 4a,b,c: E¤ects Estimated in Probit of Policy Maker Choices
      Null Case Baseline Game with Low Conict 0-2 & 0-24
                        (a) Exp 1 Results




               (b) Exp 2 Results for Five Citizens




                                34
                        (c) Exp 2 Results for Fifty Citizens




   Notably, we ...nd signi...cant evidence of a treatment e¤ect in the comparison between
Low Conict and High Conict on policy maker responsiveness, supporting Prediction 2
in all three estimations. In Exp 1, we ...nd that in the High Conict Treatment policy
makers only respond signi...cantly to increases in the sum of messages from 3-5. In Exp
2, although policy makers respond nonlinearly to the sum of messages with High Conict
payo¤s, the e¤ect of the sum changes from 2-3 (24-26) is signi...cantly less than the e¤ect
of the same variable in the Low Conict treatment for ...ve (...fty) citizens. Hence, we see
that policy makers are much less responsive to the sum of messages they receive under
High Conict than Low Conict supporting Prediction 2.

5.2.2   How E¢ cient are Policy Makers'Choices?

As is obvious in Figures C1a,b,c in Supplemental Online Appendix C, the number of
messages sent by citizens is an endogenous variable and a¤ected by treatment, so in order
to calculate a better measure of the e¤ect of treatment on policy maker behavior we
measure the e¤ect of treatment on the informational e¢ ciency of policy makers'choices,
which is also part of Prediction 2. In order to control for di¤erences in draws that may
occur between treatments as well as the number of citizens in the game (theoretically
we might expect more e¢ cient choices as the number of citizens increases), we used as
a benchmark the choice that would have been made by the policy makers if they could



                                            35
directly observe the citizens' signals.26 We then compared the choices made by policy
makers to this hypothetical informationally e¢ cient choice.27 If the policy maker made
the same choice as would have been made if fully informed, we coded those choices with
a success or 1, with failure coded 0. We then, for each policy maker, we calculated the
percentage of times they made the informationally e¢ cient choice in all rounds, which
we labeled as the policy maker'
                              s Mean E¢ ciency, M Eij for policy maker i in session j .
Figures 5a,b below present mean values of M Eij and con...dence intervals by conict level
and number of potential protesters in Exp 1 and 2.
       Figures 5a,b present a number of results that are supportive of our Predictions. In the
comparisons, we use both parametric t tests and the nonparametric Mann-Whitney z test.
We ...nd that, as expected, e¢ ciency is signi...cantly lower in both tests when we compare
the High Conict Treatment to the Low Conict Treatment in the Baseline game with
both ...ve and ...fty citizens in Exp 2.28 We ...nd a similar negative e¤ect of High Conict
on e¢ ciency in Exp 1, but the relationship is not signi...cant.29
       Furthermore, an intersting ...nding is that, holding conict level constant, we ...nd
that e¢ ciency is not signi...cantly higher when there are 50 citizens as compared to ...ve
citizens in Exp 2.30 This result means that decision of a fully informed policy maker is not
statistically more e¢ cient than the decision of a policy maker observing public protests
with n = 50 than with n = 5.


  26
     Although the program was relatively e¤ective in randomizing both the true jar and the signals, there
was still variation across treatments which would confound a comparison of simply whether the policy
maker chose the correct jar as a measure of e¢ ciency. Speci...cally, the mean number of signals that
matched the correct jar in the 5 citizen case varied from 2.86 in the Low Con          ict Baseline game in Exp
1 to 3.15 in the High Con     ict 1 Baseline game in Exp 2. With 50 citizens in Exp 2, the mean number
ranged from 29.2 in the Low Con      ict Baseline Game to 30.37 in the High Con          ict 1 Social Information
game.
  27
     Let m be the number of 1 signals (i.e the one for gold). A fully informed policy maker would choose
as follows: with low con    ict and n = 5, gold would be selected if m 3; with low con            ict and n = 50,
gold would be selected if m 26; with high con           ict and n = 5, gold would be selected if m 4; with
high con   ict and n = 5, gold would be selected if m 27.
  28
      The t statistic for the comparison of Low Con         ict with High Con    ict with 5 citizens in Exp 2 =
4.31, Pr = 0.00 and the z statistic = 4.06, Pr = 0.00. For the 50 citizen case the two statistics are 2.07,
Pr = 0.04 and 3.05, Pr = 0.00, respectively.
  29
     The t statistic = 0.72, Pr = 0.47 for two-tailed test. The z statistic for the Mann-Whitney test =
0.59, Pr = 0.55.
  30
     The t statistic for the comparison of ...ve and ...fty citizens in the baseline game under the low con    ict
treatment = 1.78, Pr = 0.08 and for the high con         ict treatment = 0.56, Pr = 0.58. The z statistics for
the two comparisons = 1.27, Pr = 0.20 and 0.34, Pr = 0.73.


                                                       36
                  Figures 5a,b: Mean E¢ ciency by Treatment
                                  (a) Exp 1 Results




                                  (b) Exp 2 Results




5.3    E¤ects of Conict: Summary
We ...nd signi...cant e¤ects of conict on citizen behavior in support of Prediction 1 in
both Exp 1 and 2. Citizens'messaging is signi...cantly more noisy when conict is high
than it is low. We also ...nd support for Prediction 2, policy makers are less responsive
to citizen protests when conict is high than when it is low. We ...nd some evidence of
less e¢ cient policy choices with high conict in Exp 2 and suggestive evidence in Exp 1.
Our results suggest then that conict does reduce the e¤ectiveness of protests, even in
a common value setting where if the truth were known there would be no disagreement
between citizens and the policy maker.

                                           37
6     E¤ects of Social Information on Citizen Behavior
Our theoretical analysis suggests that if citizens were divided into social groups and shared
their information, even when there is high conict, protests are informative and can be
e¤ective in improving policy making. In this section we evaluate our Predictions 3 and
4, begininig with Prediction 3, that citizen protests will be more informative with social
information.

6.1    Citizen Behavior and Prediction 3
In the previous Section we evaluated how informative citizen choices were by comparing
their M SDij by conict level. However, such a comparison does not make sense as a
way of measuring the informativeness of citizen behavior under social information since
citizens'behavior should not be a function of their individual signals, but the distribution
of signals in their social groups. Therefore, to compare the informativeness of citizen
behavior in the Baseline and Social Information games, we calculate a measure of how
much citizens respond to the distributions on average which we label subjects' Mean
Distribution Di¤erence or M DDij . To calculate M DDij we estimate the mean messaging
strategy for a citizen when the majority of signals in her social group is Gold (and should
send a message in the Social Information game) and the mean messaging strategy for that
citizen when the majority of signals in her social group is Silver (and should not send a
message in the Social Information game) and ...nd the di¤erence between the two for each
citizen. That is, if a citizen sends a message in a round we coded that choice with a 1
and if a citizen did not we coded that choice with a 0. We then calculated the average
messaging strategy for each citizen for all the rounds in which the majority of signals were
Gold and the average for each citizen for all the rounds in which the majority of signals
were Silver and calculated the di¤erence. If the citizen always sent a message when the
majority were Gold and never sent a message when the majority were Silver, then the ...rst
average equals 1, the second average equals 0 and the M DDij for that subject equals 1.
Hence, the closer the M DDij is to 1, the more informative the citizen'
                                                                      s signaling strategy
of the distribution of signals in the subject'
                                             s social group. We calculated this di¤erence for
citizens in the Baseline and Social Information games. If with Social Information citizens'
messaging is more informative, then the M DDij should be signi...cantly higher than in

                                             38
the Baseline games. In the Baseline games when the number of citizens were ...ve, the
social group is the total group of citizens. We randomly assigned citizens to social groups
of ...ve for the calculation with ...fty citizens using the same procedure in which they were
randomly assigned in the Social Information games.
       Our M DDij measures are presented in Figures 6a,b. We ...nd that citizens are signif-
icantly more likely to send messages reecting the distribution of signals in their social
groups in the Social Information games than in the Baseline ones in both the lab and
mturk data and for both ...ve and ...fty citizen cases.31
       In addition to our calculation of our M DDij measures, we also estimated probit equa-
tions of citizen'
                s probability of sending a message as above in our evaluation of Prediction
1 as a function of social information under the High Conict payo¤s. Since we expect that
citizens will respond to the distribution of gold signals received in their social groups, we
used a spline estimation procedure similar to the one used in Figures 5a,b,c. That is, we
created variables Sum Gold Sigs Social 0-2 for the case where the number of gold signals
was between 0 and 2 and citizens received social information, etc. We created similar
measures for the Baseline games as well. The null case in the estimations is a Baseline
game in which the citizen received a silver signal. The results of these estimations are
presented in Figures 7a,b and in the Supplemental Online Appendix B in Tables B5,6.
As above, we clustered standard errors by subjects.
  31
    The t statistic for the comparison in the lab data =6.38, Pr = 0.00. The t statistic for the comparison
in the Mturk data for ...ve citizens = 2.79, Pr = 0.01 and for ...fty citizens =3.08, Pr = 0.00. The Mann
Whitney z statistics for the same comparisons = 4.87, Pr = 0.00; 3.38, Pr = 0.00; and 2.89, Pr = 0.00;
respectively.




                                                    39
     Figures 6a,b: E¤ects of Treatment on Mean Distribution Di¤erence
                                   (a) Exp 1 Results




                                   (b) Exp 2 Results




As in Figures 6a,b,c, our probit estimations provide strong evidence that citizens are
responding to the distribution of signals in their social groups more than their own signals
and signi...cantly more than citizens in the Baseline games in both Exp 1 and 2. Hence,
we ...nd strong evidence that citizens'messaging behavior is more informative with social
information.




                                            40
 Figures 7a,b: Spline Probits of the E¤ects of Social Information on Citizen
                                 Messaging Behavior
                                   (a) Exp 1 Results




                                  (b) Exp 2 Results
           (Silver Signal Social Information case dropped due to Collinearity)




6.2    Policy Maker Behavior and Prediction 4
We now turn to our Prediction 4, that policy makers will respond more to citizen messages
and make more e¢ cient choices with social information than in the Baseline games. As
above, we ...rst consider the extent that policy makers are responding more to the messages
they receive under social information and then address the e¢ ciency of their choices.



                                            41
6.2.1   How Responsive are Policy Makers?

Figures 8a,b,c present a summary of policy makers'tendency to choose the gold jar as a
function of the number of messages they receive. We ...nd that policy makers appear more
responsive in Exp 1 and to some extent with ...ve citizens in Exp 2, but do not appear to
be so with ...fty citizens in Exp 2.

  Figures 8a,b,c: E¤ect of Social Information on Policy Makers'Responses
                                       (a) Exp 1 Results




                                 (b) & (c) Exp 2 Results




   In order to determine if the di¤erences we observe are signi...cant, we estimate spline
probit equations as in Figures 4a,b,c for a comparison of the Baseline games and Social
Information ones under the High Conict Payo¤s, which are prested in Figures 9a,b,c

                                              42
below and reported on in the Supplemental Online Appendix in Tables B7,8. As above,
we ...nd the strongest evidence that policy makers are more responsive to citizens'protests
in Exp 1 (the e¤ects of increasing the number of messages from 2-3 is signi...cantly greater
with social information), our lab sample, and little evidence of greater responsiveness in
Exp 2 with either ...ve or ...fty citizens. These di¤erences may reect either the fact that the
subjects in Exp 1 received feedback after each round and thus had a greater opportunity
to learn the bene...t of responding to the protests, whereas such learning was not possible
for policy makers in Exp 2 or that subjects in the lab were more focused on the task at
hand. In unreported analysis of policy maker choices over time in the lab, however, we
...nd little evidence that the di¤erences we observe between treatments is greater in later
periods than earlier ones, which suggests that the di¤erence in behavior between our lab
and Mturk samples does not reect learning di¤erences.

     Figures 9a,b,c: E¤ects Estimated in Probit of Policy Maker Choices
                        Null Case Baseline Game 0-2 & 0-24
                                    (a) Exp 1 Results




                                              43
                             (b) Exp 2 Results for Five Citizens




                             (c) Exp 2 Results for Fifty Citizens




6.2.2    How E¢ cient are Policy Makers'Choices?

In Figures 10a,b we summarize the e¤ects of social information on the likelihood that
policy makers choose the jar they would have chosen if fully informed as to the signals
received by the citizens. We ...nd qualitative evidence that policy makers make the infor-
mationally e¢ cient choice more often with social information, but the di¤erence is only
statistically signi...cant in Exp 2 for ...ve citizens using both parametric and nonparametric
tests and for ...fty citizens using a parametric test.32
  32
     For Exp 1, the t statistic = 0.86, Pr = 0.40 and the z statistic = 1.06, Pr =0.30. For Exp 2, for ...ve
citizens the values = 3.22, Pr = 0.00 and 3.66, Pr = 0.00. For ...fty citizens the values = 2.07, Pr = 0.04
and 1.79, Pr = 0.09.

                                                    44
                  Figures 10a,b: Mean E¢ ciency by Treatment
                                   (a) Exp 1 Results




                                  (b) Exp 2 Results




7    Conclusions
In this paper, we have presented an informational theory of public protests, according
to which public protests and petitions allow citizens to aggregate privately dispersed
information and signal it to the policy maker. The model predicts that information
aggregation depends on the precision of the individual signals and the level of conict
with the policy maker. Even for large populations, information aggregation by public
protests or petitions is possible only if, for a given precision of the individual signals,


                                            45
the conict in ex ante preferences is su¢ ciently small; or, for a given level of conict, the
precision of the individual signals is su¢ ciently high. The important point however is that
even for the cases where information aggregation is impossible with independent agents,
we show that information aggregation is achievable when agents can share information
through social groups before taking actions.
   We have used experiments on Amazon Mechanical Turk and in the laboratory to
test these predictions. Our evidence con...rms that public protests allow for information
aggregation of dispersed information and can enable policy makers to improve their choices
when conict is low and signals are relatively precise. Both informed citizens and policy
makers react to incentives as predicted by the theory, so that information transmission
and the quality of policy choices improve when conict is low. When conict is high,
moreover, we ...nd that policy makers are signi...cantly less likely to make e¢ cient choices
and that protests provide less information to policy makers.
   Consistently with the theory, we have found that information sharing in social groups
signi...cantly a¤ects citizens'protest decisions and as a consequence mitigates the e¤ects
of high conict leading to greater e¢ ciency in policy makers' choices. Our experiments
highlight that social media can play an important role in protests beyond simply a way
in which citizens can coordinate their actions; through information sharing use of social
media in protests can lead to protests that are more informative to policy makers and
more e¤ective in changing policies. Limitations on social media use not only hurts the
ability of citizens to coordinate, but also the extent that protests aggregate information,
particularly when there are conicts between citizens and policy makers in preferences.
   One important caveat with this conclusion, however, is that in our design the infor-
mation sharing is automatic, not a choice of the citizens. Our focus in this study is to
examine the e¤ects of information sharing in social groups on information aggregation
through protests and policy makers'decisions given that such sharing occurs, rather than
studying the decisions that citizens make in choosing whether to share information in
social groups or not. In our design citizens all have common interests and therefore we
would expect that information sharing would occur if a choice, since there would be no
gain from withholding their own signals from their colleagues. Our design also abstracts
away from the possibility of false information being shared within social groups either by


                                             46
accident or maliciously. In order to fully understand the informational role that social
groups can play in protests, future research should explore how endogenous information
sharing and the possibility of false information a¤ects our results.




                                            47
References
 [1] Ananyev M., D. Xefteris, G. Zudenkova and M. Petrova [2019], "Information and
    Communication Technologies, Protests, and Censorship,"mimeo.

 [2] Ali N. and A. Bohren [2019], "Should straw polls be banned?"Games and Economic
    Behavior, 118: 284-294.

 [3] Austen-Smith, D. and J. Banks [1996] "Information Aggregation, Rationality, and
    the Condorcet Jury Theorem," The American Political Science Review, 90(1), 34-45.

 [4] Banerjee A. and R. Somanathan [2001]: "A Simple Model Of Voice," The Quarterly
    Journal of Economics, 116(1), 189-227.

 [5] Barbera, S. and M. Jackson [2018], "A Model of Protests, Revolution, and Informa-
    tion,"mimeo.

 [6] Battaglini M. [2017]: "Public Protests and Policy Making," Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 2017, 132(1): 485-549.

 [7] Battaglini M. and R. Benabou [2003]: "Trust, Coordination, and The Industrial
    Organization of Political Activism," Journal of the European Economic Association,
    1(4).

 [8] Battaglini M., E. Lai, W. Lim and J. Tao-yi Wang [2019]: "The Informational Theory
    of Legislative Committees: An Experimental Analysis," American Political Science
    Review, 113(1): 55-76.

 [9] Battaglini M. and U. Makarov [2014], "Cheap Talk with Multiple Audiences: an
    Experimental Analysis," Games and Economic Behavior, 83(C): 147-164.

[10] Battaglini, M., Morton, R.B., Palfrey, T.R., (2007), "E¢ ciency, Equity and Timing
    in Voting Mechanisms," American Political Science Review, 101(3): 409-424.

[11] Battaglini, M., Morton, R.B., Palfrey, T.R., (2008), "Information and Pivotal Voter
    Models in Large Laboratory Elections,"American Economic Review Papers and Pro-
    ceedings, 98(2): 194-200.

                                          48
[12] Battaglini, M., Morton, R.B., Palfrey, T.R., (2010), "The swing voter'
                                                                          s curse in the
    laboratory," Review of Economic Studies,77, 61­89.

[13] Berinsky, A.J., Huber, G.A., and Lenz, G.S. "Evaluating Online Labor Markets for
    Experimental Research: Amazon.com'
                                     s Mechanical Turk. "Political Analysis (2012),
    20 (3), 351-368.

[14] Blume, A., D. V. DeJong, Y. Kim, and G. B. Sprinkle [1998]. "Experimental Evidence
    on the Evolution of the Meaning of Messages in Sender Recevier Games." American
    Economic Review, 88: 1323-1340.

[15] Boix C, Svolik MW. (2013): "The foundations of limited authoritarian government:
    institutions and powersharing in dictatorships," Journal of Politics, 75(2):300­16

[16] Brennan, G. and L. Lomasky [1993]: Democracy and Decision: The Pure Theory of
    Electoral Preference. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

[17] Buechel B. and L. Mechtenberg (2019), "The swing voter'
                                                           s curse in social networks,"
    Games and Economic Behavior, 118: 241-268.

[18] Cai, H. and J. T. Wang. 2006. "Overcommunication in Strategic Information Trans-
    mission Games," Games and Economic Behavior 56: 7-36.

[19] Condorcet, Marquis de. [1785]. Essai sur l'application de l'analyse a la probabilite'
    des decisions rendues a la pluralite'des voix. Trans. Ian McLean and Fiona Hewitt.
    Paris (1994).

[20] Dickhaut, J. W., K. A. McCabe, and A. Mukherji. (1995), "An Experimental Study
    of Strategic Information Transmission," Economic Theory 6: 389-403.

[21] Du¤y J. and M. Tavits (2008), "Beliefs and Voting Decisions: A Test of the Pivotal
    Voter Model", American Political Science Review, 52(3): 603-618.

[22] Ekmecki M. and S. Lauermann (2018), "Informal Elections with Dispersed Informa-
    tion," mimeo.

[23] Edmond C. (2013) "Information manipulation, coordination, and regime change."
    Review of Economic Studies, 80(4):1422­58

                                           49
[24] Enikolopov R., A. Makarin and M. Petrova [2016], "Social Media and Protest Par-
    ticipation: Evidence from Russia,"mimeo, Universitat Pompeu Fabra.

[25] Feddersen, T. and W. Pesendorfer [1996], "The Swing Voter'
                                                              s Curse," American
    Economic Review, 86(3), 408-424.

[26] Feddersen, T. and W. Pesendorfer [1997], "Voting Behavior and Information Aggre-
    gation in Elections with Private Information," Econometrica, 65(5), 1029-1058.

[27] Feddersen and Pesendorfer [1999]: " Elections, information aggregation, and strategic
    voting," Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 96: 10572­10574

[28] Feddersen, Timothy [2004], "Rational Choice Theory and the Paradox of Not Vot-
    ing," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18(1): 99-112.

[29] Fischbacher, Urs [2007], "z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic Experi-
    ments," Experimental Economics, 10(2): 171-178.

[30] Guarnaschelli, S., McKelvey, R.D., Palfrey, T.R., 2000. An experimental study of
    jury decision rules. Am. Polit. Sci. Rev.94, 407­423.

[31] Kahneman D., P. Slovic and A. Tversky [1982], Judgement under Uncertainty:
    Heuristics and Biases, Cambridge University Press.

[32] Levay, K.E., Freese, J., and Druckman, J.N. "The Demographic and Political Com-
    position of Mechanical Turk Samples."SAGE Open (2016), 1-17.

[33] Lohmann, S. [1993] "A Signalling Model of Informative and Manipulative Political
    Action," American Political Science Review, 87, 319-333.

[34] Lohmann, S. [1994] "Information Aggregation through Costly Political Action,"
    American Economic Review, 84, 518-530.

[35] Los Angeles Times (2019), "Google workers protest suspensions of activist employ-
    ees," Nov 22, 2019. https://www.latimes.com/business/technology/story/2019-11-
    22/google-workers-rally-activists-protests



                                           50
[36] Manacorda M. and A. Tesei [2016] "Liberation Technology: Mobile Phones and Po-
    litical Mobilization in Africa,"mimeo, Queen Mary University.

[37] Morgan J. and P. Stocken [2008], "Information Aggregation in Polls," American
    Economic Review, 98(3): 864-896.

[38] Olson M. (1993), "Dictatorship, democracy, and development," American Polital
    Science. Review, 87:567­76.

[39] Passarelli F. and G. Tabellini [2015], "Emotions and Political Unrest," Journal of
    Political Economy, 25(3): 903-946.

[40] Pogorelskiy K and M. Shum [2019], "News We Like to Share: How News Sharing on
    Social Networks Inuences Voting Outcomes." University of Warwick working paper.

[41] Salas, C. [2019], "Persuading policy-makers," Journal of Theoretical Politics, 31(4):
    507-542.

[42] Schelling, Thomas (1971) "Dynamic Models of Segregation," Journal of Mathematical
    Sociology, 1: 143

[43] Sanchez-Pages, S. and M. Vorsatz [2007], "An Experimental Study of Truth Telling
    in Sender-Receiver Game," Games and Economic Behavior, 61: 86-112.

[44] Tullock, Gordon (1971), "The Paradox of Revolution," Public Choice, 11:89-99.

[45] Vespa, Emanuel, and Alistair J. Wilson. 2016. "Communication with Multiple
    Senders: An Experiment." Quantitative Economics, 7: 1-36.

[46] Wang, J. T., M. Spezio and C. Camerer [20100, "Pinocchio'
                                                             s Pupil: Using Eyetrack-
    ing and Pupil Dilation to Understand Truth Telling and Deception in Sender-Receiver
    Games," American Economic Review, 100: 984-1007.

[47] Wouters R. and S. Walgrave (2017), "Demonstrating Power: How Protests Persuades
    Political Representatives," American Sociological Review, 82(2): 361-383.




                                           51
8     Supplemental Online Appendix A: Proofs of Propo-
      sitions
8.1     Proof of Proposition 2
Assume by way of contradiction that an informative equilibrium exists and V < V (v; r).
De...ne Q = minQ        0   fQ s.t.     n (a; Q;        )           g. In correspondence to an informative
equilibrium, assuming its existence, it must be that Q is ...nite for any (...nite) n. By
de...nition of   , we must have:

                                         Bn (Q ; (a;                ))       1
                                                                               ,                                         (14)
                                         Bn (Q ; (b;                ))       V

For any informative equilibrium, moreover, we need that type t = 0 is willing to stay
inactive, otherwise all types would be active and no information would be revealed by the
citizens'actions. This requires:
                                                                         1
                       1        1                   1       1                      'n (a;    ;      )
                                          1     =                   1                                 ,                  (15)
                       v       (a; 0)               v       r                      'n (b;    ;      )

for any n. Observe that we can write:

    'n (a;   ;   )         (Q ) Bn 1 (Q            1; (a; )) + (1        (Q )) Bn 1 (Q ; (a;                            ))
                   =
    'n (b;   ;   )         (Q ) Bn 1 (Q             1; (b; )) + (1       (Q )) Bn 1 (Q ; (b;                            ))
                                                   "                                  #
                                                      (1   (Q )) BB n 1 (Q ; (a;
                                                                     n (Q ; (a;  ))
                                                                                   ))


                       Bn (Q ; (a;         ))          + (Q ) BnBn1 (Q   1; (a; ))
                                                                    (Q ; (a; ))
                  =                                "              Bn 1 (Q ; (b; ))
                                                                                      #
                       Bn (Q ; (b;         ))         (1   (Q )) Bn (Q ; (b; ))
                                                       + (Q ) BnBn1 (Q    1; (b; ))
                                                                    (Q ; (b; ))
                                                   "                                #
                                                      (1   (Q )) n nQ 1 (1a; )
                       Bn (Q ; (a;         ))            + (Q ) Q       1
                                                                  n (a; )
                  =                                "                                #                                    (16)
                       Bn (Q ; (b;         ))         (1   (Q )) n nQ 1 (1b; )
                                                         + (Q ) Q       1
                                                                  n (b; )

                       Bn (Q ; (a;         ))       (b;         )
                       Bn (Q ; (b;         ))       (a;         )

where    (Q ) is the probability that A is chosen if Q protesters are observed. The

following lemma is useful to complete the argument:
                                                                                   (b; ; )       r(1;b)       1
Lemma A1. For any pair of strategies                    ; , we have:               (a; ; )       r(1;a)
                                                                                                          =   r
                                                                                                                  1 .

                                                            52
Proof. Let           be the threshold associated to                    according to (8). Assume ...rst               1.
Then we have:
                                         (b; ; )   (2              ) r(1; b)   r(1; b)
                                                 =                           =
                                         (a; ; )   (2              ) r(1; a)   r(1; a)
                                  r(1;b)     (b; ; )
We will now show that             r(1;a)     (a; ; )
                                                       for     2 [0; 1]. To this end note that for             2 [0; 1]:

               (b; ; )   r(1; b) + (1                        ) r(0; b)   r(1; b) 1 + (1            )r (0;b)
                                                                                                    r(1;b)
                       =                                               =
               (a; ; )   r(1; a) + (1                        ) r(0; a)   r(1; a) 1 + (1            )r (0;a)
                                                                                                    r(1;a)
                                     r(1; b)    1
                                             =(          1)
                                     r(1; a)    r
where the ...rst inequality follows from the monotone likelihood ratio property. We con-
               (b; ; )
clude that     (a; ; )
                             (1
                              r
                                    1) for any ; .

      From Lemma A1 and (16) we have:
                                  Bn (Q ; (a;      ))         'n (a;     ;   )     1
                                                                               =         1                         (17)
                                  Bn (Q ; (b;      ))         'n (b;     ;   )     r
Combing this inequality with (14) and (15), we have:
                                     1
                 1       1                    'n (a;     ;     )        1          Bn (Q ; (a;     ))
                              1                                              1
                 v       r                    'n (b;     ;     )        r          Bn (Q ; (b;     ))
                                              1 1
                                                             1 .
                                              V r
This implies that V               V (v; r), a contradiction.

8.2      Proof of Proposition 3
Recall that strategies ;              can be represented by two thresholds ; q with                      2 [0; 2] and
q 2 [0; n + 1]. In the rest of this section, we will represent the policy maker'
                                                                               s posterior
 n(   ; Q; ), the pivot probabilities 'n ( ; ; ), and probability of action as                                (a; ) as,
respectively,     n(     ; Q; ), 'n ( ; ; q ) and            (a; ). We proceed in two steps.

Step 1. First we consider a modi...ed game in which we force the lowest type (i.e. a
citizen with a signal t = 0) to be inactive with positive probability and the highest type
(i.e. a citizen with a signal t = 1) to be active with positive probability. De...ne                             as the
solution to:
                                                                                       n
                             Bn (n; (a; ))   r(0; a)(1                  ) + r(1; a)            1
                                           =                                               =                       (18)
                             Bn (n; (b; ))   r(0; b)(1                  ) + r(1; b)            V

                                                              53
Note that (2) implies that             2 (0; 1). In the modi...ed game we restrict the strategy
space imposing        2 [ ;2     l] for some l 2 (0; 1). We now have a modi...ed game in which
  2 [ ;2       l] and q 2 [0; n + 1]. We can prove that an informative equilibrium exists
in this modi...ed game by applying the Kakutani ...xed point theorem (see the proof of
Lemma 2 in Battaglini [2017] for details).

Step 2. We then prove that if V              V (v; r), then any equilibrium of the modi...ed game
is also an equilibrium of the original game. Since the policy maker'
                                                                   s strategy space is
unrestricted, the strategy described by q is a best response for the planner given ( ; q )
in the original game. To show that the strategy described by                                  is also a best response
for the citizens in the original game, we proceed in three sub-steps.

Step 2.1. Assume ...rst that                2 ( ;2         l). In this case, by construction types t <
                                                                1 'n (b;   ;q )
t( ; q   ) and type t = t( ; q ) if (      a;t(
                                          (b;t(
                                                   ;q ))
                                                   ;q ))
                                                           <    v 'n (a;   ;q )
                                                                                  ...nd it optimal to abstain; type
                                 1 'n (b; ;q )
t = t(    ; q ) if ( a;t( ;q ))
                   (b;t( ;q ))
                                =v 'n (a; ;q )
                                                  is indi¤erent; and types t > t( ; q ) ...nd it optimal
to be active: this is exactly the action prescribed by                        . It follows that          is an optimal
reaction function given ( ; q ). We conclude that ( ; q ) is a Nash equilibrium of the
full game.

Step 2.2. Assume now that               =     in the modi...ed game. We now prove that either we
have a contradiction or           =     is a best reply in the original game. If                         = , then the
agent can be pivotal only if n          1 out of n          1 other citizens are protesting. By de...nition
of , we must have:
                                                                                                     1
                                                                                  n 1            1
                    'n (a;     ;q )   r(0; a)(1                 ) + r(1; a)                 1        n
                                    =                                                   =                        (19)
                    'n (b;     ;q )   r(0; b)(1                 ) + r(1; b)                 V

Since V      V (v; r), using (19) we have:
                                                                 1
                                                            1
                             'n (a;    ;q )          1           n     1 1
                                            =                           (               1),                      (20)
                             'n (b;    ;q )          V                 v 1 r

It follows that:
                                   1          1                   'n (a;      ;q )
                                                                                                                 (21)
                                   v      (a; 0)      1           'n (b;      ;q )
If (21) is satis...ed as an equality, then           =      is a vest reply for the citizens in the original
game. If instead (21) is strict, then a citizens, that after observing a signal t = 0, strictly


                                                           54
prefers not to protest, i.e.      =      is too small: it follows that             = 1 + l can not describe
an optimal reaction function for a citizen in the set [1 + l; 2               l], a contradiction.

Step 2.3. Assume now that               =2    l, to prove that ( ; q ) is an equilibrium we need
to prove that either        is a best reply in the original game, or it can not be a best reply
in the restricted game. De...ne

                     e( ) = min fQ 2 f0; ::; ng a:t:
                     Q                                            n (a; Q;    )          g:

          e( ) < n by (2) and, since V < 1, Q
Naturally Q                                 e( ) > 0. Consider the problem faced by
a voter of type t = 1. Using similar steps as in (16) we can show that:

                        'n (a;    ;q )        1                   e( ); (a;
                                                              Bn (Q                 ))
                                                      1                                                  (22)
                        'n (b;    ;q )        r                   e( ); (b;
                                                              Bn (Q                 ))

We conclude that:

                 1      1          e( ); (a;
                               Bn (Q                  ))       'n (a;   ;q )        1
                                                                             =            1
                 v      V          e( ); (b;
                               Bn (Q                  ))       'n (b;   ;q )        r

Implying that:
                        1       1                 1       1          'n (a;       ;q )
                                         1   =                1                                          (23)
                        v      (a; 1)             v       r          'n (b;       ;q )
We now have two possibilities. If the inequality in (23) is satis...ed as equality, then
   = 2     l is a best reply in the original game. If instead it is satis...ed as a strict
inequality, then and agent with a signal t = 1 strictly prefers to be active (so                       is too
large), implying that       =2     l can not describe an optimal reaction function for a citizen
in the restricted game.

8.3    Proof of Proposition 5
Note that the argument in Proposition 2 does not depend on the fact that we have two
signals only in T = f0; 1g. The same argument applies when we have T = f0; 1; :::; T g
with a distribution r(t; ) = a; b that satis...es the monotone likelihoods ratio property. In
                                                                                                    (a;t=0)
the more general model with T signals, the condition for Proposition 2 is V                     1    (a;t=0)
                                                                                                             v,
where t = 0 is the lowest signal. When we have m groups of size G and a binary signal
f0; 1g, the agents in the group share the signals and act as a single player: we have an
informative equilibrium in this game if an only if we have an informative equilibrium

                                                      55
in the game with m players, G signals with distribution BG (t; r(1; )). We therefore
conclude that we have an informative signal in the game with groups of size G if V
    (a; G signals=0 )
1    (a; G signals=0 )
                       v,   since the "lowest signal" in this case corresponds to the case in which
all members of the group receive t = 0. It follows that an informative equilibrium is
                            (a;t=0)
possible if V         1      (a;t=0)
                                     v   = ( 1 r r )G v .


9       Supplemental Online Appendix B: Additional Em-
        pirical Results
9.1       E¤ects of Conict
9.1.1       Citizen Probit Exp 1
            Table B1: Prob. Citizens Send Messages in Exp 1 by Conict
                          (Null Case Low Conict Silver Signal, Clustered by Subj.)
                                                             dy=dx Std. Err.            z   P > jz j
                   Round divided by 10                           0.02    0.01        2.30    0.02
             Low Con  ict Gold Signal Baseline                   0.58    0.03       17.40    0.00
            High Con ict Silver Signal Baselione                 0.21    0.05        4.10    0.00
             High Con ict Gold Signal Baseline                   0.56    0.03       22.20    0.00
                   No. of Observations                                          2,850
                        Pseudo R2                                               0.40
                         Clusters                                                57

9.1.2       Citizen Probit Exp 2
            Table B2: Prob. Citizens Send Messages in Exp 2 by Conict
                            (Null Case Low Con   ict Silver Signal, Clustered by Subj)
                                    (Five and Fifty Citizen Cases Combined)
                                                            dy=dx Std. Err.         z       P > jz j
                  Round divided by 10                        0.01       0.01        1.46     0.15
            Low Con  ict Gold Signal Baseline                0.56       0.03       16.54     0.00
            High Con ict Silver Signal Baseline              0.20       0.04        4.53     0.00
            High Con  ict Gold Signal Baseline               0.56       0.03       19.80     0.00
                   No. of Observations                                         5,730
                       Pseudo R2                                                0.28
                         Clusters                                               210




                                                            56
9.1.3    Policy Maker Probit Exp 1
        Table B3: Prob. Policy Maker Chooses Gold in Exp 1 by Conict
                  (Null Case Msgs Low Conict Base 0-2, Clustered by Subj.)
                                      dy=dx Std. Err.         z                P > jz j
           Round divided by 10        -0.02        0.01   -3.50                 0.00
        Msgs Low Con   ict Base 2-3    0.46        0.04   11.21                 0.00
        Msgs Low Con   ict Base 3-5    0.16        0.05   2.97                  0.00
        Msgs High Con  ict Base 0-2    0.00        0.03   0.16                  0.87
        Msgs High Con  ict Base 2-3    0.07        0.07   1.07                  0.29
        Msgs High Con  ict Base 3-5    0.10        0.05   2.22                  0.03
           No. of Observations                              2,650
               Pseudo R2                                     0.24
                 Clusters                                     53

9.1.4    Policy Maker Probits Exp 2


        Table B4: Prob. Policy Maker Chooses Gold in Exp 2 by Conict
          (Null Case Low Conict Zero Messages, Clustered by Subj., Baseline Games)
                                  Five Citizens Case                       Fifty Citizens Case
                          dy/dx   Std. Err.      z    P>jzj       dy/dx   Std. Err.     z    P>jzj
 Round divided by 10      -0.04     0.01      -3.82    0.00         0.01     0.01     0.92    0.36
 Msgs Low Con   ict S2     0.54     0.05      11.09 0.00            0.28     0.04     7.44    0.00
 Msgs Low Con   ict S3     0.05     0.04       1.10    0.27        -0.01     0.02     -0.73 0.46
 Msgs High Con  ict S1    -0.05     0.03      -1.46    0.14        -0.00     0.00     -1.26 0.21
 Msgs High Con  ict S2     0.34     0.05       6.38    0.00         0.14     0.03     4.83    0.00
 Msgs High Con  ict S3     0.04     0.04       1.02    0.31         0.02     0.01     3.05    0.00
  No. of Observations                   3,230                                   2,500
      Pseudo R2                         0.22                                    0.11
       Clusters                          110                                     100
                              S1: 0-2, S2: 2-3, S3: 3-5            S1: 0-24, S2: 24-26, S3: 26-50




                                              57
9.2     E¤ects of Social Information
9.2.1   Citizen Probit Exp 1
          Table B5: Prob. Citizens Send Messages in Exp 1 By Infor
         (Null Case Silver Signal Baseline, Clustered by Subj, High Conict Payo¤s)
                                    dy=dx Std. Err.       z           P > jz j
           Round divided by 10        0.03        0.01   3.72          0.00
            Gold Sig Baseline         0.40        0.07   5.86          0.00
         Sum Gold Sigs Base 0-2       0.01        0.02   0.42          0.67
         Sum Gold Sigs Base 2-3      -0.01        0.03   -0.43         0.67
         Sum Gold Sigs Base 3-5      0.05         0.02    2,40         0.02
             Silver Sig Social       -0.30        0.08   -3.82         0.00
             Gold Sig Social         -0.22        0.09   -2.37         0.02
         Sum Gold Sigs Social 0-2    0.12         0.03    3.98         0.00
         Sum Gold Sigs Social 2-3    0.33         0.03   11.50         0.00
         Sum Gold Sigs Social 3-5    0.08         0.03    2.32         0.02
           No. of Observations                            3,600
                Pseudo R2                                  0.26
                 Clusters                                   72

9.2.2   Citizen Probit Exp 2
          Table B6: Prob. Citizens Send Messages in Exp 2 By Infor
         (Null Case Silver Signal Baseline, Clustered by Subj, High Con  ict Payo¤s)
                          (Five and Fifty Citizen Cases Combined)
                (Silver Signal Social Information omitted due to colinearity)
                                    dy=dx Std. Err.       z           P > jz j
           Round divided by 10        0.00        0.01   0.31          0.76
            Gold Sig Baseline         0.43        0.04   10.13         0.00
         Sum Gold Sigs Base 0-2       0.04        0.02   2.07          0.04
         Sum Gold Sigs Base 2-3      -0.02        0.02   -0.79         0.43
         Sum Gold Sigs Base 3-5      -0.01        0.02   -0.38         0.71
             Gold Sig Social         0.03         0.03    1.08         0.28
         Sum Gold Sigs Social 0-2    0.02         0.02    0.90         0.37
         Sum Gold Sigs Social 2-3    0.31         0.04    7.00         0.00
         Sum Gold Sigs Social 3-5    0.06         0.02    2.84         0.00
           No. of Observations                            6,005
               Pseudo R2                                   0.17
                Clusters                                   210




                                             58
9.2.3     Policy Maker Probit Exp 1
          Table B7: Prob. Policy Maker Chooses Gold in Exp 1 by Infor
                  (Null Case Msgs Low Conict Base 0-2, Clustered by Subj.)
                                          dy=dx Std. Err.       z            P > jz j
             Round divided by 10           -0.03       0.01   -3.43           0.00
          Msgs High Con   ict Base 2-3     0.14        0.06    2.16           0.03
          Msgs High Con   ict Base 3-5     0.11        0.05    2.27           0.02
          Msgs High Con  ict Social 0-2    -0.04       0.03   -1.22           0.22
          Msgs High Con  ict Social 2-3    0.34        0.06    5.56           0.00
          Msgs High Con  ict Social 3-5    0.14        0.03    4.46           0.00
              No. of Observations                             2,250
                  Pseudo R2                                    0.19
                   Clusters                                     45

9.2.4     Policy Maker Probits Exp 2
          Table B6: Prob. Policy Maker Chooses Gold in Exp 2 by Infor
        (Null Case Low Conict Zero Messages, Clustered by Subj., High Conict Payo¤s)
                                  Five Citizens Case                   Fifty Citizens Case
                         dy/dx    Std. Err.      z    P>jzj   dy/dx   Std. Err.     z    P>jzj
 Round divided by 10      -0.04      0.01     -3.53 0.00       -0.00     0.01     -0.20 0.84
  Msgs Baseline S2        0.35       0.05      7.65    0.00    0.14      0.03     5.12    0.00
  Msgs Baseline S3        0.04       0.04      1.00    0.32    0.02      0.01     3.11    0.00
   Msgs Social S1         -0.00      0.04     -0.03 0.98       0.00      0.00     1.28    0.20
   Msgs Social S2         0.37       0.08      4.44    0.00    0.12      0.04     3.16    0.00
   Msgs Social S3         0.14       0.04      3.51    0.00    0.01      0.00     2.83    0.01
 No. of Observations                    3,225                               2,780
     Pseudo R2                           0.17                                0.08
      Clusters                           109                                 101
                              S1: 0-2, S2: 2-3, S3: 3-5        S1: 0-24, S2: 24-26, S3: 26-50




                                               59
10   Supplemental Online Appendix C: Additional Fig-
     ures
        Figures C1: Histograms of the Sum of Messages Sent
                            (a) Exp 1




                     (b) Exp 2 Five Citizens




                                60
(c) Exp 2 Fifty Citizens




          61
