                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           EFFECTS OF SCALING UP PRIVATE SCHOOL CHOICE PROGRAMS
                         ON PUBLIC SCHOOL STUDENTS

                                        David N. Figlio
                                      Cassandra M.D. Hart
                                      Krzysztof Karbownik

                                       Working Paper 26758
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26758


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We are grateful to the Florida Departments of Education and Health for providing de-identified,
matched data used in this analysis. Figlio acknowledges support from National Science
Foundation, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, the Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation, and the Institute for Education Sciences (CALDER grant), and the Shelter Hill
Foundation for assistance in building the dataset and/or conducting this research. We thank
Michael Dinerstein, Stefanie Fischer and seminar participants at the CESifo Economics of
Education Meeting and University of New South Wales for helpful comments and suggestions.
The conclusions expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not represent the positions
of the Florida Departments of Education and Health, nor those of our funders, nor those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. All errors are our own.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by David N. Figlio, Cassandra M.D. Hart, and Krzysztof Karbownik. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Effects of Scaling Up Private School Choice Programs on Public School Students
David N. Figlio, Cassandra M.D. Hart, and Krzysztof Karbownik
NBER Working Paper No. 26758
February 2020
JEL No. H75,I21,I22,I28

                                         ABSTRACT

Using a rich dataset that merges student-level school records with birth records, and a student
fixed effect design, we explore how the massive scale-up of a Florida private school choice
program affected public school students' outcomes. Expansion of the program produced
modestly larger benefits for students attending public schools that had a larger initial degree of
private school options, measured prior to the introduction of the voucher program. These benefits
include higher standardized test scores and lower absenteeism and suspension rates. Effects are
particularly pronounced for lower-income students, but results are positive for more affluent
students as well.

David N. Figlio                                 Krzysztof Karbownik
School of Education and Social Policy           Department of Economics
Northwestern University                         Emory University
2120 Campus Drive                               Rich Memorial Building
Evanston IL 60208                               1602 Fishburne Drive
and NBER                                        Atlanta, GA 30322
figlio@northwestern.edu                         and NBER
                                                krzysztof.karbownik@emory.edu
Cassandra M.D. Hart
School of Education
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave
Davis, CA 95616
cmdhart@ucdavis.edu
                                         I. Introduction

       Programs using public funds for children to attend private schools of their choice are on

the rise in the United States: As of 2019, 25 states, plus the District of Columbia and Puerto

Rico, had voucher or scholarship programs in place, many of them targeted to specific

populations like students with disabilities or low-income students (EdChoice, 2019). Among the

most controversial issues associated with private school choice programs involves what happens

to the students remaining in public schools. On the one hand, private school choice programs

could encourage public schools that might otherwise have been complacent to vigorously

improve the education they offer in order to avoid losing "clients" to a more-affordable private

schooling sector (Epple, Romano, & Urquiola, 2017; Urquiola, 2016). On the other hand, public

school students could be harmed by private school choice programs if the programs drain

resources from the public schools or if choice-induced sorting of students disadvantages those

remaining in public schools (Epple, Romano & Urquiola, 2017). The theoretical predictions

assume an established program, so it is important to know what happens to traditional public

schools as school choice programs expand and mature. We might expect to see the most

pronounced effects when a new school choice program is initially announced, as the programs

may be most salient when they are new and receiving publicity. But we might also expect the

effects of school choice programs to become more pronounced as the programs grow; as schools

see a growing share of students opting into choice programs, they may feel more compelled to

respond.

       The weight of the U.S. evidence shows small but positive effects of the introduction of

private school voucher programs on public school students' test scores (Chakrabarti, 2008;

Egalite, 2016; Egalite & Wolf, 2016; Figlio & Hart, 2014; Figlio & Karbownik, 2016; Greene &



                                                 2
Winters, 2007; Hoxby, 2003; Rouse et al., 2013; see Urquiola, 2016; Epple, Romano &

Urquiola, 2017; and Egalite & Wolf, 2016 for recent overviews of this literature). But these

studies are generally limited to the very immediate short-run effects, when both the pros and

cons of the choice program may be constrained due to the small number of initial participants.

What happens when the private school choice program scales up and the number of students

using private school vouchers grows to encompass a sizeable fraction of the overall student

body? To date, with the exception of an informative but single-market school-level analysis from

Milwaukee (Chakrabarti, 2008), we do not know much about whether scaling up private school

choice programs helps or harms public schools.

        One paper provides some evidence on the impacts of scale-up of public school choice

(charter) programs. Gilraine, Petronijevis, & Singleton (2019) show that North Carolina students

who experience an increase in exposure to charter competition due to new school approvals

resulting from the removal of a charter cap saw improvements in math (but null effects in

reading). While they see some positive effects, the degree of scale-up that they study is

considerably smaller than the degree that we consider here. In their setting, competition

increases in a relatively narrow window of two years, resulting in roughly a 25% increase in the

potential degree of charter school competition. Our longer time scale allows us to consider a

program that has grown almost seven-fold from its original size and currently serves a participant

population that is nearly 4% the size of the K-12 student population in Florida.1 Moreover, our

paper considers a different sector providing competition (private vs. public charter), explores




1
 Specifically, 108,098 students participated in the program as of 2017-18, compared to a K-12 public school student
population of nearly 2.78 million students (Florida Department of Education, 2018; Florida Department of
Education, n.d.a)

                                                        3
both cognitive and behavioral outcomes, provides extensive heterogeneity analyses, and is set in

a different state.2

         In this paper, we make use of extraordinary child-level data that matches birth records to

school records, and employ student fixed effects to evaluate a statewide school voucher program,

the Florida Tax Credit Scholarship Program, that grew over the course of about a decade from

less than one percent to roughly four percent of the state's student body participating. We exploit

differences in the initial competitive landscape faced by different schools ­ using five separate

measures of voucher competition introduced by Figlio and Hart (2014) ­ as well as differences

over time in the expansion and rollout of the voucher program, to determine whether students

attending public schools that face increased exposure to private school choice as a result of a

statewide voucher program experience educational (test scores) and behavioral (absenteeism and

suspensions) benefits or losses.

         We find evidence that as public schools are more exposed to private school choice, their

students experience increasing benefits as the program scales up. In particular, higher levels of

private school choice exposure are associated with lower rates of suspensions and absences, and

with higher standardized test scores in reading and in math. These results are not uniform: We

carry out an extensive heterogeneity analysis facilitated by matched birth and school records

from Florida, and find that the public school students most positively affected by increased

exposure to private school choice are comparatively low-socio-economic status students (those

with lower family incomes and lower maternal education levels). Nonetheless, we also observe

statistically significant but smaller gains for higher-SES students who are unlikely to be targeted


2
 Two other recent papers consider scale up of charter programs (Ridley and Terrier, 2018; Cohodes et al., 2019),
however, these papers focus on even smaller expansions in Massachusetts and only the former is concerned with
effects on students remaining in traditional public schools. They find small positive effects on test scores but do not
explore behavioral outcomes.

                                                           4
by vouchers themselves. In terms of potential mechanisms, we are able to rule out alternative

explanations related to changing composition of students remaining in the public schools and

effects on the resources that public schools have. Thus, in our view, increase in competitive

pressure resulting from increased voucher utilization is the more plausible channel for the

estimated gains in test scores and behavior.



                                        II. Florida Context
       We focus on the competitive effects of the Florida Tax Credit (FTC) Scholarship

Program as it scales up. Announced in spring 2001, the FTC program provides dollar-for-dollar

tax credits to corporations that donate to non-profit Scholarship Funding Organizations (SFOs);

the SFOs then use these contributions to offer scholarships to low-income students for use at

private schools (Florida Department of Education, 2018). Until recently, and during the study

period covered by this paper, in order to receive a scholarship the first time, students must either

have spent the previous full year in a Florida public school or be entering kindergarten or first

grade. In 2002-03, the first year of operation, the program spent $50 million to fund scholarships

for 15,585 students, with a maximum value of $3,500 for each scholarship. Initially, eligibility

was restricted to students with a family income no greater than 185 percent of the federal poverty

line (see Florida Statute 220.187 (2001) and its subsequent amendments), or $47,637.50 for a

family of four in 2019 dollars.

       The program has expanded along several dimensions since 2002-03, its first year of

operation. Table 1 charts the expansion of the program in terms of the designated funds for the

program, realized spending, the number of participating private schools, the number of students

enrolled, and the maximum scholarship level available. This growth may partially reflect a

loosening of the income-based restrictions. In 2006 school-year, the program introduced a rule

                                                 5
allowing students using the scholarships to continue in the program if their family income did

not exceed 200% of the federal poverty line. In 2010, this continuing-student eligibility

threshold was raised to 230% of the federal poverty line. In 2016, the eligibility restrictions were

changed to allow partial scholarships for entering students with incomes between 185%-260% of

the federal poverty line (Table 1). By the 2017-18 school-year, the program cost roughly $640

million and awarded scholarships to 108,098 students (Florida Department of Education, 2018),

or about 4 percent of all K-12 students in Florida.



                                           II. Methods

A. Data and Sample

       We draw upon data provided by the Florida Department of Education and Florida

Department of Health. The Department of Education collects data on all students, including test

scores, absences, and suspension data for students in grades PK-12. The Florida agencies merged

these data to birth records for children born in Florida between 1992 and 2002, providing

measures of families' socioeconomic status at birth, as well as neonatal outcomes such as birth

weight. Because we also received the same data on the set of children born in Florida but never

attending Florida public schools, we can characterize selection into our sample. We measure a

public school's competitive landscape of nearby private schools based on files maintained by the

Florida Department of Education, which provide locational data (latitude and longitude, as well

as addresses) for public and private schools as well as the grades that each school serves (Figlio

& Hart, 2014).

       Our sample is limited in two key ways. First, we focus on outcomes for students in grades

3-8, because test scores serve as one of our main outcomes and they are most consistently



                                                 6
available for this set of grades. The second is that due to data availability and in order to have

complete coverage of the rich set of measures provided by the birth records data, we restrict our

sample only to those students with Florida birth certificates (i.e., those students born in Florida).

Roughly 81 percent of children represented in Florida birth records are ultimately observed in the

Florida public school data, a match rate that tracks closely with the share of Florida-born

students who appear in Florida public schools according to the American Community Surveys

(Figlio, Guryan, Karbownik, & Roth, 2014).3 Records of children who started in a public Florida

kindergarten but left the public school system prior to the start of testing in the third grade or had

missing test score information in all years accounted for 14.8 percent and 0.8 percent of the

remaining matched sample, respectively.4 Additionally, 0.8 percent of the matched sample was

excluded from testing because of severe disabilities. This suggests that our data provide good

coverage of the overall universe of students affected by the competitive pressures from the

school voucher program.

         Overall, our main analytic sample includes student data for roughly 1.2 million unique

students in the 2002-03 to 2016-17 academic years, although we use several additional prior

years of data to characterize the initial schools for students in earlier cohorts as well. When we

refer to academic years in data for the remainder of the paper, we will refer to spring of the

academic year when the testing takes place.




3
  It is noteworthy that the voucher program's scale-up affected who shows up in public schools to begin with. As
we discuss in Appendix A, in areas with greater competition, we see a diminishing share of students coming from
lower-income families enrolling in public schools, consistent with the means-testing criteria for program eligibility.
4
  Leaving the public school system between kindergarten and the commencement of testing in grade 3 is not
consistently correlated ­ in terms of sign and statistical significance ­ with competitive pressures faced at entry into
the school system, suggesting that attrition from the sample is not endogenous to exposure to competitive pressure.

                                                           7
B. Models

        We estimate the effects of expansions of school choice programs by estimating within-

student models of the following form:

                     "#$%& = & × #% + "% + $& + "#$%&

where Yisglt captures an outcome measure for student i who entered the FLDOE data in grade one

school s, observed in grade g corresponding to school level (elementary or middle school) l in

year t, il is a student- by-school level fixed effect that allows separate within-student effects for

elementary school (grades 3-5) and middle school (grades 6-8), but constrains school effects to

be determined by schools that we anticipate students attending given their first grade

placement.5,6 The term gt is a grade-by-year fixed effect. We include robust standard errors

(eisglt) clustered by student's first-grade school.

        The coefficient of interest is , which estimates the interaction between a measure,

Expansiont, that captures the degree of program use statewide in year t, and a measure,

Competitionsl, that captures whether each student's school is expected to face an above-median

or below-median degree of competitive pressure, based on the pre-program competitive

landscape. Importantly, for reasons we describe below in the Competition Measures section, the

competitive pressure measures that we expect each student's school to face are projected based



5
  We focus on first grade rather than kindergarten because first grade is the first mandated grade of attendance in
Florida. In practice, there is extremely high correspondence between kindergarten school attendance and first grade
school attendance observed in the Florida data. As explained below we anchor each student to their grade one school
and then rely on empirically observed flows of students between elementary and middle schools. Therefore, a school
effect itself is not identified in this equation given the individual student fixed effects.
6
  Since our model includes individual fixed effects, it is problematic to further include lagged test scores in this
estimation, which could presumably account for dynamic responses of cognitive skills to competitive pressures,
because coefficient on bwillbeinconsistentlyestimated(Nickell,1981). Nonetheless, since our sample sizes are
very large, we have also estimated models with once-lagged test scores as control variable. This analysis produces,
if anything, more positive estimates in the range of 0.2 to 1.0 percent of a standard deviation as compared to our
baseline results of 0.3 to 0.7 percent of a standard deviation per 10 percent increase in the program size. Thus, we
conclude that our results are robust to this specification check.

                                                         8
on the school that each child initially attends in first grade, rather than the actual school attended

in any given grade, and we project these different measures based on whether the child is in

elementary or middle school. This helps us avoid identifying off of changes in competitive

pressure generated by endogenous moves by students. The competitive pressure measures are

further based on pre-program competitive landscapes, as explored in Figlio & Hart (2014), rather

than the actual competitive landscapes after the voucher program is introduced because the latter

may be endogenous to public school quality. Given this design, the student-level fixed effect

implicitly holds the initial level of pre-program competition constant within each student-by-

school level cell. This means that the effect for the interaction term is identified off of program

expansion rather than by any movement of the students between schools, or off the introduction

of new private schools in response to the incentives introduced by the voucher program. Thus,

the coefficient of interest describes whether expansion matters more for schools with higher

initial degrees of competitive pressure than for schools with relatively little initial competitive

pressure. We multiply our estimates by 100 to ease interpretation of effect sizes in our figures

and tables.



C. Measures

        Outcomes. Our main cognitive outcomes rely on standardized measures of math and

reading scores for 3rd-8th grade students on Florida's state tests. We standardize each test within

year and grade7 using our empirical sample of Florida-born students to maintain consistency

across years, but the results are robust to using measures available for a subset of our sample


7
 This is especially important due to several changes in the structure of the tests over the period covered by our
analysis. The Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test (FCAT) was replaced by an updated version (FCAT 2.0) in
2010-11, and then by the Florida Standards Assessments (FSA) in 2014-15 (Florida Department of Education,
n.d.b).

                                                        9
years that are standardized on the whole-state population. We use school years 2002-03 to 2013-

14 and 2002-03 to 2016-17 for mathematics and reading, respectively. This discordance comes

from the fact that, in mathematics, more advanced students were able to exercise more choice

about which assessments to take starting in school year 2014-15; for instance, students taking

Algebra I in eighth grade could take an algebra-specific examination rather than an examination

on 8th grade math generally. We therefore exclude the years with less consistency in tests from

our analysis. We also construct the measure of averaged mathematics and reading test scores for

each student for school years 2002-03 to 2013-14.8

        Another major contribution of our paper is to explore effects of competitive pressure on a

novel set of behavioral outcomes: likelihood of being suspended and absence rates. Our

suspension measure is an indicator variable for whether a student has ever been suspended in a

given school year, while our absence measure captures the share of days that a student is

reported absent net of days they are suspended. Thus, the former can be thought of as an

indicator for more serious disciplinary problems while the latter is a measure of truancy. We

observe suspension and absenteeism outcomes through the 2011-12 school-year.

        Competition. Following Figlio & Hart (2014), we use five measures to capture the

degree of competitive pressure that each school is likely to face. The "Density" measure

captures the number of private schools serving the same grade range of students (i.e., elementary

or middle school grades) within a five-mile radius of each public school. The "Distance"

measure captures the distance between each public school and the nearest private competitor

serving the same grade range; this measure is multiplied by -1 so that a positive sign on the



8
 In the main regression for years 2002-03 to 2013-14, 98.8 percent of observations have both math and reading
scores, 0.3 percent have only math, and 0.9 percent have only reading. By comparison in years 2014-15 to 2016-17,
74.7 percent have both scores, 1.7 percent have only math, and 23.6 percent have only reading.

                                                       10
measure will indicate greater competitive pressure. The "Diversity" measure captures the number

of different religious denominational categories represented among the private schools within a

five-mile radius of each public school; we group each school into one of ten denominational

categories (including non-religious) for this measure.9 The "Slots" measure captures the number

of private school students served in the same grade range within a five-mile radius, standardized

by the number of grades served. The "Churches" measure captures the number of houses of

worship in a five-mile radius. This measure captures the underlying religiosity of the community,

which may be associated with demand for private religious education, as well as the possibility

that private schools may co-locate in the buildings that serve as houses of worship (Figlio &

Hart, 2014). This measure is related to others commonly used to capture demand for religious

education in the literature on private school competition, such as the share of a population that is

Catholic (Hoxby, 1994; Dee, 1998; Jepsen, 2002) or the density of Catholic churches in a

locality (Jepsen, 2002), but captures religiosity across a greater number of faith traditions.

         Because presenting all five measures is unwieldy for the purposes of robustness checks

and heterogeneity analyses, we also construct a single composite "Competitive Pressure Index"

measure based on a principal components analysis of the five aforementioned measures. The

principal component analysis produced a single component with an eigenvalue greater than 1;

the loadings for this component were used to generate the Competitive Pressure Index score for

each school. The component loadings generated by the principal components analysis for the

first two components are documented in Appendix Table A2.

         We make two important decisions in assigning competitive pressure measures to schools.

The first addresses the concern that the competitive pressure faced by a school in any given year


9
  The ten categories are Non-religious, Catholic, Protestant, Baptist, Evangelical, Non-denominational, Jewish,
Islamic, Christian Other, and Religious Other.

                                                         11
may be endogenous to perceived school quality; for instance, private schools may be tempted to

enter into markets where the public alternatives are of poorer quality (Arsen & Ni, 2008). In that

case, competitive pressure would be conflated with other unobserved factors plausibly correlated

with student outcomes. To avoid this problem, we measure the competitive pressure that each

elementary and middle school in Florida faced using the competitive landscape in place in 2000,

the last year before the voucher program was announced.

       The second decision addresses the concern that students may move between public

schools based on their perception of school quality. If these factors are correlated with

competitive landscape of schools, our within-student estimates would be estimated partially off

of the effects of these potentially endogenous school switches. To avoid this, we assign students

to elementary and middle schools based on the school that they attend in first grade. This treats

students as if they were in the same elementary school they entered in first grade, and thus

abstracts from any potentially endogenous moves. For students' elementary-school years, the

competitive pressure measures therefore capture the pre-policy competitive landscape of

students' grade 1 schools. For the middle school years, we create a weighted average of the

competitive landscapes that we would anticipate students to face based on 1) the flow of students

empirically observed in our data from each elementary school (grade 1) to each middle school

(grade 6) in Florida, and 2) the pre-program competitive landscape of Florida middle schools.

Specifically, for each student attending a given grade-1 school, we observe the middle school

that they actually attend, and we capture the pre-policy degree of competition faced by that

middle school. We then weight these measures with empirical flows between elementary and

middle schools to obtain the expected middle-school competition for each student based on the

grade 1 school they attend. Importantly, in our estimating equation the fixed effect  contains the



                                                12
interaction of an individual fixed effect with an indicator for whether the child is in a middle

school grade, so that the competitive pressure that we expect children to face as they progress

from elementary to middle school is allowed to vary with expansion.10

         Because our main interest is in whether effects from program expansion are more marked

in schools that face greater competitive pressure, we dichotomize each competition measure to

ease interpretation of the interaction terms. Thus, for each variable, the competitive pressure

indicator captures whether the student's projected school is above or below the median on each

competitive pressure measure. This median split is conducted at school- rather than individual-

level and separately for grades 1 to 5 and 6 to 8.

         Program expansion. Our main measure of program expansion captures the logged

number of students participating in the FTC Scholarship program in a given year. The

interaction of the logged expansion measure and the median-split measure of competitive

pressure can therefore be interpreted as the relative effect of a one percent expansion in the

number of students served in schools initially facing an above-median degree of competitive

pressure, compared to the effects of expansion in locations with lower competitive pressure.

         Student characteristics. We have a variety of student characteristics from birth records.

In particular, we capture student sex, mother's race (White, African-American, other), mother's

ethnicity (Hispanic vs. non-Hispanic), whether the child's mother was born in the US, mother's

marital status at the time of birth, mother's years of education, whether the birth was paid for by

Medicaid, maternal age at the time of birth, and information on the month and year of birth.

These characteristics are time-invariant and are therefore captured by student fixed effects in our




10
  In robustness checks we also estimate models where we assign the pre-policy degree of competition faced by
grade 1 and grade 6 schools separately, and likewise estimate models with student-by-school level fixed effects.

                                                         13
main estimating equation; however, we use some of them to provide extensive heterogeneity

analysis to further the understanding of mechanisms at play.

       In school records we also observe information on students' free and reduced price lunch

status (FRPL), which we use as another stratifying characteristic in our heterogeneity tests. This

measure varies within student across years but we focus our analysis on two groups of students:

those that were never on free and reduced price lunch through their public schooling career; and

those that were ever designated to be eligible for free or reduced price lunch.

       Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the full population of Florida births (column 1)

and our empirical sample (column 2). The comparison between these two columns makes it clear

that the set of children remaining in Florida to attend public school is negatively selected in

terms of socioeconomic characteristics compared with all children born in Florida. We are more

likely to observe children whose mothers are high school dropouts (24.9 percent vs. 20.9

percent), and less likely to observe children whose mothers are college graduates (14.7 percent

vs. 20.2 percent). We are also more likely to observe African-American children (23.3 percent

vs. 19.4 percent). At the same time, ethnicity, immigrant origin and maternal age at birth are

comparable in these two samples.

       In subsequent columns of Table 2 we investigate whether characteristics of students

differ based on the degree of the pre-policy competitive pressure faced. Columns 3 and 4

provide statistics for children whose schools are above- or below-median in competitive pressure

based on our Competitive Pressure Index. It appears that locations facing less competitive

pressure prior to program's introduction have more White students (68.0 percent versus 37.3

percent for schools with above median competition) and have markers suggestive of higher

socioeconomic status (66.6 percent ever on free or reduced price lunch vs. 75.8 percent; 65.1



                                                 14
percent of parents married at the time of birth vs. 54.6 percent). Interestingly, however,

composition of parental education is relatively similar across these locations. Panel B of this

table presents mean values of our five measures of competitive pressure and the combined

Competitive Pressure Index based on principal components analysis while panel C shows the

five outcome variables. Descriptively, it appears that children attending schools with above

median competitive pressure have, on average, worse outcomes than children attending schools

with below median competitive pressure. For example, mathematics and reading test scores are

9.1 and 10.8 percent of a standard deviation lower in the former as compared to the latter sample,

respectively. These patterns may be because lower-SES families (who tend to have lower test

scores on average) are more likely than higher-SES households to live in more densely-

populated urban areas (which tend to have higher degrees of competition). Regardless of the

explanation, these cross-sectional differences underscore the importance of our empirical

strategy that identifies competitive pressure effects based on the roll-out of the voucher program,

controlling for student fixed effects.



                                            III. Results

A. Main Results

       We find consistent evidence that as the voucher program scales-up, students in areas with

more pre-program competitive pressure see a significantly greater improvement in outcomes

than do students in areas with lighter pre-program competitive pressure (Table 3). While the

magnitude of the coefficients varies across competition pressure measures, this pattern is

consistent across all five underlying measures of competitive pressure (Panels A-E) for four of

the five outcomes that we measure: averaged math and reading (Column 1), reading (Column 3),



                                                 15
suspension rates (Column 4), and absence rates (Column 5). When we combine all the measures

into our single Competitive Pressure Index measure (Panel F), we likewise find statistically

significant increases in test scores and reductions in behavioral problems. Recall that the

outcomes are multiplied by 100, and thus, our results for the Diversity measure in Panel A

suggest that a 10 percent increase in the number of students participating in the voucher program

is associated with a 0.4 percent of a standard deviation greater improvement in combined

math/reading scores for students in schools with above-median density of private competitors,

compared to improvements for students schools facing lower degrees of competitive pressure.

This effect is larger for reading (about 0.7 percent of a standard deviation) as compared to math

(about 0.2 percent of standard deviation). We also find reductions in both suspensions and

absences, indicating that behavioral outcomes in the schools facing higher competition likewise

improve. The former declines by 0.4 percent and the latter by 0.5 percent compared to their

means in specifications using the Diversity measure. While the Density, Diversity, Churches, and

Slots measures suggest that expanded competitive pressure is significantly and positively

associated with math achievement, results are non-significant when the Distance measure is used

(Column 2). Nonetheless, large negative effects on math are unlikely: Based on a 95 percent

confidence interval, we can rule out negative effects of up to 0.2 percent of a standard deviation.

       The Competitive Pressure Index estimates presented in panel F ­ the estimates using our

preferred measure ­ imply that a 10 percent increase in the number of students participating in

the voucher program, in schools with above-median as compared to those with below-median

baseline competitive pressure, increases math test scores by 0.3 percent of a standard deviation.

Reading gains are larger at over 0.7 percent of a standard deviation. At the same time,

suspensions decline by 0.9 percent relative to the baseline rate of 13.7% of students being



                                                16
suspended, while absence rates decline by 0.6 percent relative to the baseline absence rate of

5.0%. Since this measure combines all the competitive inputs into a single index, for

transparency and clarity we present subsequent heterogeneity and robustness analyses using the

Competitive Pressure Index measure, but we make results for all other measures available in the

Appendix as well.

        Our results are similar in pattern if we simply look at the changes in effects of the initial

level of competitive pressure over time (as the program was expanding) rather than as a function

of a measure of program usage. In other words, the key terms here are interactions of initial

competitive pressure level-by-year rather than interactions of initial competitive pressure level-

by-logged number of participants. Figure 1 shows the year-by-year marginal effects for being

located in a market with more baseline competitive pressure for each outcome using our

preferred measure of competition pressure­ the Competitive Pressure Index. In this analysis, we

standardize all five outcome variables to have mean zero and standard deviation of 100 in their

respective empirical samples, thus making the direct comparison of magnitudes across multiple

outcomes feasible.11

        The graph suggests that schools located in markets with more competitive pressure saw a

roughly 14 percent of a standard deviation greater increase in combined mathematics and reading

scores by 2014 relative to schools in markets with less-competitive pressure. These gains are

initially modestly larger for mathematics but this pattern changes in favor of reading by 2013.

Given that by 2014, the program had expanded by nearly 300 percent compared to its original

size, this coefficient is strongly consistent with our main table.12 With respect to behavioral


11
   This figure standardizes each outcome across the entire timespan studied, but versions of the graph that
standardize each outcome by year produce similar results.
12
   More specifically, given our estimate of 5.111 (on a logged competitive pressure measure where the combined
math and reading test score dependent variable was multiplied by 100 to show significant digits), the 284 percent

                                                        17
outcomes, improvements emerge later in the time period. Students attending schools in markets

with more competitive pressure saw consistently greater reductions in suspensions (absences)

relative to peers in schools facing less competitive pressure starting in 2006 (2009). We present

corresponding graphs for each competitive pressure measure and each outcome (unstandardized)

separately in the Appendix (Figures A1 to A3). The bottom panel of Figure 1 further illustrates

estimates for families ever versus never on free or reduced price lunch, and shows that our

effects are more pronounced for the former set. We come back to this point in our heterogeneity

analysis below.

B. Benchmarking Effect Sizes

         One benchmark to contextualize the size of our causal estimates is the extent to which

expansion of the voucher program is associated with closing the gap between schools located in

high-competitive pressure and low-competitive pressure areas. Our descriptive statistics in Table

2 suggest that students in schools facing higher competitive pressures tend to have poorer

outcomes across all measures except for absences, which are similar in both groups. Those

poorer outcomes include lower math scores (gap of 9.1 percent of a standard deviation), reading

scores (gap of 10.8 percent of a standard deviation), combined scores (gap of 10.0 percent of a

standard deviation), and higher likelihood of suspensions (gap of 1.4 percentage points or 4.1

percent of a standard deviation). Given these figures and the effect sizes presented above, a ten

percent increase in the size of a voucher program would be expected to close between 2.9 and

6.8 percent of the test score gaps, and 9.2 percent of the gap in suspensions. The closure of these

gaps is especially meaningful because students with poorer average academic outcomes



increase in the size of the program would be associated with an 14.52 percent of a standard deviation increase in the
combined math and reading test scores; this is very close to the estimate of 14.46 percent of a standard deviation
presented for 2014 in Figure 1.

                                                         18
(including African-American students, Latino students, and students using free and reduced price

lunch) tend to be over-represented in schools facing higher degrees of competitive pressure.

       However, it is worth highlighting that, as illustrated in Table 1, the program has

expanded by much more than ten percent; the number of scholarship users was nearly seven

times higher in 2017-18 than in 2002-03--and thus the realized gains should actually be much

larger. If we use our preferred Competitive Pressure Index estimates from Table 3 (Panel F), we

would expect a more conservative doubling of the program size to result in a greater differential

improvement of 5.1 percent of a standard deviation in combined math/reading scores in areas

with high competitive pressure vs. in areas with low competitive pressure, and a 1.3 percentage

point greater decline in suspension rates (9.4 percent relative to the sample mean); these effect

sizes represent a meaningful change in the gaps in outcomes between schools facing higher and

lower degrees of competitive pressure.

       A potentially more intuitive set of benchmarks may also help contextualize the size of our

reduced-form results. For example, when considering combined math and reading, the mean test

score difference between students ever observed on free or reduced price lunch and those never

observed with that status is 73 percent of a standard deviation. Likewise, the test score gap

between children with high school graduate and college graduate mothers is over 60 percent of a

standard deviation, while the gap between African-American and White children is 62 percent of

a standard deviation. The same gaps in likelihood of being suspended are 12.2, 8.5, and 14.4

percentage points, respectively. Thus, it is worth noting that the program effects, even when

considering maximum observed scale-up, are still relatively modest compared to these larger,

long-standing gaps.




                                                19
       To further asses the magnitude of our estimates, it is also helpful to compare them to

other estimates in the education and human capital formation literature, and in particular to those

obtained using data from Florida. For instance, Figlio and Hart (2014), who looked at the

introduction of the program, found that a one standard deviation increase in the pre-program

competition pressure predicted a differential improvement in test scores of 1.5 to 2.7 percent of a

standard deviation in combined math and reading standardized scores. We can most directly

compare the present results to those if we draw on specifications that use continuous (rather than

median-split) measures of competitive pressures, which we show in robustness check presented

in Table 5, panel B. Those figures suggest that our conservative quantification, assuming

doubling (tripling) of the program, would result in a roughly 1.5 (2.9) percent of a standard

deviation increase in combined math and reading standardized scores. Thus, a doubling or

tripling of the program size is required to increase the salience of competition pressure--with

attendant benefits to public school student test performance ­ to the same degree as the initial

introduction of competitive pressures.

       A doubling of the program based on the preferred Competitive Pressure Index estimates

of 5.1 percent of a standard deviation effect from Table 3 is also comparable to or larger,

depending on the exact outcome and specification, when contrasted with effect sizes from

charter expansion studied by Ridley & Terrier (2018) and Gilraine, Petronijevis, & Singleton

(2019). It is further about the same as the effect of a 10-percent increase in birth weight (Figlio et

al., 2014), a quarter of the size of the effect of school entry cutoff on cognitive development

(Dhuey et al., 2019), and 80% of the birth order gap in reading scores (Breining et al., 2020).

More generally, it is equivalent to roughly 10-percent of the effect of child care subsidies on

children's GPA (Black et al., 2014). Note, however, that all these papers estimate total effects of



                                                 20
the treatment while our estimates represent gains in high-competition relative to low-competition

areas (thus providing lower bound on the total effect), where competitiveness of an area is

measured prior to program's introduction. Nonetheless, we feel that these comparisons should

help readers in understanding the magnitude of our coefficients.

       We view benchmarking the effect sizes off of a doubling of the program (i.e., a relative

measure of increase in size) as useful because no other program has expanded to the same extent

in absolute terms; however, as documented in Figure 1 the effective gains of Florida students

between first year of program operation (2002-2003 school year) and end of our data span are

much larger at 12 and 17 percent of a standard deviation in math (school year 2013-2014) and

reading (school year 2016-2017), respectively. Importantly, it appears that even after almost

seven-fold expansion and coverage of about 4 percent of K-12 population the test score gains do

not decline.



C. Heterogeneity

       We next address questions of whether different types of students differentially benefit

from increased competitive pressure, running our reduced-form regressions separately for each

subsample of students in turn. We present the results using the composite Competitive Pressure

Index measure for all five outcome variables (Table 4), and show the results for each underlying

competitive pressure measure separately in the Appendix (Tables A3 to A7).

       Results are generally consistent in pattern across all subgroups; however, the exact

magnitudes and statistical significance vary somewhat. Lower socioeconomic status students­

measured by free or reduced price lunch designation­ see larger effects across all outcomes.

Within test score outcomes, these differences are more pronounced for reading than for math.



                                               21
When we compare how the effects unfold over time as the competitive pressure increases from

year-to-year for individuals ever and never on free and reduced price lunch (panels B and C of

Figure 1), it becomes clear that irrespective of the exact outcome, the gains are larger in former

group than in the latter. Given that more affluent children should never have been eligible for the

program, however, the fact that the expansion of the program was nonetheless associated with

improvements for this group of children in more competitive landscapes suggests that the

benefits of competitive pressure are diffuse and extend, albeit to a lesser degree, to children that

the public schools are not at risk of losing to private schools due to the voucher program.

Importantly, the results are also similar when we stratify the sample by maternal education:

Effects are consistently smaller for children of mothers who graduated from college than for

children whose mothers attained less education.

       Similarly, we also can divide families into deciles of socio-economic status, using a

measure introduced by Autor et al. (2019) using the same Florida data that we use here. The

socioeconomic status composite index is created through a principal components analysis,

similar to our competitive pressure index. Specifically, the principal components analysis

generates factor loadings based on mother's marital status, age, and years of education at birth as

well as an indicator for whether the birth was Medicaid-funded and median zip code-level

neighborhood income at the time of birth; and uses these to construct the composite

socioeconomic status gradient index. We then separate the sample by SES deciles to observe

competitive effects across the SES gradient.

       Appendix Figure A4 presents coefficients associated with increasing competitive

pressure on students by SES decile. It shows that these effects are strongest for those families in

the bottom six deciles, but that expanded competitive pressure is associated with benefits for all



                                                 22
families except for the very top SES decile. Taken together, these patterns of results suggest that

voucher expansion may work partly through particularly stimulating competition near lower-SES

schools, competition-induced additional focus on lower-SES students (regardless of school SES),

or a combination of both.

       We also observe differences in magnitudes across racial and ethnic groups as well as by

immigration status. First, test score gains are very similar for African-American and White

children. The former group, however, does not experience significant behavioral benefits in

terms of absences or suspensions. Second, Hispanics experience larger gains in reading

compared to the other two racial/ethnic groups but smaller and statistically insignificant

increases in mathematics. It also appears that increased competitive pressure is particularly

beneficial for Hispanic students in terms of reductions in suspensions. Third, students with

foreign born mothers see a pattern of results comparable to that of Hispanic students. This is not

surprising given that Latino children are disproportionately likely to have non-native born

mothers in our sample (68 percent of Hispanic children in our sample has mother born outside of

the U.S., compared to only 9 percent for non-Hispanic children).

       Some of these results are somewhat sensitive to measures. For instance, the Distance

measure generally yields the weakest effects on student outcomes (Appendix Table A5).

Consistent with this weaker relationship, groups that experience more modest effects using our

preferred Competitive Pressure Index measure often show non-significant benefits to expanded

competitive pressure when we use the Distance measure. For instance, White students only

experience significant benefits to absence rates using that measure; their estimated effects on

other outcomes are of the expected sign but non-significant. Nonetheless, the pattern of results is

mostly similar in terms of direction--if not in magnitude or significance--using this measure.



                                                23
One exception from this rule are estimates for mathematics where six out of ten estimates using

the Distance measure have negative sign, and one ­ for children of foreign-born mothers ­ is

statistically significant. Interestingly, for these same children we estimate positive gains in

reading that are comparable to those in panel C of Table 3. Overall, aside from the Distance

measure, most other measures show similar results in terms of pattern and significance to the

preferred results presented in Table 4.



D. Robustness

       While our results vary somewhat across outcomes and different sociodemographic

groups, they are largely robust to different modeling decisions. We present a set of robustness

checks, using our preferred competitive pressure measure (the Competitive Pressure Index) in

Table 5 while robustness tests for each competitive pressure measure separately are presented in

the Appendix (Tables A8 to A12). Our main results from Table 3 are reproduced in Panel A for

ease of comparisons.

       A first set of tests looks at whether our results are sensitive to different constructions of

the competitive pressures and expansion measures that underlie the interaction term. Panel B

uses the underlying, continuous Competitive Pressure Index measure of pre-program competitive

pressures in our interaction terms rather than the median-split term. The pattern of results

remains the same, although consistent with the fact that this measure has a different underlying

distribution, the magnitudes of the coefficients are predictably different compared to results in

panel A. Panel C uses an alternate measure of program expansion, substituting a logged measure

of program funding in place of the logged measure of student participation. Results are strongly

consistent with our main analysis. As further documented in panel D, our results are likewise



                                                 24
unchanged when we assign the middle-school pre-policy competition measures based on the

actual grade 6 (middle) schools initially attended by each student, thus potentially allowing for

endogenous selection into middle school based on its quality. This suggests that our conservative

decision to anchor each student to the competition that we project based on grade 1-school

(proxied by empirically-observed transitions into middle school) is not consequential for the

results.

           Finally, our main results use all available data to generate flows of students between

elementary and middle schools that we then use to generate the aforementioned expected

competitive pressure measures faced by children in the latter set of institutions. This approach

may, however, be subject to endogeneity if these flows are affected by program expansion

differentially in areas with higher vs. lower baseline competition pressures. Thus, in panel E, we

investigate if our results remain unchanged when we generate our expected competitive pressure

measures for middle school-aged students using pre-policy announcement flows between

elementary and middle schools. Since our data do not go back far enough to track children from

grade 1 to grade 6 using only pre-announcement cohorts, we cannot execute this analysis based

on first attended grade but rather utilize transitions between grades 5 and 6 for school years

1998/99 to 2000/01. As evidenced from Table 5 this refinement is inconsequential and, if

anything, test scores coefficients increase in magnitude. Since this analysis necessarily treats

grade five schools as if they were first observed as grade one schools we chose to include it as a

robustness check rather than the main analysis.

           The next set of tests in Table 5 checks for sensitivity of results to the exact samples used.

Our earlier work (Figlio & Hart, 2014) used a sample restricted to students attending schools

with at least one competitor within five miles. In panel F we impose a similar restriction, and we



                                                    25
reconstruct the median split to reflect the exclusion of the schools that do not have a competitor

with 5 miles from the analysis. We find that the preferred results are robust to this sample

change. We next test whether our results change if we limit all models to the set of years for

which we have all outcomes available, ending our sample in 2011-12, after which we no longer

observe suspension and absenteeism outcomes (panel G). Results are likewise robust to this

sample limitation. Panel H uses the subsample of children for whom we observe student for six

consecutive years, when a normal progression would have taken them from grade 3 to grade 8.

Again, results are similar for this subsample.

       The final two panels (I and J) address the concern that our test measures in the main

specifications are standardized using the Florida-born sample rather than a statewide sample.

This decision allowed us to use a greater set of years, because we only have data to standardize

scores using the entire state population through the 2012/13 school-year. Panel I replicates our

main specification using our sample-standardized outcome measure and dropping years after

2012/13 school-year where we lack population-level standardized measures. Panel J substitutes

in the set of test score measures standardized using the whole state population. Again, these

results are very similar to our primary findings. The stability of these results across different

specifications gives us greater confidence in the reliability of our findings. Results are also

generally stable across different competitive pressure measures (Appendix Tables A8-A12),

although consistent with the generally weaker results overall, we see more sensitivity to results

in the Distance measure or for mathematics when considering Churches measure.

       A final concern for our identification may be that there are secular improvements over

time that happen to be more pronounced in areas with high competition, but that are occurring

regardless of the voucher policies. We refer readers to our earlier work on the introduction of the



                                                 26
FTC program (Figlio & Hart, 2014), where we show that trends in school performance prior to

the introduction of the FTC program were unrelated to the baseline competition levels; only after

the voucher program was introduced did schools in areas with higher baseline competition begin

to improve disproportionately. Thus, we are confident that our results reflect effects of the scale

up of the program itself differentially affecting schools in higher-baseline competition areas,

rather than reflecting any prior differential trends.



                                       IV. Alternative Explanations

       So far, we have suggested that the results found in this paper are due to increased

competitive pressure on public schools associated with voucher program expansion. However,

there may be alternative explanations to these findings. For instance, voucher programs may

change the composition of students remaining in the public schools, and these changes might be

related to the degree of voucher competition individual schools face. Voucher programs also

influence the resources that public schools have, and these resource effects might work in

opposite directions. On the one hand, the voucher program reduces funding to school districts

that lose state funding allocations for students attending private school. On the other hand, if the

vouchers lead to fewer students per grade, class sizes might plausibly go down in the public

schools. To the extent possible, we investigate these alternative explanations in this section.



A. Peer Composition

       First, consider the possibility that our results are due to changes in school composition

brought about by differing degrees of voucher competition. These composition changes could

result in observed impacts through peer effects associated with who remains in the public



                                                  27
schools. For instance, if students who leave public schools to use the voucher program tend to be

lower-achieving on average, then the loss of those peers to the private sector could leave behind

an easier-to-educate core of students, and result in positive impacts on student learning. These

compositional changes could produce benefits even if schools exert no more effort in response to

the competitive pressure caused by vouchers.

       To investigate this, we carry out an analysis to see whether schools facing increased

competitive pressure have students remaining in the school who would have higher predicted test

scores, all else equal, based solely on their background characteristics. Panels A1 to A3 of Table

6 and Figure 2 present the results of an analysis that is parallel to our main specification, but with

two key changes. First, this analysis is conducted at the school level rather than the student level

and accordingly uses school fixed effects rather than student fixed effects. Second, the

dependent variable is the average predicted test score in each school, with the predicted values

based solely on background characteristics of the students enrolled. That is, we regress

individual-level test scores onto student background characteristics measured at birth (child's

month and year of birth, sex, birth weight, gestational age, birth order, prenatal care start,

abnormal conditions at birth and congenital anomalies; as well as mother's education, race,

ethnicity, place of birth outside of U.S., state of birth other than Florida, health problems, age,

marital status and Medicaid-paid birth), and use the resulting coefficients to predict test scores

for each student. These predicted test scores are then collapsed to create a school-by-year level

averages, which generate an indexed value of the average test score that would be predicted in

the school and year, given only student background data. If we see that schools with more

competition also have student cohorts with greater predicted scores enrolled over time, this




                                                  28
would provide evidence that changes in student composition, rather than any effort by the school,

may explain the effects we documented above.

        Indeed, it appears that when we pool all years together the estimated competition effects

are all positive, however, they are statistically significant in only 7 out of 18 specifications and

they are generally small in magnitude. In fact, the largest estimated coefficient, for reading using

diversity measure, is more than 20 times smaller than the equivalent estimate for actual reading

test scores in Table 3. The estimates for our preferred competition measure - Competitive

Pressure Index ­ are even more negligible quantitatively at 18 to 35 times smaller than

corresponding coefficients in Table 3. Furthermore, Figure 2 documents that schools facing

greater competitive pressure under the expansion of the voucher program had student

populations that were likely to have somewhat lower test scores in non-trivial number of years

and specifications. This non-linearity could explain why many estimates in Table 6 are small,

statistically insignificant, and close to zero.

        The largest positive estimate in Figure 2 ­ corresponding to the Diversity measure for the

average reading score of the school in 2017­ is 0.25 percent of a standard deviation (b=2.51).

This coefficient is six times smaller than the corresponding estimate of competition pressure

measured by Diversity on student reading in 2017 (b=15.05) in Figure A1. The largest negative

estimate in Figure 2 ­ corresponding to churches measure for mathematics in 2011 ­ is 0.20

percent of a standard deviation (b=-1.96). This coefficient is about 4.5 times smaller, in absolute

value, than the corresponding positive estimate of competition pressure measured by Churches

on student math in 2011 (b=8.67) in Figure A1.

        Finally, it is worth noting that the non-linear pattern observed for predicted test scores is

in stark contrast to persistently positive and, if anything, growing over time effects documented



                                                  29
in Figure A1 for actual test scores. This increase in test scores is further notable prior to school

years 2015/16 and 2016/17 where we estimate positive and for some measures statistically

significant coefficients in Figure 2. When it comes to small negative estimates documented in

Figure 2, these would lead to underestimation of the effects of competition per se (net of

composition effects), and thus, if anything, our results for mathematics where this phenomenon

is more pronounced should be treated as lower bound. Overall, all this suggests that our results

are unlikely to be driven primarily by changes in student composition associated with increased

voucher utilization and competitive pressure effects, in our view, are the more plausible

explanation for the estimated effects.



B. Resources

       The voucher program could also have induced changes in resources received by affected

schools. We lack reliable data on most measures of school resources, and candidate measures

such as school-level measures of expenditures, when they exist, largely reflect either teacher

experience levels or student participation in special education (Lankford, & Wyckoff, 1995). But

arguably the most salient resource indicator ­ average class size in a school ­ is measurable in

the Florida data. We therefore explore whether our estimates of the competitive effects of

voucher scale-up are potentially due to changes in class size associated with increases in

competitive pressure. These may occur mechanically, to the extent that voucher programs draw

students away from the public schools they would have attended, or may be the result of strategic

decisions by principals to make the school more attractive to students and parents. We draw on

class size archives from 2006-2007 through 2016-2017 posted by the Florida Department of

Education, which report the average class size for each school separately for students in grades



                                                  30
PK-3, grades 4-8, and grades 9-12.13 For each school and year, we calculate the weighted

average class size at the school level based on the grade range served by each school. This class

size variable, varying at school-by-year level, is then used as an outcome in regressions akin to

those used to produce our peer effect estimates.

         Table 6, panels B1 to B3, shows the results of this exercise. Several patterns of note

emerge. Schools facing landscapes with more initial competitive pressure did have somewhat

smaller class sizes as the program expanded, though this relationship is only statistically distinct

from zero in one measure of competition (Diversity). If we look at the yearly differential effects

on class size based on initial competitive landscape, we see a more pronounced effects on class

size reduction (Figure 3). Coefficients are negative and statistically significant for most measures

of competitive pressure in most years. But, unlike Figures A1-A3, which show an increasingly

positive (negative) relationship between initial competitive pressure and student testing

(suspension and absences) outcomes as the program expands, the class size effects remain fairly

static over time.

         Moreover, the magnitudes of the coefficients are too small to realistically explain away

much of our main cognitive and behavioral effects. Consider the largest estimate of effects of

competition on class size ­ using the Diversity measure. Here, we estimate a 0.0042 student

reduction in class size per 10 percent increase in the program. To contextualize the expected

effects on test scores of a reduction of this magnitude, we make use of the 22 percent of a

standard deviation increase in test scores associated with a roughly seven-student reduction in

class size effect implied by the Tennessee STAR experiment (Krueger, 1999); this estimated



13
  Ideally, we would observe class size information starting in 2002/2003 school year, however, data for these earlier
cohorts are not available online. At the same time, we cannot construct class size using our registry data because
these are limited only to individuals born in the state of Florida.

                                                         31
effect is similar in magnitude to those found by Angrist & Lavy (1999), Chetty et al. (2011),

Fredriksson et al. (2013), and Lindahl (2005) in related studies. If we assume the same

proportionate effect would apply to competition-induced class size decrease, a 0.0042 reduction

in class size would imply expected test score improvements scarcely different from 0

(0.0042*22/7=0.013 percent of a standard deviation). This would account for only about 3% of

the effect of competition on test scores that we estimated in Table 3, where our coefficient on the

Diversity Measure implied a 0.42 percent of a standard deviation increase predicted for a 10

percent program expansion. For the other measures of competition, the explained share is even

smaller.14 Given that the range of results in the extant literature (e.g., Jepsen & Rivkin, 2009; see

Chingos, 2013 for a thorough review of the class size literature) estimate that class size

reductions of about 10 students produce improvements in test scores of between 0.05 and 0.22

standard deviations, and other papers (e.g., Leuven & Løkken, forthcoming) sometimes find very

small class size effects on other meaningful outcomes, the share of our estimated effects that can

be explained by class size reductions may be even smaller still. Thus, class size changes would

explain only a relatively small portion of the observed effects of program expansion presented in

Figures 1 and A1. While class size may be contributing to the observed positive effects of

competitive pressure on cognitive and behavioral outcomes, it seems unlikely to be a major

driver of the findings.




14
  Even the upper bound of the 95 percent confidence interval in the Diversity measure would imply that less than 6
percent of the estimated competitive effects could be due to class size reductions. For the other measures of
competition, the upper bound estimate, based on the 95 percent confidence interval of the estimates of competition
expansion on class sizes, ranges from 2.9 to 4.7 percent of the estimated competitive effects.

                                                        32
                                          V. Conclusions

       School choice programs have been growing in the United States and worldwide over the

past two decades, and thus there is considerable interest in how these policies affect students

remaining in public schools. Although we now have relatively comprehensive knowledge on the

immediate short-run effects stemming from the introduction of such programs, the evidence on

the effects of these programs as they scale up is virtually non-existent. Here, we investigate this

question using data from the state of Florida where, over the course of our sample period, the

voucher program participation increased nearly seven-fold.

       We find consistent evidence that as the program grows in size, students in public schools

that faced higher competitive pressure levels see greater gains from the program expansion than

do those in locations with less competitive pressure. Importantly, we find that these positive

externalities extend to behavioral outcomes-- absenteeism and suspensions--that have not been

well-explored in prior literature on school choice from either voucher or charter programs. Our

preferred competition measure, the Competitive Pressure Index, produces estimates implying

that a 10 percent increase in the number of students participating in the voucher program

increases test scores by 0.3 to 0.7 percent of a standard deviation and reduces behavioral

problems by 0.6 to 0.9 percent. We show that these results are robust to alternative plausible

ways of measuring competition and expansion, as well as to different modeling choices. Our

results are also consistent with past work showing modest benefits to the initial introduction of

voucher programs (e.g., Hoxby, 2003; Figlio & Hart, 2014; Egalite, 2016; Egalite & Wolf, 2016;

Figlio & Karbownik, 2016), while extending upon these findings to show the persistence and

growth of these positive effects as the program scaled up.




                                                 33
       Finally, we find that public school students who are most positively affected come from

comparatively lower socioeconomic background, which is the set of students that schools should

be most concerned about losing under the Florida Tax Credit Scholarship program. However,

smaller effects remain statistically significant ­ in most cases ­ even for students who are very

unlikely to be targeted by vouchers themselves, suggesting that benefits may come partially

through generalized school improvements rather than through improvements targeted solely at

voucher-eligible students.




                                                34
                                          References
Angrist, J.D., & Lavy, V. (1999). Using Maimonides' Rule to estimate the effect of class size on
       scholastic achievement. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114(2), 533-575.
Arsen, D., & Ni, Y. (2008). The competitive effect of school choice policies on traditional public
       schools. Arizona State University/University of Colorado at Boulder. Tempe, AZ:
       Education Public Interest Center.
Autor, D., Figlio, D., Karbownik, K., Roth, J., & Wasserman (2019). Family disadvantage and
       the gender gap in behavioral and educational outcomes. American Economic Journal:
       Applied Economics, 11(3), 338-381.
Black, S.E., Devereux, P.J., Løken, K.V., & Salvanes, K.G. (2014). Care or cash? The effect of
       child care subsidies on student performance. Review of Economics and Statistics, 96(5),
       824-837.
Breining, S., Doyle, J., Figlio, D., Karbownik, K., & Roth, J. (2020). Birth order and
       delinquency: Evidence from Denmark and Florida. Journal of Labor Economics, 38(1):
       95-142.
Chakrabarti, R. (2008). Can increasing private school participation and monetary loss in a
      voucher program affect public school performance? Evidence from Milwaukee. Journal
      of Public Economics, 92, 1371-1393.
Chetty, R., Friedman, J.N., Hilger, N., Saez, E., Schanzenbach, D.W., & Yagan, D. (2011). How
       does your kindergarten classroom affect your earnings? Evidence from Project STAR.
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 126(4), 1593-1660.
Chingos, M.M. (2013). Class size and student outcomes: Research and policy implications.
      Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 32(2), 411-438.
Cohodes, S., Setren, E., & Walters, C. (2019). Can successful schools replicate? Scaling up
Boston's charter school sector. NBER working paper 25796.
Dee, T.S. (1998). Competition and the quality of public schools. Economics of Education
       Review, 17(4), 419-427.
Dhuey, E., Figlio, D., Karbownik, K., & Roth, J. (2019). School starting age and cognitive
      development. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 38(3), 538-578.
EdChoice. (2019, February 12). School choice in American. Retrieved from EdChoice:
      https://www.edchoice.org/school-choice/school-choice-in-america/#
Egalite, A. J. (2016). Competitive impacts of means-tested vouchers on public school
        performance: Evidence from Louisiana and Indiana. Cambridge, MA: Program on
        Education and Governance Working Paper Series, Harvard Kennedy School. Retrieved

                                                35
       February 23, 2019, from
       http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.696.8049&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Egalite, A. J., & Wolf, P. J. (2016). A review of the empirical research on private school choice.
        Peabody Journal of Education, 91(4), 441-454.
Epple, D., & Romano, R.E. (2008). Educational vouchers and cream-skimming. International
       Economic Review, 49(4), 1395-1435.
Epple, D., Romano, R. E., & Urquiola, M. (2017). School vouchers: A survey of the economics
       literature. Journal of Economic Literature, 55(2), 441-492.
Figlio, D. N., & Hart, C. M. (2014). Competitive effects of means-tested school vouchers.
        American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(1), 133-156.
Figlio, D., & Karbownik, K. (2016). Evaluation of Ohio's EdChoice Scholarship Program:
        Selection, competition, and performance effects. Washington, DC: Thomas B. Fordham
        Institute.
Figlio, D., Guryan, J., & Karbownik, K., Roth, J. (2014). The effects of poor neonatal health on
        children's cognitive development. American Economic Review, 104(12), 3921-3955.
Florida Department of Education. (2018, September). Fact Sheet: Florida Tax Credit
       Scholarship Program. Retrieved February 13, 2019, from
       http://www.fldoe.org/core/fileparse.php/5606/urlt/FTC-Sept-2018.pdf
Florida Department of Education. (n.d.a). Student Enrollment: State Level. Retrieved January 31,
       2019 from
       https://edstats.fldoe.org/SASWebReportStudio/gotoReportSection.do?sectionNumber=1
Florida Department of Education. (n.d.b). FCAT Historical. Retrieved February 3, 2019, from
       http://www.fldoe.org/accountability/assessments/k-12-student-assessment/archive/fcat/
Florida Statute 220.187 (2001).
Fredriksson, P., Öckert, B., & Oosterbeek, H. (2013). Long-term effects of class size. Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 128(1), 249-285.
Gilraine, M., Petronijevic, U., & Singleton, J.D. (2019). Horizontal differentiation and the policy
       effect of charter schools. Unpublished manuscript.
Greene, J. P., & Winters, M. A. (2007). An evaluation of the effect of DC's voucher program on
      public school achievement and racial integration after one year. Catholic Education: A
      Journal of Inquiry and Practice, 11(1), 83-101.
Hoxby, C.M. (1994). Do private schools provide competition for public schools? National
      Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No. 4978,




                                                36
Hoxby, C. M. (2003). School choice and school productivity: Could school choice be a tide that
      lifts all boats? In C. M. Hoxby, The Economics of School Choice (pp. 287-241). Chicago,
      IL: University of Chicago Press.
Jepsen, C. (2002). The role of aggregation in estimating the effects of private school competition
       on student achievement. Journal of Urban Economics, 52: 477-500.
Jepsen, C., & Rivkin, S. (2009). Class size reduction and student achievement: The potential
       tradeoff between teacher quality and class size. Journal of Human Resources, 44(1), 223-
       250.
Krueger, A.B. (1999). Experimental estimates of education production functions. Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 114(2), 497-532.
Lankford, H., & Wyckoff, J. (1995). Where has the money gone? An analysis of school district
      spending in New York. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 17(2), 195-218.
Leuven, E., & Løkken, S.A. (Forthcoming). Long-term effects of class size in compulsory
      school. Journal of Human Resources.
Lindahl, M. (2005). Home versus school learning: A new approach to estimating the effect of
       class size on achievement. Scandanavian Journal of Economics, 107(2), 375-394.
Nickell, S. (1981). Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica, 49(6), 1417-
       1426.
Ridley, M., & Terrier, C. (2018). Fiscal and education spillovers from charter school expansion.
       NBER working paper 25070.
Rouse, C. E., Hannaway, J., Goldhaber, D., & Figlio, D. (2013). Feeling the Florida heat? How
       low-performing schools respond to voucher and accountability pressure. American
       Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(2), 251-281.
Urquiola, M. (2016). Chapter 4. Competition among schools: Traditional public and private
       schools. In E. A. Hanushek, S. Machin, & L. Woessmann, Handbook of the Economics of
       Education (pp. 209-237). Oxford: Elsevier.




                                                37
               Appendix A. Composition of Students in Florida Public Schools
       Here we explore the extent to which competitive pressures affect the composition of

students ever appearing in Florida public schools. Recall that, during this paper's study period,

voucher participants must either have spent the previous year in Florida public schools or been

entering kindergarten or first grade, and the latter would never be observed in the sample. Since

the empirical strategy in our paper relies on student fixed effects, would-be peers never observed

in the public schools will not contribute to changes in students' schooling environments and thus

our coefficients should remain unbiased. Who is in the sample, however, could affect the

external validity and interpretation of our results.

       To address this question, we analyze whether the voucher program's roll-out affected

which children were present in the birth records but not in the school records. To do so, we proxy

for the zip code of birth's level of competition pressure in any given year by re-weighting our

measures of competition pressure (introduced in Section II.C.) for birth cohorts expected to enter

grade one after the program started (September 1995 to December 2002 births) with empirically

observed flows of students born in any given zip code to all possible grade one schools as

observed for birth cohorts entering schooling before the program started (January 1994 to August

1995 births). Table A1 shows how the voucher program roll-out affected the probability that a

child would ultimately appear in the Florida public school data, both overall (panel A) and

stratified for samples with a given characteristic (e.g. child of high school dropout mother in

panel D or child of immigrant mother in panel J).

       We observe that, unsurprisingly, as the program expanded fewer students born in

communities with greater competitive pressures ended up in public schools, meaning that locales

with more competition pressure straightaway were the places sending more children to private

schools as the voucher program expanded. These results are concentrated in the set of children

                                                  38
whose births were funded by Medicaid and those with relatively poorly-educated mothers which

makes sense since the program supports vouchers for low-income families. At the same time,

however, as the program expanded, Black children and the children of immigrants were

disproportionately likely to never appear in public schooling in communities with greater

competitive pressures. It is also worth highlighting that the estimates from Table A1 are very

modest in magnitude with effect sizes not exceeding 6 percent of sample mean. In summary, the

voucher program led to a public school sector that is modestly more affluent with higher parental

education. These composition changes, albeit small in magnitude, underscore the importance of

gauging heterogeneity in the effects of competition pressure, as we report in Section III.C. On

the one hand, such selection could reduce the estimated competitive effects if higher-SES

individuals are less responsive to the effects of competition. On the other hand, it could increase

them if there is complementarity between school-level student ability and competitive pressure.

In neither case the estimates will be biased given our identification strategy.




                                                 39
Figures

         Figure 1: Effects of voucher expansion over school years for standardized outcomes
                                                                                                                                                                  A. Pooled




                                                                                                          5 10 15 20 25
                                                                                       Standardized (0,100) outcome measures
                                                                                     -15 -10 -5      0




                                                                                                                               2003          2005          2007      2009      2011                                             2013          2015          2017
                                                                                                                                                                     School year (end)

                                                                                                                                                      Math+reading          Math                                                 Reading
                                                                                                                                                      Suspensions           Absences



                                          B. Children ever on free or reduced                                                                                                                       C. Children never on free or reduced
                                                      price lunch                                                                                                                                               price lunch
                                                                                                                                                                                                    5 10 15 20 25
                             5 10 15 20 25
           Standardized (0,100) outcome measures




                                                                                                                                                                                 Standardized (0,100) outcome measures
                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                         0




                                                                                                                                                                               -15 -10 -5
         -15 -10 -5




                                                   2003   2005    2007     2009      2011                                             2013          2015          2017                                                   2003          2005          2007      2009      2011      2013       2015   2017
                                                                           School year (end)                                                                                                                                                                   School year (end)

                                                                 Math+reading     Math                                                 Reading                                                                                                  Math+reading          Math          Reading
                                                                 Suspensions      Absences                                                                                                                                                      Suspensions           Absences



Note: These figures plot modified estimates from the main specification estimated in panel F of Table 3 and from heterogeneity
analysis from panels A and B of Table 4, where instead of interaction between composite competition measure and log number
of scholarships we plot composite competition measure interacted with school years, and with baseline omitted year 2002/2003.
Panel A presents results for pooled sample (Table 3) while panels B and C divide the sample by free and reduced price lunch
status of a child (Table 4). Outcomes are averaged test scores in mathematics and reading (navy squares); mathematics test
scores (orange circles); reading test scores (maroon triangles); likelihood of being suspended (khaki diamonds); and absence
rate (green pluses). Each outcome variable is standardized in its empirical sample to have mean zero and standard deviation
of 100. Spikes present 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at grade one school level.




                                                                                                                                                                         40
                                                                           Figure 2: Estimating potential peer effects
                                                                 A. School-level predicted averaged math + reading




                                                                                              4            3
                                                                                Math+reading effects (%SD)
                                                                              -2   -1    0     1
                                                                                              -3      2
                                                                                                               2003        2005       2007         2009        2011                           2013
                                                                                                                                             School year (end)

                                                                                                                      Competition measure:      Diversity                       Density       Distance
                                                                                                                                                Churches                        Slots         PCA index



             B. School-level predicted mathematics                                                                                                                             C. School-level predicted reading
                       4




                                                                                                                                                                 4
                                   3




                                                                                                                                                                 3
         Mathematics effects (%SD)




                                                                                                                                                      Reading effects (%SD)
                              2




                                                                                                                                                                        2
                        1




                                                                                                                                                                   1
                 0




                                                                                                                                                            0
            -1




                                                                                                                                                       -1
                       -2




                                                                                                                                                                 -2
                       -3




                                                                                                                                                                 -3




                                       2003       2005        2007         2009        2011                                  2013                                             2003     2005          2007   2009      2011        2013    2015    2017
                                                                     School year (end)                                                                                                                      School year (end)

                                              Competition measure:      Diversity                                Density      Distance                                               Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance
                                                                        Churches                                 Slots        PCA index                                                                         Churches        Slots     PCA index



Note: These figures plot potential peer effect estimates where the dependent variables are predicted rather than actual test
scores. Predicted tests scores are based on predicted values from a regression of actual test scores on year and month of birth
dummies, gender, birth weight, maternal years of education dummies, gestational age dummies, marital status, mother's place
of birth, race, ethnicity, maternal age at birth, prior number of births to mother, month prenatal care began, complications
of labor and delivery, abnormal conditions at birth, congenital anomalies, maternal health problems and Medicaid paid birth.
We then aggregate these data at grade one school by year level and measure competition according to panels A to F in Table
3. Regressions include interaction between competition measure and school year along school year and grade one school fixed
effects. Effects are presented relative to baseline (omitted) 2002/03 school year. Panel A presents results for predicted school-
level averaged mathematics and reading scores, panel B presents results for predicted school-level mathematics scores, and panel
C presents results for predicted school-level reading scores. Spikes present 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors
clustered at grade one school level.




                                                                                                                                               41
                                                                   Figure 3: Estimating potential class size effects




                                                    .2
             Class size effect (number of students)
                -1    -.8 -.6 -.4 -.2
                                   -1.2       0




                                                         2007   2008   2009   2010     2011 2012 2013       2014      2015   2016   2017
                                                                                        School year (end)

                                                                Competition measure:        Diversity       Density      Distance
                                                                                            Churches        Slots        PCA index

Note: This figure plots estimates where the dependent variable is class size measured at school-by-year level. Data on
class size for school years 2006/2007 to 2016/2017 are based on reports provided by Florida Department of Education
(http://www.fldoe.org/finance/budget/class-size/class-size-reduction-averages.stml) separately for grades PK to 3, 4 to 8 and
9 to 12. For each school we weight these reported class sizes according to actual grades served e.g., if school is serving grades
PK to 8 then we compute school-level class size as CS = 0.5CSP K -3 + 0.5CS4-8 + 0CS9-12 . These are then merged at grade
one school by year level to competition measures used in panels A to F in Table 3. Regressions include interaction between
competition measure and school year along school year and grade one school fixed effects, and school year 2006/2007 is a
reference (omitted) category. Spikes present 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at grade one school
level.




                                                                                            42
Tables
                                               Table 1: Program expansion
                       (1)               (2)                (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
                                                        Number of       Number of     Maximum amount Maximum annual
                 Designated state
   School year                    Realized spending    participating    scholarship     granted per   family income
                      funds
                                                      private schools   enrollments       student        allowed
     2002/03        50,000,000        50,000,000          N/A            15,585            3,500        < 185% FPL
     2003/04        88,000,000        40,000,000           924           11,550            3,500        < 185% FPL
     2004/05        88,000,000        36,655,500           973           10,549            3,500        < 185% FPL
     2005/06        88,000,000        46,745,482           895           15,123            3,500        < 185% FPL
     2006/07        88,000,000        59,300,655           948           17,819            3,750        < 200% FPL
     2007/08        88,000,000        73,450,691           933           21,493            3,750        < 200% FPL
     2008/09       118,000,000        88,626,463          1,002          24,871            3,950        < 200% FPL
     2009/10       118,000,000       106,049,940          1,033          28,927            3,950        < 200% FPL
     2010/11       140,000,000       129,474,868          1,114          34,550            4,106        < 230% FPL
     2011/12       175,000,000       147,481,308          1,216          40,248            4,011        < 230% FPL
     2012/13       229,000,000       206,974,102          1,338          51,075            4,335        < 230% FPL
     2013/14       286,000,000       274,495,570          1,429          59,822            4,880        < 230% FPL
     2014/15       357,800,000       344,887,372          1,533          69,950            5,272        < 230% FPL
     2015/16       447,000,000       418,693,458          1,602          78,664            5,677        < 230% FPL
     2016/17       559,000,000       539,252,526          1,733          98,936            5,886        < 260% FPL
     2017/18       698,000,000       641,024,651          1,818          108,098           7,208        < 260% FPL
Note: This table presents Florida Tax Credit (FTC) Scholarship Program expansion between school years 2002/03 and 2017/18.
Column 1 shows total amount of tax credits which may be a granted in given year; column 2 shows realized spending in the
program; column 3 shows number of participating private schools; column 4 shows number of students enrolled through the
scholarship program; column 5 shows maximum amount of scholarship that can be awarded; column 6 shows maximum annual
family income allowed. Columns 1, 5 and 6 are based on Florida Statues 220.187 for years 2002/03 to 2009/10 and Florida
Statues 1002.395 for years 2010/11 to 2017/18. Columns 2 to 4 are based on Florida Department of Education reports (Choice
Facts, 2008; 2010; 2011; 2014; 2018).




                                                              43
                                           Table 2: Descriptive statistics

                                               (1)                 (2)                  (3)              (4)
                                                                                         Competition index
                                            All births     Empirical sample
                                                                                 Above median        Below median
                                                         Panel A. Sociodemographic characteristics
       White                                  55.4                50.9             37.3                    68.0
       African-American                       19.4                23.3             30.2                    14.5
       Hispanic                               22.8                23.9             30.5                    15.6
       Mother foreign born                    23.2                23.0             29.7                    14.5
       Male                                   51.2                51.1             51.1                    51.1
       Mother HS dropout                      20.9                24.9             25.0                    24.6
       Mother HS graduate                     58.8                60.4             60.7                    60.1
       Mother college graduate                20.2                14.7             14.3                    15.2
       Mother age at birth                    27.1                26.6             26.6                    26.5
       Parents married at birth               64.9                59.2             54.6                    65.1
       Ever on FRPL                           N/A                 71.8             75.8                    66.6

                                                              Panel B. Competition measures
       Diversity                                                   5.1               6.8                    2.9
       Density                                                    15.6              24.0                    5.0
       Distance                                                   -1.9              -1.0                   -3.0
                                              N/A
       Number of churches                                        143.0             207.9                   61.0
       Number of slots                                             2.9               4.7                    0.7
       Competition index (PCA)                                     0.3               1.6                   -1.5

                                                                    Panel C. Outcomes
       Math+reading score                                          0.0              -4.4                    5.6
       Math score                                                  0.0              -4.1                    5.0
       Reading scores                         N/A                  0.0              -4.8                    6.0
       Likelihood suspended                                       13.7              14.3                   12.9
       Absence rate                                                5.0               5.0                    5.2
       Maximum # observations              2,028,798           6,971,914         3,890,161              3,081,753
       Maximum # children                  2,028,798           1,255,084          755,254                609,646
Note: Panel A presents means of sociodemographic variables (all indicator variables multiplied by 100); panel B presents means
of competition measures with distance reverse coded (more positive values indicate higher competition); panel C presents
outcome variables (all multiplied by 100). Column 1 presents characteristics of full sample of births between 1992 and 2002;
column 2 presents characteristics of our preferred empirical sample for school years between 2002/03 to 2016/17; columns 3 and
4 divide sample from column 2 into two mutually exclusive categories based on median of the PCA competition index.




                                                             44
                 Table 3: Effects of voucher expansion by baseline competition measures
                                 (1)                 (2)                     (3)                  (4)             (5)
                            Math + Reading       Mathematics             Reading              Suspensions       Absences
                                                                    Panel A. Diversity
     Expansion × above         4.233***            1.937***             6.539***                 -0.504*        -0.265***
     median competition         (0.599)             (0.736)               (0.618)                (0.267)         (0.052)
                                                                       Panel B. Density
     Expansion × above         5.293***            2.817***               7.566***              -1.109***       -0.258***
     median competition         (0.586)             (0.728)                (0.608)               (0.268)         (0.052)
                                                                       Panel C. Distance
     Expansion × above         1.648***              -0.308                3.542***              -0.430*        -0.151***
     median competition         (0.590)             (0.712)                 (0.622)              (0.261)         (0.052)
                                                               Panel D. Churches nearby
     Expansion × above         3.917***             1.643**            5.966***         -1.428***               -0.223***
     median competition         (0.598)             (0.727)             (0.626)          (0.265)                 (0.051)
     Mean [SD] of Y         0.027 [93.104]      0.000 [100.000]        0.000 [100.000]       13.633 [34.314]   5.039 [5.786]
     Observations              6,187,563           6,131,878              6,611,067             5,453,653        5,453,653
     # children               1,222,165            1,222,912              1,223,799             1,228,461        1,228,461
                                                                  Panel E. Slots per grade
     Expansion × above         6.064***            3.361***              8.684***               -1.749***       -0.290***
     median competition         (0.590)             (0.732)               (0.604)                (0.266)         (0.052)
                                                         Panel F. Competitive Pressure Index
     Expansion × above         5.111***            2.639***          7.389***             -1.282***             -0.281***
     median competition         (0.593)             (0.738)           (0.611)              (0.267)               (0.052)
     Mean [SD] of Y         0.000 [93.085]      -0.038 [99.977]        -0.017 [99.984]       13.666 [34.349]   5.041 [5.790]
     Observations              6,160,525           6,104,889              6,584,014             5,427,985        5,427,985
     # children                1,221,023           1,220,753              1,223,123             1,225,713        1,225,713

Note: Sample is based on individual-level observations in grades 3 to 8 for students attending Florida public schools between
2002/03 to 2016/17 and born between 1992 and 2002. Each child has to be observed at least in grade 1 so that we can
assign them school-level competition measures which are based on Figlio and Hart (2014); these are assigned to individuals
for the schools they attend in grades 1 and 6. Thus, there are up to two values of competition observed for each individual.
Expansion is measured at annual level between 2002/03 and 2016/17 as logarithm of number of scholarships awarded. Test
scores are based on FCAT developmental scores for years 2000/2001 to 2013/2014 and on FSA developmental scores for years
2014/2015 to 2016/2017, and we standardize them in-sample by years and grade to have mean 0 and standard deviation of 1.
These standardized scores are then multiplied by 100. Averaged mathematics and reading as well as mathematics test scores are
available up to school year 2013/2014 while reading test scores are available up to school year 2016/2017. Suspensions (indicator
for ever being suspended in a given year) and absences (absence rate in a given year net of suspension days) are measured for
years 2002/03 to 2011/2012, and they are multiplied by 100. Each column represents a separate outcome variable. Competition
measures are: number of denominational types represented (panel A); number of local private schools (panel B); miles to nearest
private school competitor (panel C); number of churches, synagogues, and mosques (panel D); number of private school slots per
grade (panel E); and principal components analysis competition index ("Competitive Pressure Index") based on five measures
from panels A to E (panel F). Regression table presents interactions between competition measure (dummy for competition
above median in the full sample of schools) and log of expansion measure, and all regressions include student-by-school level
FE and grade-by-school year FE. School level is defined as indicator for grade 6 to 8 vs. 3 to 5. Standard errors are clustered
at grade one school level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels,
respectively.




                                                                  45
                           Table 4: Heterogeneity in the effects of voucher expansion
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)           (5)
                                       Math + Reading     Mathematics        Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                            Panel A. Ever on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       6.504***         3.660***          9.187***           -1.946***       -0.431***
                  median competition       (0.624)          (0.770)           (0.666)            (0.338)         (0.063)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -21.409 [89.396] -21.402 [97.315] -21.010 [96.385] 17.305 [37.829]      5.587 [6.314]
                  Observations            4,362,211         4,324,143        4,696,426           3,803,417      3,803,417
                                                             Panel B. Never on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       3.971***           2.781***         4.860***           -0.917***      -0.144***
                  median competition       (0.759)            (0.970)          (0.771)             (0.254)       (0.055)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       51.933 [80.552]   51.840 [86.435] 52.216 [89.054] 5.147 [22.095]        3.763 [4.044]
                  Observations            1,798,314         1,780,746         1,887,588          1,624,568       1,624,568
                                                                  Panel C. Mother high school dropout
                  Expansion × above       5.256***           2.956***          7.504***          -2.159***      -0.338***
                  median competition       (0.762)            (0.953)           (0.852)            (0.479)       (0.096)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -43.261 [88.539] -42.496 [97.764] -43.506 [95.362] 21.774 [41.271]        6.460 [7.175]
                  Observations          1,504,461        1,492,865         1,609,399          1,334,914          1,334,914
                                                               Panel D. Mother high school graduate
                  Expansion × above      5.675***         2.900***          8.297***           -1.113***        -0.337***
                  median competition      (0.597)          (0.752)           (0.620)            (0.287)          (0.052)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       1.324 [87.359]    0.979 [94.291]     1.434 [94.682] 12.655 [33.247]     4.870 [5.415]
                  Observations           3,739,944         3,709,186          3,989,457          3,304,238       3,304,238
                                                                   Panel E. Mother college graduate
                  Expansion × above       3.163***            1.863            3.812***          -0.776***        -0.060
                  median competition       (0.902)           (1.146)            (0.940)            (0.292)        (0.057)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       65.640 [82.760]   65.993 [88.952] 65.155 [91.140] 4.182 [20.017]        3.356 [3.792]
                  Observations             916,120           902,838          985,158         788,833             788,833
                                                                       Panel F. White mother
                  Expansion × above       4.682***           3.803***         5.269***       -1.116***          -0.228***
                  median competition       (0.677)            (0.860)          (0.657)        (0.295)            (0.064)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       22.894 [88.067]   22.368 [93.933] 23.256 [96.293] 10.145 [30.193]       5.257 [5.730]
                  Observations            3,156,514         3,132,289         3,348,248        2,815,187         2,815,187
                                                                   Panel G. African-American mother
                  Expansion × above       4.319***           3.693***           5.277***         -0.121           -0.021
                  median competition       (0.844)            (1.122)            (0.834)         (0.650)          (0.094)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -48.816 [88.572] -49.807 [98.517] -47.479 [94.430] 25.486 [43.578]        5.311 [6.483]
                  Observations          1,414,642        1,403,085         1,513,010         1,248,570           1,248,570
                                                                    Panel H. Hispanic mother
                  Expansion × above      5.488***           1.557           9.126***         -2.452***           -0.170**
                  median competition      (0.989)          (1.274)           (1.093)           (0.423)            (0.084)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -6.380 [88.165]   -4.972 [95.255] -7.608 [95.334] 10.518 [30.678]       4.441 [5.190]
                  Observations            1,469,512         1,451,296         1,593,065          1,261,615       1,261,615
                                                                    Panel I. Mother born in the U.S.
                  Expansion × above       3.607***           2.142***          4.744***           -0.898***     -0.288***
                  median competition       (0.591)            (0.759)           (0.564)            (0.296)       (0.059)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -1.281 [93.900]   -1.947 [100.685] -0.724 [100.883] 14.870 [35.579]     5.374 [6.008]
                  Observations            4,739,008          4,701,848           5,049,671        4,198,015      4,198,015
                                                                       Panel J. Foreign born mother
                  Expansion × above       2.690***             -0.945             6.103***         -1.631***     -0.127*
                  median competition       (0.926)             (1.223)             (1.018)          (0.390)      (0.071)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       4.272 [90.182]    6.359 [97.294]     2.311 [96.932]    9.558 [29.402]   3.907 [4.805]
                  Observations           1,421,517         1,403,041          1,534,343         1,229,970        1,229,970

Note: Specifications are based on those in panel F of Table 3 with the baseline sample split by child's free or reduced price lunch
history (panels A and B), maternal education (panels C to E), race/ethnicity (panels F to H), and maternal immigration status
(panels I and J). Outcome variables are averaged mathematics and reading test scores (column 1), mathematics test scores
(column 2), reading test scores (column 3), likelihood of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard
errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                      46
                                    Table 5: Robustness of the preferred estimates
                                                 (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)              (5)
                                           Math + Reading     Mathematics           Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                                                Panel A. Baseline
                      Expansion × above       5.111***          2.639***            7.389***           -1.282***       -0.281***
                      median competition       (0.593)           (0.738)             (0.611)            (0.267)         (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.000 [93.085]    -0.038 [99.977]    -0.017 [99.984]     13.666 [34.349]   5.041 [5.790]
                      Observations           6,160,525          6,104,889          6,584,014        5,427,985          5,427,985
                                                                    Panel B. Continuous competition measure
                      Expansion ×             1.453***           0.620***           2.296***         -0.422***         -0.086***
                      competition              (0.157)            (0.196)            (0.161)          (0.068)           (0.014)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.000 [93.085]    -0.038 [99.977] -0.017 [99.984] 13.666 [34.349]          5.041 [5.790]
                      Observations           6,160,525          6,104,889          6,584,014        5,427,985           5,427,985
                                                                    Panel C. Log funding expansion measure
                      Expansion × above       4.747***           2.547***           6.536***        -1.358***          -0.311***
                      median competition       (0.555)            (0.695)            (0.552)          (0.268)           (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.000 [93.085]    -0.038 [99.977]    -0.017 [99.984]     13.666 [34.349]   5.041 [5.790]
                      Observations           6,160,525        6,104,889         6,584,014         5,427,985          5,427,985
                                               Panel D. Competition measure unweighted with elementary to middle school flows
                      Expansion × above       4.337***         1.955***          6.528***         -1.031***          -0.280***
                      median competition       (0.574)           (0.722)          (0.588)           (0.250)            (0.048)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       -0.003 [92.865] -0.002 [99.755] -0.072 [99.844] 13.223 [33.874]            5.011 [5.706]
                      Observations            5,761,773         5,714,711          6,123,884          5,117,781         5,117,781
                                                Panel E. Weights based solely on pre-program transitions between grades 5 and 6
                      Expansion × above       5.633***          3.111***            8.209***           -1.333***       -0.228***
                      median competition       (0.578)           (0.718)             (0.594)            (0.265)         (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.002 [93.084] -0.036 [99.975] -0.014 [99.984] 13.653 [34.336]             5.038 [5.793]
                      Observations           6,071,801          6,016,952         6,487,847           5,351,967         5,351,967
                                              Panel F. Limiting the sample to schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles
                      Expansion × above       4.271***           2.221***          6.131***           -1.129***          -0.193***
                      median competition       (0.618)            (0.767)           (0.642)             (0.284)           (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.003 [93.124]    -0.042 [99.976]    -0.019 [99.984]     13.636 [34.317]   5.008 [5.781]
                      Observations           5,703,761          5,650,965          6,092,805         5,030,501         5,030,501
                                                                   Panel G. School years 2002/03 to 2011/12
                      Expansion × above       4.584***           2.644***           6.578***         -1.282***         -0.281***
                      median competition       (0.589)            (0.738)            (0.615)           (0.267)          (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       -0.219 [92.915]   -0.040 [99.974] -0.019 [99.981] 13.666 [34.349]          5.041 [5.790]
                      Observations            5,336,140         5,323,917          5,323,137          5,427,985         5,427,985
                                                                        Panel H. Balanced panel (6-years)
                      Expansion × above       5.463***           3.496***           6.933***          -1.427***        -0.364***
                      median competition       (0.660)            (0.825)            (0.683)            (0.306)         (0.055)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.095 [92.933]    -0.037 [99.974] -0.015 [99.986] 14.524 [35.234]          4.969 [5.551]
                      Observations           3,958,889           3,919,656          5,303,632          2,845,185        2,845,185
                                                                    Panel I. In sample standardized test scores
                      Expansion × above       4.825***            2.484***           7.165***
                      median competition       (0.586)             (0.733)            (0.603)
                                                                                                          N/A             N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.061 [92.587]     0.190 [99.823] -0.069 [99.805]
                      Observations           5,756,691           5,756,691          5,756,691
                                                                Panel J. In population standardized scores sample
                      Expansion × above       4.913***            2.729***           7.097***
                      median competition       (0.555)             (0.700)            (0.573)
                                                                                                          N/A             N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       4.669 [89.064]     4.657 [96.371]      4.681 [95.610]
                      Observations           5,756,691           5,756,691          5,756,691

Note: Robustness checks based on estimates from panel F of Table 3. Panel A replicates the main result from panel F of
Table 3; panel B replaces dummy indicator for above median pre-reform competition with continuous measure; panel C replaces
logarithm of number of scholarships expansion measure with logarithm of funding; panel D assigns the middle-school pre-policy
competition measures based on the actual grade 6 (middle) school initially attended by each student; panel E generates expected
competitive pressure measures for middle school-aged students using only pre-policy announcement flow between elementary
and middle schools; panel F limits the initial sample to only schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles; panel G
restricts the sample to school years 2002/03 to 2011/12 where we observe all five outcomes; panel H restricts the sample to
6-year panel of observations starting with grade 3 and within school years available for a given variable; panels I and J restrict
the sample to school years 2002/03 to 2012/13 where we observe test scores that are standardized for the full population of
Florida students - panel I presents our in-sample standardization while panel J population-level standardization. Outcome
variables are averaged mathematics and reading test score (column 1), mathematics test score (column 2), reading test score
(column 3), likelihood of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard errors are clustered at grade one
school level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                           47
Table 6: Alternative explanations: Effects of voucher program expansion on peer composition and
                                             class size

                                    (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)        (6)
                                 Diversity  Density       Distance Churches           Slots      PCA
                                                    Panel A. Potential "peer effects"
                                   A1. School-level predicted averaged mathematics and reading scores
    Expansion × above            0.253**     0.199*        0.063        0.053         0.042      0.148
    median competition           (0.119)     (0.112)      (0.073)      (0.102)       (0.104)    (0.107)
    Observations                  20,009          20,009         20,009          20,009          19,986          19,986
                                                 A2. School-level predicted mathematics scores
    Expansion × above             0.218*          0.185       0.061        0.045       0.037                      0.148
    median competition            (0.118)        (0.113)     (0.073)      (0.103)     (0.103)                    (0.108)
    Observations                  20,009          20,009         20,009          20,009          19,986          19,986
                                                     A3. School-level predicted reading scores
    Expansion × above            0.294***        0.276***     0.125**        0.116        0.106                 0.245**
    median competition            (0.105)         (0.104)     (0.060)       (0.092)      (0.092)                (0.103)
    Observations                  24,930          24,930         24,930          24,930          24,907          24,907
                                                        Panel B. Potential class size effects
                                                          B1. Main class size estimates
    Expansion × above            -0.042**         -0.011       -0.003        -0.012        -0.020                -0.027
    median competition            (0.018)         (0.019)      (0.011)       (0.018)       (0.018)               (0.020)
                                    B2. Effect on number of students per 10% increase in the progam
    Estimate                     -0.0042     -0.0011     -0.0003      -0.0012      -0.002       -0.0027
                                B3. Implied effect sizes based on 22% SD 3-year STAR effect (in % of SD)
    Implied effect                0.013        0.003         0.001      0.004      0.006         0.008
    Observations                  17,747          17,747         17,747          17,747          17,739          17,739
Note: Panel A presents potential peer effect estimates where the dependent variables are predicted rather than actual test
scores. Predicted tests scores are based on predicted values from a regression of actual test scores on year and month of birth
dummies, gender, birth weight, maternal years of education dummies, gestational age dummies, marital status, mother's place
of birth, race, ethnicity, maternal age at birth, prior number of births to mother, month prenatal care began, complications
of labor and delivery, abnormal conditions at birth, congenital anomalies, maternal health problems and Medicaid paid birth.
These are then aggregate at grade one school by year level. RRegressions include interaction between competition measure
(dummy for competition above median in the full sample of schools) and log of expansion measure along school year and
grade one school fixed effects. Panel A1 presents results for predicted school-level averaged mathematics and reading scores,
panel A2 presents results for predicted school-level mathematics scores, and panel A3 presents results for predicted school-level
reading scores. Panel B presents estimates where the outcome variable is class size measured at school-by-year level. Data
on class size for school years 2006/2007 to 2016/2017 are based on reports provided by Florida Department of Education
(http://www.fldoe.org/finance/budget/class-size/class-size-reduction-averages.stml) separately for grades PK to 3, 4 to 8 and
9 to 12. For each school we weight these reported class sizes according to actual grades served e.g., if school is serving grades
PK to 8 then we compute school-level class size as CS = 0.5CSP K -3 + 0.5CS4-8 + 0CS9-12 . These are then merged at grade
one school by year level to competition measures used in panels A to F in Table 3. Regressions include interaction between
competition measure (dummy for competition above median in the full sample of schools) and log of expansion measure, year
fixed effects, and grade one school fixed effects. Panel B1 presents the effects of voucher program expansion on class size; panel
B2 scales this estimate into effect size of 10% increase in voucher program scholarships; and panel B3 computes the implied
potential gain in test scores from reduced class size based on estimates from project STAR (Krueger, 1999). Standard errors
are clustered at grade one school level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10
percent levels, respectively.




                                                               48
Appendix
 Table A1: Voucher program expansion and likelihood of being observed in matched birth-public
                                      school records
                                             (1)                  (2)               (3)            (4)             (5)         (6)
                                                           Outcome: Probability of being matched to school records (*100)
             Competition measures         PCA index          Diversity          Density        Distance       Churches        Slots
                                                                    Panel A: Overall (Mean = 79.8; N = 1,279,009)
             Expansion × above median      -1.055***         -1.218***         -1.238***      -1.364***       -0.963***   -1.185***
             weighted competition            (0.356)
                                              -1.055           (0.351)
                                                                -1.218           (0.354)
                                                                                  -1.238        (0.385)
                                                                                                 -1.364         (0.359)
                                                                                                                 -0.963     (0.356)
                                                                                                                             -1.185
             Implied % effect                  -1.3              -1.5              -1.6           -1.7            -1.2        -1.5
                                                           Panel B. Non-Medicaid paid birth (Mean = 74.7; N = 709,570)
             Expansion × above median         -0.115            -0.301            -0.258       -1.090**          -0.290      -0.125
             weighted competition            (0.505)
                                              -0.115           (0.494)
                                                                -0.301           (0.506)
                                                                                  -0.258        (0.525)
                                                                                                 -1.090         (0.502)
                                                                                                                 -0.290     (0.506)
                                                                                                                             -0.125
             Implied % effect                  -0.2              -0.4              -0.3           -1.5            -0.4        -0.2
                                                              Panel C. Medicaid paid birth (Mean = 86.1; N = 569,438)
             Expansion × above median      -2.342***         -2.433***         -2.435***      -1.687***       -2.036***   -2.506***
             weighted competition            (0.385)
                                              -2.342           (0.384)
                                                                -2.433           (0.384)
                                                                                  -2.435        (0.415)
                                                                                                 -1.687         (0.390)
                                                                                                                 -2.036     (0.378)
                                                                                                                             -2.506
             Implied % effect                  -2.7              -2.8              -2.8           -2.0            -2.4        -2.9
                                                         Panel D. Mother high school dropout (Mean = 87.1; N = 250,565)
             Expansion × above median      -1.451***         -1.714***         -1.581***        -1.114*        -1.370**   -1.428***
             weighted competition            (0.536)
                                              -1.451           (0.528)
                                                                -1.714           (0.534)
                                                                                  -1.581        (0.597)
                                                                                                 -1.114         (0.547)
                                                                                                                 -1.370     (0.529)
                                                                                                                             -1.428
             Implied % effect                  -1.7              -2.0              -1.8           -1.3            -1.6        -1.6
                                                        Panel E. Mother high school graduate (Mean = 82.2; N = 746,382)
             Expansion × above median       -0.769**          -0.863**          -0.818**      -1.256***         -0.686*     -0.765*
             weighted competition            (0.389)
                                              -0.769           (0.381)
                                                                -0.863           (0.387)
                                                                                  -0.818        (0.409)
                                                                                                 -1.256         (0.388)
                                                                                                                 -0.686     (0.391)
                                                                                                                             -0.765
             Implied % effect                  -0.9              -1.0              -1.0           -1.5            -0.8        -0.9
                                                           Panel F. Mother college graduate (Mean = 66.9; N = 282,062)
             Expansion × above median         -0.189            -0.397            -0.421         -0.641          -0.322      -0.683
             weighted competition            (0.853)
                                              -0.189           (0.817)
                                                                -0.397           (0.834)
                                                                                  -0.421        (0.776)
                                                                                                 -0.641         (0.773)
                                                                                                                 -0.322     (0.834)
                                                                                                                             -0.683
             Implied % effect                  -0.3              -0.6              -0.6           -1.0            -0.5        -1.0
                                                     Panel G. White, non-Hispanic, non-immigrant (Mean = 77.4; N = 640,193)
             Expansion × above median         0.034             -0.083            -0.265         -0.704          -0.232      -0.053
             weighted competition            (0.433)
                                              0.034            (0.435)
                                                               -0.083            (0.436)
                                                                                 -0.265         (0.452)
                                                                                                -0.704          (0.440)
                                                                                                                -0.232      (0.433)
                                                                                                                            -0.053
             Implied % effect                   0.0              -0.1              -0.3           -0.9            -0.3        -0.1
                                                     Panel H. Black, non-Hispanic, non-immigrant (Mean = 89.5; N = 213,720)
             Expansion × above median      -2.230***         -2.566***         -2.374***      -2.439***        -1.351**   -2.255***
             weighted competition            (0.597)
                                             -2.230            (0.573)
                                                               -2.566            (0.590)
                                                                                 -2.374         (0.609)
                                                                                                -2.439          (0.620)
                                                                                                                -1.351      (0.578)
                                                                                                                            -2.255
             Implied % effect                  -2.5              -2.9              -2.7           -2.7            -1.5        -2.5
                                                           Panel I. Hispanic, non-immigrant (Mean = 81.4; N = 107,344)
             Expansion × above median         -0.742            -0.639            0.095          -0.493          -0.031      -1.252
             weighted competition            (1.049)
                                              -0.742           (1.031)
                                                                -0.639           (1.038)
                                                                                  0.095         (0.856)
                                                                                                 -0.493         (1.022)
                                                                                                                 -0.031     (1.053)
                                                                                                                             -1.252
             Implied % effect                  -0.9              -0.8               0.1           -0.6             0.0        -1.5
                                                              Panel J. Immigrant mother (Mean = 77.6; N = 317,752)
             Expansion × above median      -4.296***         -4.289***         -4.231***      -2.830***       -3.508***   -4.335***
             weighted competition            (0.815)
                                              -4.296           (0.810)
                                                                -4.289           (0.825)
                                                                                  -4.231        (0.872)
                                                                                                 -2.830         (0.830)
                                                                                                                 -3.508     (0.779)
                                                                                                                             -4.335
             Implied % effect                  -5.5              -5.5              -5.5           -3.6            -4.5        -5.6
                                                                     Panel K: Females (Mean = 80.2; N = 624,677)
             Expansion × above median      -1.290***         -1.313***         -1.466***      -1.326***        -0.998**   -1.221***
             weighted competition            (0.419)
                                              -1.290           (0.414)
                                                                -1.313           (0.418)
                                                                                  -1.466        (0.444)
                                                                                                 -1.326         (0.426)
                                                                                                                 -0.998     (0.420)
                                                                                                                             -1.221
             Implied % effect                  -1.6              -1.6              -1.8           -1.7            -1.2        -1.5
                                                                      Panel L. Males (Mean = 79.5; N = 654,332)
             Expansion × above median        -0.816*          -1.118**          -1.006**      -1.400***        -0.910**    -1.125**
             weighted competition            (0.444)
                                              -0.816           (0.438)
                                                                -1.118           (0.445)
                                                                                  -1.006        (0.460)
                                                                                                 -1.400         (0.442)
                                                                                                                 -0.910     (0.438)
                                                                                                                             -1.125
             Implied % effect                  -1.0              -1.4              -1.3           -1.8            -1.1        -1.4

Note: This table presents estimates where the outcome variable is an indicator for being matched between birth and school
records multiplied by 100. Panel A presents overall probability while panels B to L present results for various subsamples.
Independent variable of interest is an interaction between annual voucher expansion and weighted competition at zip code level.
Analysis is based on data for cohorts entering grade one after the program stated (September 1995 and later) while weights
are created based on pre-program grade one cohorts (January 1994 to August 1995). Weighting is based on observed flows
of individuals born in a given zip code to all possible schools. Models further include zip code level and year fixed effects.
Standard errors are clustered at zip code level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5,
and 10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                   49
 Table A2: Construction of Competitive Pressure Index based on principal components analysis

                                            (1)                     (2)                  (3)                    (4)
                                                  Grades 1 to 5                                Grades 6 to 8
                                          First                                        First
                                                         Second component                             Second component
                                       component                                    component
      Diversity                          0.474                     0.144              0.474                     0.169
      Density                            0.499                    -0.214              0.494                    -0.215
      Distance                           0.295                     0.903              0.331                     0.873
      Number of churches                  0.46                    -0.229              0.455                    -0.271
      Number of slots                    0.477                    -0.257              0.463                    -0.301
      Eigenvalue                         3.614                     0.813              3.829                     0.733
Note: This table reports the results of a principal components analysis of number of denominational types represented (diversity),
number of local private schools (density), miles to nearest private school competitor (distance), number of churches, synagogues,
and mosques, and number of private school slots per grade. The eigenvectors associated with the first (columns 1 and 3) and
second (columns 2 and 4) components are reported separately for grades 1 to 5 and 6 to 8, as well as their associated eigenvalues.




                                                               50
            Table A3: Heterogeneity in the effects of voucher expansion: Diversity measure
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)           (5)
                                       Math + Reading     Mathematics        Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                            Panel A. Ever on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       5.877***         3.101***          8.604***           -1.054***       -0.370***
                  median competition       (0.627)          (0.764)           (0.669)            (0.336)         (0.064)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -21.420 [89.403] -21.405 [97.323] -21.028 [96.392] 17.271 [37.800]      5.585 [6.310]
                  Observations            4,379,915         4,341,810        4,714,149           3,820,075      3,820,075
                                                             Panel B. Never on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       2.180***             1.304          3.142***             -0.226       -0.170***
                  median competition       (0.773)            (0.970)          (0.796)             (0.255)       (0.055)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       51.995 [80.557]   51.918 [86.455] 52.259 [89.053] 5.124 [22.048]        3.762 [4.042]
                  Observations            1,807,648         1,790,068         1,896,918          1,633,578       1,633,578
                                                                  Panel C. Mother high school dropout
                  Expansion × above       4.747***           2.044**           7.438***          -1.307***      -0.249***
                  median competition       (0.760)            (0.935)           (0.833)            (0.484)       (0.096)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -43.279 [88.547] -42.509 [97.770] -43.525 [95.370] 21.728 [41.240]        6.455 [7.169]
                  Observations          1,511,217        1,499,602         1,616,155          1,341,389          1,341,389
                                                               Panel D. Mother high school graduate
                  Expansion × above      4.712***         2.249***          7.206***            -0.259          -0.318***
                  median competition      (0.601)          (0.751)           (0.629)            (0.286)          (0.052)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       1.336 [87.366]    1.001 [94.301]     1.438 [94.687] 12.627 [33.215]     4.869 [5.413]
                  Observations           3,754,631         3,723,846          4,004,160          3,318,165       3,318,165
                                                                   Panel E. Mother college graduate
                  Expansion × above        1.706*             0.896            2.423**             -0.360        -0.103*
                  median competition       (0.916)           (1.151)            (0.981)            (0.291)       (0.058)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       65.699 [82.758]   66.072 [88.959] 65.192 [91.139] 4.160 [19.967]        3.355 [3.789]
                  Observations             921,715           908,430          990,752        794,099              794,099
                                                                       Panel F. White mother
                  Expansion × above       3.130***           2.353***         3.873***        -0.115            -0.233***
                  median competition       (0.694)            (0.867)          (0.674)       (0.304)             (0.063)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       22.957 [88.068]   22.440 [93.939] 23.308 [96.293] 10.113 [30.150]       5.253 [5.726]
                  Observations            3,170,846         3,146,594         3,362,580        2,828,887         2,828,887
                                                                   Panel G. African-American mother
                  Expansion × above       4.246***           3.501***           5.361***          0.767            0.079
                  median competition       (0.817)            (1.073)            (0.810)         (0.640)          (0.095)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -48.852 [88.588] -49.836 [98.533] -47.516 [94.446] 25.448 [43.557]        5.310 [6.478]
                  Observations          1,420,501        1,408,927         1,518,874         1,254,177           1,254,177
                                                                    Panel H. Hispanic mother
                  Expansion × above      4.934***           1.178           8.515***         -2.174***           -0.209**
                  median competition      (0.979)          (1.232)           (1.095)           (0.429)            (0.086)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -6.396 [88.173]   -4.972 [95.269] -7.637 [95.336] 10.491 [30.643]       4.440 [5.187]
                  Observations            1,475,615         1,457,395         1,599,177          1,267,259       1,267,259
                                                                    Panel I. Mother born in the U.S.
                  Expansion × above       2.722***            1.379*           3.934***             0.035       -0.267***
                  median competition       (0.594)            (0.756)           (0.572)            (0.298)       (0.058)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -1.250 [93.922]   -1.907 [100.711] -0.701 [100.901] 14.836 [35.545]     5.371 [6.004]
                  Observations            4,759,439          4,722,232           5,070,104        4,217,517      4,217,517
                                                                       Panel J. Foreign born mother
                  Expansion × above        2.082**             -1.261             5.484***         -1.457***     -0.138*
                  median competition       (0.929)             (1.202)             (1.026)          (0.389)      (0.076)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       4.284 [90.192]    6.389 [97.308]     2.307 [96.939]    9.529 [29.361]   3.905 [4.802]
                  Observations           1,428,124         1,409,646          1,540,963         1,236,136        1,236,136

Note: Specifications are based on those in panel A of Table 3 with the baseline sample split by child's free or reduced price lunch
history (panels A and B), maternal education (panels C to E), race/ethnicity (panels F to H), and maternal immigration status
(panels I and J). Outcome variables are averaged mathematics and reading test scores (column 1), mathematics test scores
(column 2), reading test scores (column 3), likelihood of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard
errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                      51
             Table A4: Heterogeneity in the effects of voucher expansion: Density measure
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)           (5)
                                       Math + Reading     Mathematics        Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                            Panel A. Ever on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       6.818***         3.959***          9.495***           -1.677***       -0.375***
                  median competition       (0.613)          (0.756)           (0.658)            (0.339)         (0.063)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -21.420 [89.403] -21.405 [97.323] -21.028 [96.392] 17.271 [37.800]      5.585 [6.310]
                  Observations            4,379,915         4,341,810        4,714,149           3,820,075      3,820,075
                                                             Panel B. Never on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       3.613***           2.323**          4.564***           -0.833***      -0.150***
                  median competition       (0.753)            (0.961)          (0.773)             (0.256)       (0.054)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       51.995 [80.557]   51.918 [86.455] 52.259 [89.053] 5.124 [22.048]        3.762 [4.042]
                  Observations            1,807,648         1,790,068         1,896,918          1,633,578       1,633,578
                                                                  Panel C. Mother high school dropout
                  Expansion × above       5.417***           3.125***          7.684***          -1.824***      -0.259***
                  median competition       (0.746)            (0.929)           (0.843)            (0.483)       (0.096)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -43.279 [88.547] -42.509 [97.770] -43.525 [95.370] 21.728 [41.240]        6.455 [7.169]
                  Observations          1,511,217        1,499,602         1,616,155          1,341,389          1,341,389
                                                               Panel D. Mother high school graduate
                  Expansion × above      5.784***         3.028***          8.371***           -0.948***        -0.311***
                  median competition      (0.591)          (0.744)           (0.617)            (0.287)          (0.051)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       1.336 [87.366]    1.001 [94.301]     1.438 [94.687] 12.627 [33.215]     4.869 [5.413]
                  Observations           3,754,631         3,723,846          4,004,160          3,318,165       3,318,165
                                                                   Panel E. Mother college graduate
                  Expansion × above       3.133***            1.583            3.928***           -0.633**        -0.081
                  median competition       (0.901)           (1.147)            (0.945)            (0.290)        (0.057)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       65.699 [82.758]   66.072 [88.959] 65.192 [91.139] 4.160 [19.967]        3.355 [3.789]
                  Observations             921,715           908,430          990,752         794,099             794,099
                                                                       Panel F. White mother
                  Expansion × above       4.587***           3.666***         5.187***       -0.975***          -0.224***
                  median competition       (0.676)            (0.853)          (0.660)        (0.299)            (0.063)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       22.957 [88.068]   22.440 [93.939] 23.308 [96.293] 10.113 [30.150]       5.253 [5.726]
                  Observations            3,170,846         3,146,594         3,362,580        2,828,887         2,828,887
                                                                   Panel G. African-American mother
                  Expansion × above       5.015***           4.500***           5.826***          0.345            0.070
                  median competition       (0.807)            (1.072)            (0.808)         (0.649)          (0.094)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -48.852 [88.588] -49.836 [98.533] -47.516 [94.446] 25.448 [43.557]        5.310 [6.478]
                  Observations          1,420,501        1,408,927         1,518,874         1,254,177           1,254,177
                                                                    Panel H. Hispanic mother
                  Expansion × above      5.472***           1.236           9.355***         -2.479***           -0.176**
                  median competition      (0.984)          (1.245)           (1.072)           (0.414)            (0.082)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -6.396 [88.173]   -4.972 [95.269] -7.637 [95.336] 10.491 [30.643]       4.440 [5.187]
                  Observations            1,475,615         1,457,395         1,599,177          1,267,259       1,267,259
                                                                    Panel I. Mother born in the U.S.
                  Expansion × above       3.829***           2.422***          4.909***           -0.684**      -0.264***
                  median competition       (0.583)            (0.748)           (0.558)            (0.299)       (0.058)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -1.250 [93.922]   -1.907 [100.711] -0.701 [100.901] 14.836 [35.545]     5.371 [6.004]
                  Observations            4,759,439          4,722,232           5,070,104        4,217,517      4,217,517
                                                                       Panel J. Foreign born mother
                  Expansion × above       2.513***             -1.358             6.100***         -1.570***      -0.109
                  median competition       (0.932)             (1.194)             (1.016)          (0.389)       (0.070)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       4.284 [90.192]    6.389 [97.308]     2.307 [96.939]    9.529 [29.361]   3.905 [4.802]
                  Observations           1,428,124         1,409,646          1,540,963         1,236,136        1,236,136

Note: Specifications are based on those in panel B of Table 3 with the baseline sample split by child's free or reduced price lunch
history (panels A and B), maternal education (panels C to E), race/ethnicity (panels F to H), and maternal immigration status
(panels I and J). Outcome variables are averaged mathematics and reading test scores (column 1), mathematics test scores
(column 2), reading test scores (column 3), likelihood of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard
errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                      52
            Table A5: Heterogeneity in the effects of voucher expansion: Distance measure
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)           (5)
                                       Math + Reading     Mathematics        Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                            Panel A. Ever on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       3.208***           1.042           5.365***           -1.101***       -0.233***
                  median competition       (0.632)          (0.750)           (0.682)            (0.326)         (0.063)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -21.420 [89.403] -21.405 [97.323] -21.028 [96.392] 17.271 [37.800]      5.585 [6.310]
                  Observations            4,379,915         4,341,810        4,714,149           3,820,075      3,820,075
                                                             Panel B. Never on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above         0.016             -1.053            0.869               0.003       -0.151***
                  median competition       (0.749)            (0.945)          (0.780)             (0.250)       (0.053)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       51.995 [80.557]   51.918 [86.455] 52.259 [89.053] 5.124 [22.048]        3.762 [4.042]
                  Observations            1,807,648         1,790,068         1,896,918          1,633,578       1,633,578
                                                                  Panel C. Mother high school dropout
                  Expansion × above       3.109***             0.966           5.404***          -1.589***       -0.193**
                  median competition       (0.762)            (0.923)           (0.833)            (0.477)        (0.095)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -43.279 [88.547] -42.509 [97.770] -43.525 [95.370] 21.728 [41.240]        6.455 [7.169]
                  Observations          1,511,217        1,499,602         1,616,155          1,341,389          1,341,389
                                                               Panel D. Mother high school graduate
                  Expansion × above      1.775***          -0.213           3.740***            -0.252          -0.176***
                  median competition      (0.598)          (0.728)           (0.640)            (0.281)          (0.051)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       1.336 [87.366]    1.001 [94.301]     1.438 [94.687] 12.627 [33.215]     4.869 [5.413]
                  Observations           3,754,631         3,723,846          4,004,160          3,318,165       3,318,165
                                                                   Panel E. Mother college graduate
                  Expansion × above         1.161            -0.324            2.009**             -0.113       -0.153***
                  median competition       (0.875)           (1.104)            (0.927)            (0.286)       (0.056)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       65.699 [82.758]   66.072 [88.959] 65.192 [91.139] 4.160 [19.967]        3.355 [3.789]
                  Observations             921,715           908,430          990,752        794,099              794,099
                                                                       Panel F. White mother
                  Expansion × above         0.592             0.015             1.077         -0.095             -0.163**
                  median competition       (0.692)           (0.865)          (0.683)        (0.296)              (0.066)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       22.957 [88.068]   22.440 [93.939] 23.308 [96.293] 10.113 [30.150]       5.253 [5.726]
                  Observations            3,170,846         3,146,594         3,362,580        2,828,887         2,828,887
                                                                   Panel G. African-American mother
                  Expansion × above         1.087              0.867            1.721**           0.879            0.136
                  median competition       (0.833)            (1.054)            (0.865)         (0.594)          (0.090)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -48.852 [88.588] -49.836 [98.533] -47.516 [94.446] 25.448 [43.557]        5.310 [6.478]
                  Observations          1,420,501        1,408,927         1,518,874         1,254,177           1,254,177
                                                                    Panel H. Hispanic mother
                  Expansion × above      2.828***          -0.552           6.013***         -1.736***            -0.055
                  median competition      (0.895)          (1.120)           (1.005)           (0.389)            (0.075)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -6.396 [88.173]   -4.972 [95.269] -7.637 [95.336] 10.491 [30.643]       4.440 [5.187]
                  Observations            1,475,615         1,457,395         1,599,177          1,267,259       1,267,259
                                                                    Panel I. Mother born in the U.S.
                  Expansion × above         0.358             -0.763            1.312**            -0.056       -0.161***
                  median competition       (0.588)            (0.740)           (0.578)            (0.293)       (0.059)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -1.250 [93.922]   -1.907 [100.711] -0.701 [100.901] 14.836 [35.545]     5.371 [6.004]
                  Observations            4,759,439          4,722,232           5,070,104        4,217,517      4,217,517
                                                                       Panel J. Foreign born mother
                  Expansion × above         0.602             -2.469**            3.567***         -0.967***      -0.018
                  median competition       (0.852)             (1.090)             (0.950)          (0.365)       (0.061)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       4.284 [90.192]    6.389 [97.308]     2.307 [96.939]    9.529 [29.361]   3.905 [4.802]
                  Observations           1,428,124         1,409,646          1,540,963         1,236,136        1,236,136

Note: Specifications are based on those in panel C of Table 3 with the baseline sample split by child's free or reduced price lunch
history (panels A and B), maternal education (panels C to E), race/ethnicity (panels F to H), and maternal immigration status
(panels I and J). Outcome variables are averaged mathematics and reading test scores (column 1), mathematics test scores
(column 2), reading test scores (column 3), likelihood of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard
errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                      53
            Table A6: Heterogeneity in the effects of voucher expansion: Churches measure
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)           (5)
                                       Math + Reading     Mathematics        Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                            Panel A. Ever on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       5.335***         2.900***          7.698***           -2.330***       -0.378***
                  median competition       (0.640)          (0.768)           (0.694)            (0.338)         (0.062)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -21.420 [89.403] -21.405 [97.323] -21.028 [96.392] 17.271 [37.800]      5.585 [6.310]
                  Observations            4,379,915         4,341,810        4,714,149           3,820,075      3,820,075
                                                             Panel B. Never on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       3.926***           2.423***         4.789***           -1.125***       -0.110**
                  median competition       (0.738)            (0.928)          (0.756)             (0.255)        (0.053)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       51.995 [80.557]   51.918 [86.455] 52.259 [89.053] 5.124 [22.048]        3.762 [4.042]
                  Observations            1,807,648         1,790,068         1,896,918          1,633,578       1,633,578
                                                                  Panel C. Mother high school dropout
                  Expansion × above       4.594***           2.705***          6.433***          -2.832***      -0.305***
                  median competition       (0.779)            (0.945)           (0.870)            (0.487)       (0.096)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -43.279 [88.547] -42.509 [97.770] -43.525 [95.370] 21.728 [41.240]        6.455 [7.169]
                  Observations          1,511,217        1,499,602         1,616,155          1,341,389          1,341,389
                                                               Panel D. Mother high school graduate
                  Expansion × above      4.648***         2.085***          7.097***           -1.346***        -0.273***
                  median competition      (0.602)          (0.743)           (0.637)            (0.286)          (0.050)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       1.336 [87.366]    1.001 [94.301]     1.438 [94.687] 12.627 [33.215]     4.869 [5.413]
                  Observations           3,754,631         3,723,846          4,004,160          3,318,165       3,318,165
                                                                   Panel E. Mother college graduate
                  Expansion × above       3.281***            1.512            3.943***          -0.761***        -0.051
                  median competition       (0.883)           (1.127)            (0.929)            (0.288)        (0.057)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       65.699 [82.758]   66.072 [88.959] 65.192 [91.139] 4.160 [19.967]        3.355 [3.789]
                  Observations             921,715           908,430          990,752         794,099             794,099
                                                                       Panel F. White mother
                  Expansion × above       4.031***           3.013***         4.683***       -1.382***            -0.094
                  median competition       (0.665)            (0.828)          (0.652)        (0.283)             (0.066)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       22.957 [88.068]   22.440 [93.939] 23.308 [96.293] 10.113 [30.150]       5.253 [5.726]
                  Observations            3,170,846         3,146,594         3,362,580        2,828,887         2,828,887
                                                                   Panel G. African-American mother
                  Expansion × above       3.406***           3.159***           4.197***        -1.322**          -0.043
                  median competition       (0.872)            (1.132)            (0.880)         (0.672)          (0.095)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -48.852 [88.588] -49.836 [98.533] -47.516 [94.446] 25.448 [43.557]        5.310 [6.478]
                  Observations          1,420,501        1,408,927         1,518,874         1,254,177           1,254,177
                                                                    Panel H. Hispanic mother
                  Expansion × above      4.666***           1.455           7.624***         -1.686***           -0.145*
                  median competition      (0.975)          (1.210)           (1.082)           (0.421)           (0.080)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -6.396 [88.173]   -4.972 [95.269] -7.637 [95.336] 10.491 [30.643]       4.440 [5.187]
                  Observations            1,475,615         1,457,395          1,599,177          1,267,259      1,267,259
                                                                     Panel I. Mother born in the U.S.
                  Expansion × above       2.481***             1.130            3.490***           -1.239***    -0.231***
                  median competition       (0.591)            (0.746)            (0.570)            (0.293)      (0.058)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -1.250 [93.922]   -1.907 [100.711] -0.701 [100.901] 14.836 [35.545]     5.371 [6.004]
                  Observations            4,759,439          4,722,232           5,070,104        4,217,517      4,217,517
                                                                       Panel J. Foreign born mother
                  Expansion × above       2.476***             -0.838             5.590***         -1.104***      -0.080
                  median competition       (0.931)             (1.176)             (1.012)          (0.386)       (0.067)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       4.284 [90.192]    6.389 [97.308]     2.307 [96.939]    9.529 [29.361]   3.905 [4.802]
                  Observations           1,428,124         1,409,646          1,540,963         1,236,136        1,236,136

Note: Specifications are based on those in panel D of Table 3 with the baseline sample split by child's free or reduced price lunch
history (panels A and B), maternal education (panels C to E), race/ethnicity (panels F to H), and maternal immigration status
(panels I and J). Outcome variables are averaged mathematics and reading test scores (column 1), mathematics test scores
(column 2), reading test scores (column 3), likelihood of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard
errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                      54
               Table A7: Heterogeneity in the effects of voucher expansion: Slots measure
                                            (1)               (2)               (3)                 (4)           (5)
                                       Math + Reading     Mathematics        Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                            Panel A. Ever on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       7.481***         4.384***         10.515***           -2.334***       -0.427***
                  median competition       (0.614)          (0.755)           (0.655)            (0.337)         (0.063)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -21.409 [89.396] -21.402 [97.315] -21.010 [96.385] 17.305 [37.829]      5.587 [6.314]
                  Observations            4,362,211         4,324,143        4,696,426           3,803,417      3,803,417
                                                             Panel B. Never on free or reduced price lunch
                  Expansion × above       4.392***           2.949***         5.655***           -1.325***       -0.133**
                  median competition       (0.774)            (0.981)          (0.775)             (0.255)        (0.054)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       51.933 [80.552]   51.840 [86.435] 52.216 [89.054] 5.147 [22.095]        3.763 [4.044]
                  Observations            1,798,314         1,780,746         1,887,588          1,624,568       1,624,568
                                                                  Panel C. Mother high school dropout
                  Expansion × above       6.144***           3.651***          8.629***          -2.533***      -0.355***
                  median competition       (0.749)            (0.924)           (0.835)            (0.480)       (0.096)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -43.261 [88.539] -42.496 [97.764] -43.506 [95.362] 21.774 [41.271]        6.460 [7.175]
                  Observations          1,504,461        1,492,865         1,609,399          1,334,914          1,334,914
                                                               Panel D. Mother high school graduate
                  Expansion × above      6.464***         3.504***          9.376***           -1.549***        -0.324***
                  median competition      (0.594)          (0.749)           (0.616)            (0.287)          (0.052)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       1.324 [87.359]    0.979 [94.291]     1.434 [94.682] 12.655 [33.247]     4.870 [5.415]
                  Observations           3,739,944         3,709,186          3,989,457          3,304,238       3,304,238
                                                                   Panel E. Mother college graduate
                  Expansion × above       3.459***            1.634            4.881***          -0.967***        -0.031
                  median competition       (0.932)           (1.174)            (0.957)            (0.297)        (0.058)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       65.640 [82.760]   65.993 [88.952] 65.155 [91.140] 4.182 [20.017]        3.356 [3.792]
                  Observations             916,120           902,838          985,158         788,833             788,833
                                                                       Panel F. White mother
                  Expansion × above       5.523***           4.367***         6.528***       -1.717***          -0.255***
                  median competition       (0.672)            (0.854)          (0.646)        (0.282)            (0.063)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       22.894 [88.067]   22.368 [93.933] 23.256 [96.293] 10.145 [30.193]       5.257 [5.730]
                  Observations            3,156,514         3,132,289         3,348,248        2,815,187         2,815,187
                                                                   Panel G. African-American mother
                  Expansion × above       5.482***           4.467***           6.961***         -0.810            0.008
                  median competition       (0.816)            (1.076)            (0.806)         (0.660)          (0.097)
                  Mean [SD] of Y     -48.816 [88.572] -49.807 [98.517] -47.479 [94.430] 25.486 [43.578]        5.311 [6.483]
                  Observations          1,414,642        1,403,085         1,513,010         1,248,570           1,248,570
                                                                    Panel H. Hispanic mother
                  Expansion × above      5.986***           1.721           9.875***         -2.658***           -0.208**
                  median competition      (0.993)          (1.241)           (1.081)           (0.435)            (0.087)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -6.380 [88.165]   -4.972 [95.255] -7.608 [95.334] 10.518 [30.678]       4.441 [5.190]
                  Observations            1,469,512         1,451,296         1,593,065          1,261,615       1,261,615
                                                                    Panel I. Mother born in the U.S.
                  Expansion × above       4.585***           2.904***          6.065***           -1.427***     -0.295***
                  median competition       (0.588)            (0.754)           (0.558)            (0.292)       (0.059)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       -1.281 [93.900]   -1.947 [100.685] -0.724 [100.883] 14.870 [35.579]     5.374 [6.008]
                  Observations            4,739,008          4,701,848           5,049,671        4,198,015      4,198,015
                                                                       Panel J. Foreign born mother
                  Expansion × above       3.259***             -0.614             6.952***         -1.859***     -0.141*
                  median competition       (0.946)             (1.194)             (1.031)          (0.401)      (0.074)
                  Mean [SD] of Y       4.272 [90.182]    6.359 [97.294]     2.311 [96.932]    9.558 [29.402]   3.907 [4.805]
                  Observations           1,421,517         1,403,041          1,534,343         1,229,970        1,229,970

Note: Specifications are based on those in panel E of Table 3 with the baseline sample split by child's free or reduced price lunch
history (panels A and B), maternal education (panels C to E), race/ethnicity (panels F to H), and maternal immigration status
(panels I and J). Outcome variables are averaged mathematics and reading test scores (column 1), mathematics test scores
(column 2), reading test scores (column 3), likelihood of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard
errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and
10 percent levels, respectively.


                                                                      55
                          Table A8: Robustness of the estimates: Diversity measure
                                                 (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)              (5)
                                           Math + Reading     Mathematics           Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                                                Panel A. Baseline
                      Expansion × above       4.233***          1.937***            6.539***            -0.504*        -0.265***
                      median competition       (0.599)           (0.736)             (0.618)            (0.267)         (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.633 [34.314]   5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563         6,131,878          6,611,067         5,453,653          5,453,653
                                                                   Panel B. Continuous competition measure
                      Expansion ×             1.020***          0.534***           1.534***         -0.179***          -0.071***
                      competition              (0.129)           (0.166)            (0.127)          (0.053)            (0.011)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000] 0.000 [100.000] 13.633 [34.314]          5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563          6,131,878          6,611,067        5,453,653           5,453,653
                                                                    Panel C. Log funding expansion measure
                      Expansion × above       3.940***           1.945***           5.777***         -0.554**          -0.292***
                      median competition       (0.561)            (0.693)            (0.559)          (0.268)           (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.633 [34.314]   5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563        6,131,878         6,611,067         5,453,653          5,453,653
                                               Panel D. Competition measure unweighted with elementary to middle school flows
                      Expansion × above       3.965***         1.960***          5.861***           -0.200           -0.197***
                      median competition       (0.572)           (0.713)          (0.589)           (0.252)            (0.047)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.107 [92.883]   0.118 [99.757]     0.026 [99.869] 13.240 [33.892]        5.008 [5.703]
                      Observations           5,843,075         5,795,031          6,213,961          5,186,087         5,186,087
                                               Panel E. Weights based solely on pre-program transitions between grades 5 and 6
                      Expansion × above       4.317***          1.918***            6.792***            -0.368         -0.225***
                      median competition       (0.579)           (0.712)             (0.603)            (0.264)         (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.105] 0.000 [100.000] 0.000 [100.000] 13.620 [34.301]             5.035 [5.789]
                      Observations           6,098,353          6,043,455         6,514,413           5,377,233         5,377,233
                                              Panel F. Limiting the sample to schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles
                      Expansion × above       2.992***             1.064           4.810***             -0.387           -0.183***
                      median competition       (0.604)            (0.753)           (0.628)            (0.274)            (0.053)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.033 [93.144]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.600 [34.279]   5.006 [5.776]
                      Observations           5,730,114         5,677,273          6,119,166         5,055,539          5,055,539
                                                                  Panel G. School years 2002/03 to 2011/12
                      Expansion × above       3.911***          1.912***           5.976***          -0.504*           -0.265***
                      median competition       (0.592)           (0.735)            (0.621)          (0.267)            (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       -0.190 [92.937]   0.000 [99.999]     0.000 [99.999] 13.633 [34.314]        5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations            5,361,423        5,349,158          5,348,374          5,453,653          5,453,653
                                                                       Panel H. Balanced panel (6-years)
                      Expansion × above       4.786***          3.053***           6.271***           -0.770**         -0.356***
                      median competition       (0.666)           (0.825)            (0.690)            (0.306)          (0.055)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.121 [92.953]    0.001 [99.999]      0.001 [99.999] 14.491 [35.201]       4.967 [5.547]
                      Observations           3,975,445          3,936,192          5,325,819          2,857,336         2,857,336
                                                                   Panel I. In sample standardized test scores
                      Expansion × above       4.124***           1.767**            6.480***
                      median competition       (0.590)            (0.731)            (0.611)
                                                                                                         N/A              N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.090 [92.607]    0.229 [99.846] -0.049 [99.823]
                      Observations           5,783,177          5,783,177          5,783,177
                                                               Panel J. In population standardized scores sample
                      Expansion × above       4.160***           1.946***           6.374***
                      median competition       (0.559)            (0.698)            (0.581)
                                                                                                         N/A              N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       4.698 [89.085]    4.695 [96.395]      4.702 [95.627]
                      Observations           5,783,177          5,783,177          5,783,177

Note: Robustness checks based on those in panel A of Table 3. Panel A replicates the main result from panel A of Table 3; panel
B replaces dummy indicator for above median pre-reform competition with continuous measure; panel C replaces logarithm of
number of scholarships expansion measure with logarithm of funding; panel D assigns the middle-school pre-policy competition
measures based on the actual grade 6 (middle) school initially attended by each student; panel E generates expected competitive
pressure measures for middle school-aged students using only pre-policy announcement flow between elementary and middle
schools; panel F limits the initial sample to only schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles; panel G restricts the
sample to school years 2002/03 to 2011/12 where we observe all five outcomes; panel H restricts the sample to 6-year panel of
observations starting with grade 3 and within school years available for a given variable; panels I and J restrict the sample to
school years 2002/03 to 2012/13 where we observe test scores that are standardized for the full population of Florida students -
panel I presents our in-sample standardization while panel J population-level standardization. Outcome variables are averaged
mathematics and reading test score (column 1), mathematics test score (column 2), reading test score (column 3), likelihood
of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point
estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                           56
                           Table A9: Robustness of the estimates: Density measure
                                                 (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)              (5)
                                           Math + Reading     Mathematics           Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                                                Panel A. Baseline
                      Expansion × above       5.293***          2.817***            7.566***           -1.109***       -0.258***
                      median competition       (0.586)           (0.728)             (0.608)            (0.268)         (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.633 [34.314]   5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563         6,131,878          6,611,067         5,453,653          5,453,653
                                                                   Panel B. Continuous competition measure
                      Expansion ×             0.209***          0.080***           0.342***         -0.063***          -0.014***
                      competition              (0.023)           (0.029)            (0.025)           (0.009)           (0.002)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000] 0.000 [100.000] 13.633 [34.314]          5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563          6,131,878          6,611,067        5,453,653           5,453,653
                                                                    Panel C. Log funding expansion measure
                      Expansion × above       4.909***           2.735***           6.666***        -1.179***          -0.290***
                      median competition       (0.549)            (0.686)            (0.550)          (0.270)           (0.051)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.633 [34.314]   5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563        6,131,878         6,611,067         5,453,653          5,453,653
                                               Panel D. Competition measure unweighted with elementary to middle school flows
                      Expansion × above       4.982***         2.658***          7.100***         -0.712***          -0.271***
                      median competition       (0.561)           (0.705)          (0.580)           (0.252)            (0.047)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.107 [92.883]   0.118 [99.757]     0.026 [99.869] 13.240 [33.892]        5.008 [5.703]
                      Observations           5,843,075         5,795,031          6,213,961          5,186,087         5,186,087
                                               Panel E. Weights based solely on pre-program transitions between grades 5 and 6
                      Expansion × above       5.789***          3.337***            8.213***           -1.151***       -0.224***
                      median competition       (0.574)           (0.713)             (0.591)            (0.266)         (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.105] 0.000 [100.000] 0.000 [100.000] 13.620 [34.301]             5.035 [5.789]
                      Observations           6,098,353          6,043,455         6,514,413           5,377,233         5,377,233
                                              Panel F. Limiting the sample to schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles
                      Expansion × above       4.324***           2.184***          6.317***           -1.295***          -0.178***
                      median competition       (0.613)            (0.754)           (0.639)             (0.282)           (0.053)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.033 [93.144]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.600 [34.279]   5.006 [5.776]
                      Observations           5,730,114         5,677,273          6,119,166         5,055,539          5,055,539
                                                                  Panel G. School years 2002/03 to 2011/12
                      Expansion × above       4.768***          2.700***           6.868***         -1.109***          -0.258***
                      median competition       (0.582)           (0.729)            (0.610)           (0.268)           (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       -0.190 [92.937]   0.000 [99.999]     0.000 [99.999] 13.633 [34.314]        5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations            5,361,423        5,349,158          5,348,374          5,453,653          5,453,653
                                                                       Panel H. Balanced panel (6-years)
                      Expansion × above       5.813***          3.850***           7.243***          -1.277***         -0.361***
                      median competition       (0.652)           (0.814)            (0.682)            (0.308)          (0.054)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.121 [92.953]    0.001 [99.999]      0.001 [99.999]     14.491 [35.201]   4.967 [5.547]
                      Observations           3,975,445          3,936,192          5,325,819          2,857,336        2,857,336
                                                                   Panel I. In sample standardized test scores
                      Expansion × above       5.017***           2.634***           7.399***
                      median competition       (0.580)            (0.725)            (0.600)
                                                                                                         N/A              N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.090 [92.607]    0.229 [99.846] -0.049 [99.823]
                      Observations           5,783,177          5,783,177          5,783,177
                                                               Panel J. In population standardized scores sample
                      Expansion × above       5.040***           2.814***           7.266***
                      median competition       (0.549)            (0.692)            (0.570)
                                                                                                         N/A              N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       4.698 [89.085]    4.695 [96.395]      4.702 [95.627]
                      Observations           5,783,177          5,783,177          5,783,177

Note: Robustness checks based on those in panel B of Table 3. Panel A replicates the main result from panel B of Table 3; panel
B replaces dummy indicator for above median pre-reform competition with continuous measure; panel C replaces logarithm of
number of scholarships expansion measure with logarithm of funding; panel D assigns the middle-school pre-policy competition
measures based on the actual grade 6 (middle) school initially attended by each student; panel E generates expected competitive
pressure measures for middle school-aged students using only pre-policy announcement flow between elementary and middle
schools; panel F limits the initial sample to only schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles; panel G restricts the
sample to school years 2002/03 to 2011/12 where we observe all five outcomes; panel H restricts the sample to 6-year panel of
observations starting with grade 3 and within school years available for a given variable; panels I and J restrict the sample to
school years 2002/03 to 2012/13 where we observe test scores that are standardized for the full population of Florida students -
panel I presents our in-sample standardization while panel J population-level standardization. Outcome variables are averaged
mathematics and reading test score (column 1), mathematics test score (column 2), reading test score (column 3), likelihood
of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point
estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                           57
                          Table A10: Robustness of the estimates: Distance measure
                                                 (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)              (5)
                                           Math + Reading     Mathematics           Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                                                Panel A. Baseline
                      Expansion × above       1.648***           -0.308             3.542***            -0.430*        -0.151***
                      median competition       (0.590)           (0.712)             (0.622)            (0.261)         (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.633 [34.314]   5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563         6,131,878          6,611,067         5,453,653          5,453,653
                                                                   Panel B. Continuous competition measure
                      Expansion ×             0.887***          0.532***           1.246***          -0.126**          -0.071***
                      competition              (0.148)           (0.201)            (0.140)           (0.061)           (0.013)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000] 0.000 [100.000] 13.633 [34.314]          5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563          6,131,878          6,611,067        5,453,653           5,453,653
                                                                    Panel C. Log funding expansion measure
                      Expansion × above       1.528***            -0.280            3.174***          -0.408           -0.167***
                      median competition       (0.551)            (0.670)            (0.561)          (0.264)           (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.633 [34.314]   5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563        6,131,878         6,611,067         5,453,653          5,453,653
                                               Panel D. Competition measure unweighted with elementary to middle school flows
                      Expansion × above       1.623***            0.223          3.009***         -0.672***           -0.109**
                      median competition       (0.553)           (0.692)          (0.573)           (0.237)            (0.045)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.107 [92.883]   0.118 [99.757]     0.026 [99.869] 13.240 [33.892]        5.008 [5.703]
                      Observations           5,843,075         5,795,031          6,213,961          5,186,087         5,186,087
                                               Panel E. Weights based solely on pre-program transitions between grades 5 and 6
                      Expansion × above       2.270***           -0.017             4.678***            -0.276         -0.136***
                      median competition       (0.568)           (0.687)             (0.607)            (0.257)         (0.051)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.105] 0.000 [100.000] 0.000 [100.000] 13.620 [34.301]             5.035 [5.789]
                      Observations           6,098,353          6,043,455         6,514,413           5,377,233         5,377,233
                                              Panel F. Limiting the sample to schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles
                      Expansion × above       1.245**              0.145           2.345***            -0.700**           -0.050
                      median competition       (0.602)            (0.733)           (0.641)             (0.273)           (0.051)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.033 [93.144]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.600 [34.279]   5.006 [5.776]
                      Observations           5,730,114         5,677,273          6,119,166         5,055,539          5,055,539
                                                                  Panel G. School years 2002/03 to 2011/12
                      Expansion × above       1.213**            -0.275            2.755***          -0.430*           -0.151***
                      median competition      (0.590)            (0.717)            (0.629)           (0.261)           (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       -0.190 [92.937]   0.000 [99.999]     0.000 [99.999] 13.633 [34.314]        5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations            5,361,423        5,349,158          5,348,374          5,453,653          5,453,653
                                                                       Panel H. Balanced panel (6-years)
                      Expansion × above       1.861***            0.232            3.022***           -0.530*          -0.170***
                      median competition       (0.662)           (0.815)            (0.691)            (0.304)          (0.054)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.121 [92.953]    0.001 [99.999]      0.001 [99.999] 14.491 [35.201]       4.967 [5.547]
                      Observations           3,975,445          3,936,192          5,325,819          2,857,336         2,857,336
                                                                   Panel I. In sample standardized test scores
                      Expansion × above       1.573***            -0.265            3.412***
                      median competition       (0.584)            (0.708)            (0.616)
                                                                                                         N/A              N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.090 [92.607]    0.229 [99.846] -0.049 [99.823]
                      Observations           5,783,177          5,783,177          5,783,177
                                                               Panel J. In population standardized scores sample
                      Expansion × above       1.720***             0.019            3.420***
                      median competition       (0.555)            (0.677)            (0.589)
                                                                                                         N/A              N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       4.698 [89.085]    4.695 [96.395]      4.702 [95.627]
                      Observations           5,783,177          5,783,177          5,783,177

Note: Robustness checks based on those in panel C of Table 3. Panel A replicates the main result from panel C of Table 3; panel
B replaces dummy indicator for above median pre-reform competition with continuous measure; panel C replaces logarithm of
number of scholarships expansion measure with logarithm of funding; panel D assigns the middle-school pre-policy competition
measures based on the actual grade 6 (middle) school initially attended by each student; panel E generates expected competitive
pressure measures for middle school-aged students using only pre-policy announcement flow between elementary and middle
schools; panel F limits the initial sample to only schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles; panel G restricts the
sample to school years 2002/03 to 2011/12 where we observe all five outcomes; panel H restricts the sample to 6-year panel of
observations starting with grade 3 and within school years available for a given variable; panels I and J restrict the sample to
school years 2002/03 to 2012/13 where we observe test scores that are standardized for the full population of Florida students -
panel I presents our in-sample standardization while panel J population-level standardization. Outcome variables are averaged
mathematics and reading test score (column 1), mathematics test score (column 2), reading test score (column 3), likelihood
of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point
estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                           58
                         Table A11: Robustness of the estimates: Churches measure
                                                 (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)              (5)
                                           Math + Reading     Mathematics           Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                                                Panel A. Baseline
                      Expansion × above       3.917***           1.643**            5.966***           -1.428***       -0.223***
                      median competition       (0.598)           (0.727)             (0.626)            (0.265)         (0.051)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.633 [34.314]   5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563         6,131,878          6,611,067        5,453,653           5,453,653
                                                                   Panel B. Continuous competition measure
                      Expansion ×             0.012***            0.003            0.021***         -0.006***          -0.001***
                      competition              (0.003)           (0.003)            (0.003)          (0.001)            (0.000)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000] 0.000 [100.000] 13.633 [34.314]          5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563          6,131,878          6,611,067        5,453,653           5,453,653
                                                                    Panel C. Log funding expansion measure
                      Expansion × above       3.639***           1.518**            5.336***        -1.401***          -0.245***
                      median competition       (0.559)            (0.684)            (0.566)          (0.266)           (0.051)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.104]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.633 [34.314]   5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations           6,187,563        6,131,878         6,611,067         5,453,653          5,453,653
                                               Panel D. Competition measure unweighted with elementary to middle school flows
                      Expansion × above       3.650***          1.483**          5.517***         -1.411***          -0.242***
                      median competition       (0.570)           (0.710)          (0.590)           (0.249)            (0.046)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.107 [92.883]   0.118 [99.757]     0.026 [99.869] 13.240 [33.892]        5.008 [5.703]
                      Observations           5,843,075         5,795,031          6,213,961          5,186,087         5,186,087
                                               Panel E. Weights based solely on pre-program transitions between grades 5 and 6
                      Expansion × above       3.557***            1.149             5.904***           -1.203***       -0.141***
                      median competition       (0.576)           (0.707)             (0.607)            (0.260)         (0.051)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.027 [93.105] 0.000 [100.000] 0.000 [100.000] 13.620 [34.301]             5.035 [5.789]
                      Observations           6,098,353          6,043,455         6,514,413           5,377,233         5,377,233
                                              Panel F. Limiting the sample to schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles
                      Expansion × above       2.421***             0.479           4.108***           -1.290***          -0.120**
                      median competition       (0.610)            (0.743)           (0.644)             (0.278)           (0.051)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.033 [93.144]    0.000 [100.000]    0.000 [100.000]     13.600 [34.279]   5.006 [5.776]
                      Observations           5,730,114         5,677,273          6,119,166         5,055,539          5,055,539
                                                                  Panel G. School years 2002/03 to 2011/12
                      Expansion × above       3.356***          2.022***           4.728***         -1.428***          -0.223***
                      median competition       (0.593)           (0.730)            (0.627)           (0.265)           (0.051)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       -0.190 [92.937]   0.000 [99.999]     0.000 [99.999] 13.633 [34.314]        5.039 [5.786]
                      Observations            5,361,423        5,349,158          5,348,374          5,453,653          5,453,653
                                                                       Panel H. Balanced panel (6-years)
                      Expansion × above       4.304***          2.768***           5.107***          -1.475***         -0.231***
                      median competition       (0.662)           (0.815)            (0.698)            (0.303)          (0.054)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.121 [92.953]    0.001 [99.999]      0.001 [99.999] 14.491 [35.201]       4.967 [5.547]
                      Observations           3,975,445          3,936,192          5,325,819          2,857,336         2,857,336
                                                                   Panel I. In sample standardized test scores
                      Expansion × above       3.530***           1.615**            5.445***
                      median competition       (0.590)            (0.723)            (0.618)
                                                                                                         N/A              N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.090 [92.607]    0.229 [99.846] -0.049 [99.823]
                      Observations           5,783,177          5,783,177          5,783,177
                                                               Panel J. In population standardized scores sample
                      Expansion × above       3.757***           2.046***           5.469***
                      median competition       (0.559)            (0.690)            (0.588)
                                                                                                         N/A              N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       4.698 [89.085]    4.695 [96.395]      4.702 [95.627]
                      Observations           5,783,177          5,783,177          5,783,177

Note: Robustness checks based on those in panel D of Table 3. Panel A replicates the main result from panel D of Table 3; panel
B replaces dummy indicator for above median pre-reform competition with continuous measure; panel C replaces logarithm of
number of scholarships expansion measure with logarithm of funding; panel D assigns the middle-school pre-policy competition
measures based on the actual grade 6 (middle) school initially attended by each student; panel E generates expected competitive
pressure measures for middle school-aged students using only pre-policy announcement flow between elementary and middle
schools; panel F limits the initial sample to only schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles; panel G restricts the
sample to school years 2002/03 to 2011/12 where we observe all five outcomes; panel H restricts the sample to 6-year panel of
observations starting with grade 3 and within school years available for a given variable; panels I and J restrict the sample to
school years 2002/03 to 2012/13 where we observe test scores that are standardized for the full population of Florida students -
panel I presents our in-sample standardization while panel J population-level standardization. Outcome variables are averaged
mathematics and reading test score (column 1), mathematics test score (column 2), reading test score (column 3), likelihood
of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point
estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                           59
                             Table A12: Robustness of the estimates: Slots measure
                                                 (1)               (2)                 (3)                (4)              (5)
                                           Math + Reading     Mathematics           Reading          Suspensions       Absences
                                                                                Panel A. Baseline
                      Expansion × above       6.064***          3.361***            8.684***           -1.749***       -0.290***
                      median competition       (0.590)           (0.732)             (0.604)            (0.266)         (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.000 [93.085]    -0.038 [99.977]    -0.017 [99.984]     13.666 [34.349]   5.041 [5.790]
                      Observations           6,160,525          6,104,889          6,584,014         5,427,985         5,427,985
                                                                    Panel B. Continuous competition measure
                      Expansion ×             1.164***           0.491***           1.871***         -0.349***         -0.060***
                      competition              (0.102)            (0.128)            (0.108)           (0.043)          (0.008)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.000 [93.085]    -0.038 [99.977] -0.017 [99.984] 13.666 [34.349]          5.041 [5.790]
                      Observations           6,160,525          6,104,889          6,584,014        5,427,985           5,427,985
                                                                    Panel C. Log funding expansion measure
                      Expansion × above       5.631***           3.227***           7.728***        -1.859***          -0.314***
                      median competition       (0.552)            (0.688)            (0.546)          (0.267)           (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.000 [93.085]    -0.038 [99.977]    -0.017 [99.984]     13.666 [34.349]   5.041 [5.790]
                      Observations           6,160,525        6,104,889         6,584,014         5,427,985          5,427,985
                                               Panel D. Competition measure unweighted with elementary to middle school flows
                      Expansion × above       4.700***         2.040***          7.305***         -1.315***          -0.266***
                      median competition       (0.571)           (0.716)          (0.585)           (0.251)            (0.048)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       -0.003 [92.865] -0.002 [99.755] -0.072 [99.844] 13.223 [33.874]            5.011 [5.706]
                      Observations            5,761,773         5,714,711          6,123,884          5,117,781         5,117,781
                                                Panel E. Weights based solely on pre-program transitions between grades 5 and 6
                      Expansion × above       5.964***          3.140***            8.952***           -1.554***       -0.211***
                      median competition       (0.571)           (0.709)             (0.589)            (0.264)         (0.053)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.002 [93.084] -0.036 [99.975] -0.014 [99.984] 13.653 [34.336]             5.038 [5.793]
                      Observations           6,071,801          6,016,952         6,487,847           5,351,967         5,351,967
                                              Panel F. Limiting the sample to schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles
                      Expansion × above       5.406***           2.873***          7.876***           -1.781***          -0.192***
                      median competition       (0.612)            (0.757)           (0.631)             (0.284)           (0.053)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.003 [93.124]    -0.042 [99.976]    -0.019 [99.984]     13.636 [34.317]   5.008 [5.781]
                      Observations           5,703,761          5,650,965          6,092,805         5,030,501         5,030,501
                                                                   Panel G. School years 2002/03 to 2011/12
                      Expansion × above       5.485***           3.349***           7.670***         -1.749***         -0.290***
                      median competition       (0.586)            (0.733)            (0.610)           (0.266)          (0.052)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       -0.219 [92.915]   -0.040 [99.974] -0.019 [99.981] 13.666 [34.349]          5.041 [5.790]
                      Observations            5,336,140         5,323,917          5,323,137          5,427,985         5,427,985
                                                                        Panel H. Balanced panel (6-years)
                      Expansion × above       6.372***           4.225***           8.304***          -1.938***        -0.368***
                      median competition       (0.659)            (0.821)            (0.678)            (0.304)         (0.056)
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.095 [92.933]    -0.037 [99.974] -0.015 [99.986] 14.524 [35.234]          4.969 [5.551]
                      Observations           3,958,889           3,919,656          5,303,632          2,845,185        2,845,185
                                                                    Panel I. In sample standardized test scores
                      Expansion × above       5.752***            3.223***           8.282***
                      median competition       (0.582)             (0.728)            (0.596)
                                                                                                          N/A             N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       0.061 [92.587]     0.190 [99.823] -0.069 [99.805]
                      Observations           5,756,691           5,756,691          5,756,691
                                                                Panel J. In population standardized scores sample
                      Expansion × above       5.746***            3.357***           8.135***
                      median competition       (0.551)             (0.695)            (0.568)
                                                                                                          N/A             N/A
                      Mean [SD] of Y       4.669 [89.064]     4.657 [96.371]      4.681 [95.610]
                      Observations           5,756,691           5,756,691          5,756,691

Note: Robustness checks based on those in panel E of Table 3. Panel A replicates the main result from panel E of Table 3; panel
B replaces dummy indicator for above median pre-reform competition with continuous measure; panel C replaces logarithm of
number of scholarships expansion measure with logarithm of funding; panel D assigns the middle-school pre-policy competition
measures based on the actual grade 6 (middle) school initially attended by each student; panel E generates expected competitive
pressure measures for middle school-aged students using only pre-policy announcement flow between elementary and middle
schools; panel F limits the initial sample to only schools with at least one competitor within 5 miles; panel G restricts the
sample to school years 2002/03 to 2011/12 where we observe all five outcomes; panel H restricts the sample to 6-year panel of
observations starting with grade 3 and within school years available for a given variable; panels I and J restrict the sample to
school years 2002/03 to 2012/13 where we observe test scores that are standardized for the full population of Florida students -
panel I presents our in-sample standardization while panel J population-level standardization. Outcome variables are averaged
mathematics and reading test score (column 1), mathematics test score (column 2), reading test score (column 3), likelihood
of being suspended (column 4), and absence rate (column 5). Standard errors are clustered at grade one school level. Point
estimates marked ***, **, and * are statistically significant at the 1, 5, and 10 percent levels, respectively.
                                                                           60
                                                           Figure A1: Effects of voucher expansion over school years
                                              A. Averaged math + reading                                                                                   D. Probability of being suspended
                       25




                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                       Likelihood of being suspended (%)
                                  20
         Math+reading effects (%SD)




                                                                                                                                                  0
                            15




                                                                                                                                       -10
              5     10




                                                                                                                             -20
         0




                                                                                                                                        -30
                       -5




                                       2003       2005        2007         2009        2011        2013                                                    2003          2005            2007           2009             2011
                                                                     School year (end)                                                                                                    School year (end)

                                              Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance                                                       Competition measure:       Diversity         Density     Distance
                                                                         Churches        Slots     PCA index                                                                                 Churches          Slots       PCA index



                                                         B. Mathematics                                                                                                      E. Absence rate
                       25




                                                                                                                                        10
                                  20
          Mathematics effects (%SD)




                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                       Absence rate (%)
                            15




                                                                                                                             -10
               5     10




                                                                                                                                        -20
         0




                                                                                                                                        -30
                       -5




                                       2003       2005        2007         2009        2011        2013                                                    2003          2005            2007           2009             2011
                                                                     School year (end)                                                                                                    School year (end)

                                              Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance                                                       Competition measure:       Diversity         Density     Distance
                                                                         Churches        Slots     PCA index                                                                                 Churches          Slots       PCA index



                                                             C. Reading
                       25      20
         Reading effects (%SD)
            5     10   0
                       -5 15




                                       2003     2005      2007       2009      2011        2013    2015    2017
                                                                     School year (end)

                                              Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance
                                                                         Churches        Slots     PCA index



Note: These figures plot estimates from the specifications estimated in panels A to F of Table 3 where instead of interaction
between competition measures and log number of scholarships we plot competition measures interacted with school years, and
with baseline omitted year 2002/2003. Outcomes are averaged test scores in mathematics and reading (panel A); mathematics
test scores (panel B); and reading test scores (panel C); likelihood of being suspended (panel D); and absence rate (panel E).
Competition measures are: number of denominational types represented (orange square); number of local private schools (navy
circle); miles to nearest private school competitor (maroon triangles); number of churches, synagogues, and mosques (green
diamonds); number of private school slots per grade (black pluses); and composite index of all five measures (khaki exes). Spikes
present 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at grade one school level.




                                                                                                                  61
 Figure A2: Effects of voucher expansion over school years by family socioeconomic status: Test
                                             scores
                                        I. Children ever on free or reduced       II. Children never on free or reduced
                                                    price lunch                                price lunch
                                                                  A. Averaged math + reading
                        30




                                                                                                                                       30
                                  25




                                                                                                                                                 25
         Math+reading effects (%SD)




                                                                                                                        Math+reading effects (%SD)
                              20




                                                                                                                                             20
                       15




                                                                                                                                      15
                 10




                                                                                                                                10
             5




                                                                                                                            5
                        0




                                                                                                                                       0
                        -5




                                                                                                                                       -5
                                        2003       2005        2007         2009        2011        2013                                               2003       2005        2007         2009        2011        2013
                                                                      School year (end)                                                                                              School year (end)

                                               Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance                                                  Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance
                                                                          Churches        Slots     PCA index                                                                            Churches        Slots     PCA index



                                                                                                       B. Mathematics
                        30




                                                                                                                                       30         25
                                   25
         Mathematics effects (%SD)




                                                                                                                        Mathematics effects (%SD)
                                                                                                                                             20
                              20




                                                                                                                                      15
                       15




                                                                                                                               10
                10




                                                                                                                           5
            5




                                                                                                                                       0
                        0




                                                                                                                                       -5
                        -5




                                        2003       2005        2007         2009        2011        2013                                               2003       2005        2007         2009        2011        2013
                                                                      School year (end)                                                                                              School year (end)

                                               Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance                                                  Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance
                                                                          Churches        Slots     PCA index                                                                            Churches        Slots     PCA index



                                                                                                           C. Reading
                        30




                                                                                                                                       30
                        25




                                                                                                                                       25
         Reading effects (%SD)




                                                                                                                        Reading effects (%SD)
                           20




                                                                                                                                          20
                     15




                                                                                                                                    15
               10




                                                                                                                              10
          5




                                                                                                                         5
                        0




                                                                                                                                       0
                        -5




                                                                                                                                       -5




                                        2003     2005      2007       2009      2011        2013    2015    2017                                       2003     2005      2007       2009      2011        2013    2015    2017
                                                                      School year (end)                                                                                              School year (end)

                                               Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance                                                  Competition measure:       Diversity       Density   Distance
                                                                          Churches        Slots     PCA index                                                                            Churches        Slots     PCA index



Note: These figures plot estimates from the specifications estimated in panels A and B of Tables 4 and A3 to A7, where instead
of interaction between competition measures and log number of scholarships we plot competition measures interacted with
school years, and with baseline omitted year 2002/2003. Outcomes are averaged test scores in mathematics and reading (panel
A); mathematics test scores (panel B); and reading test scores (panel C). Competition measures are: number of denominational
types represented (orange square); number of local private schools (navy circle); miles to nearest private school competitor
(maroon triangles); number of churches, synagogues, and mosques (green diamonds); number of private school slots per grade
(black pluses); and composite index of all five measures (khaki exes). Sample is divided into children from families ever observed
on free or reduced price lunch (column 1) and those never observed on free or reduced price lunch (column 2). Spikes present
95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at grade one school level.




                                                                                                                   62
     Figure A3: Effects of voucher expansion over school years by family socioeconomic status:
                                      Disciplinary outcomes
                                                 I. Children ever on free or reduced         II. Children never on free or reduced
                                                             price lunch                                  price lunch
                                                                        A. Probability of being suspended
                             20




                                                                                                                                                      20
             Likelihood of being suspended (%)




                                                                                                                                      Likelihood of being suspended (%)
                                                                                                                                  -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10
         -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0 10




                                                 2003          2005            2007           2009             2011                                                       2003          2005            2007           2009             2011
                                                                                School year (end)                                                                                                        School year (end)

                                                        Competition measure:       Diversity         Density     Distance                                                        Competition measure:       Diversity         Density     Distance
                                                                                   Churches          Slots       PCA index                                                                                  Churches          Slots       PCA index



                                                                                                                      B. Absence rate
                             10




                                                                                                                                                      10
                             5




                                                                                                                                                      5
         Absence rate (%)




                                                                                                                                  Absence rate (%)
                    0




                                                                                                                                             0
            -5




                                                                                                                                     -5
                             -10




                                                                                                                                                      -10
                             -15




                                                                                                                                                      -15




                                                 2003          2005            2007           2009             2011                                                       2003          2005            2007           2009             2011
                                                                                School year (end)                                                                                                        School year (end)

                                                        Competition measure:       Diversity         Density     Distance                                                        Competition measure:       Diversity         Density     Distance
                                                                                   Churches          Slots       PCA index                                                                                  Churches          Slots       PCA index



Note: These figures plot estimates from the specifications estimated in panels A and B of Tables 4 and A3 to A7, where instead of
interaction between competition measures and log number of scholarships we plot competition measures interacted with school
years, and with baseline omitted year 2002/2003. Outcomes are likelihood of being suspended (panel A) and absence rate (panel
B). Competition measures are: number of denominational types represented (orange square); number of local private schools
(navy circle); miles to nearest private school competitor (maroon triangles); number of churches, synagogues, and mosques
(green diamonds); number of private school slots per grade (black pluses); and composite index of all five measures (khaki
exes). Sample is divided into children from families ever observed on free or reduced price lunch (column 1) and those never
observed on free or reduced price lunch (column 2). Spikes present 95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered
at grade one school level.




                                                                                                                             63
       Figure A4: Effects of voucher expansion: Heterogeneity by socioeconomic status index




                                                   15
               Standardized (0,100) outcome measures
             -20 -15 -10 -5          0    5   10




                                                        1   2   3      4        5      6      7       8    9   10
                                                                    Deciles of socioeconomic status

                                                                Math+reading        Math         Reading
                                                                Suspensions         Absences

Note: This figure plots heterogeneity estimates for the main specification estimated in panel F of Table 3. These are computed
separately for each outcome and each decile of socioeconomic status distribution. SES index is computed as first component
from Principal Components Analysis (PCA) of maternal years of education, marital status, maternal age at birth, indicator
for Medicaid paid birth, and zip code neighborhood income at the time of birth. Sample is restricted to births between 1994
and 2002. Outcomes are averaged test scores in mathematics and reading (maroon squares); mathematics test scores (orange
triangles); reading test scores (navy circles); likelihood of being suspended (khaki diamonds); and absence rate (green pluses).
Each outcome variable is standardized in its empirical sample to have mean zero and standard deviation of 100. Spikes present
95% confidence intervals based on standard errors clustered at grade one school level.




                                                                               64
