                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            CAN INVESTORS TIME THEIR EXPOSURE TO PRIVATE EQUITY?

                                         Gregory Brown
                                         Robert S. Harris
                                           Wendy Hu
                                         Tim Jenkinson
                                        Steven N. Kaplan
                                        David T. Robinson

                                       Working Paper 26755
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w26755


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




The authors are grateful to Manuel Adelino, Oleg Gredil, Per Stromberg, Michael Cembalest and
seminar participants at the 2017 Private Equity Research Consortium Symposium, the 2019
Southern California Private Equity Conference, and the AlpInvest London LP Roundtable for
their helpful feedback and suggestions. We thank the Private Equity Research Consortium and
the UAI Foundation for their support and Burgiss for supplying data. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

At least one co-author has disclosed a financial relationship of potential relevance for this
research. Further information is available online at http://www.nber.org/papers/w26755.ack

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Gregory Brown, Robert S. Harris, Wendy Hu, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and
David T. Robinson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
Can Investors Time Their Exposure to Private Equity?
Gregory Brown, Robert S. Harris, Wendy Hu, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and David
T. Robinson
NBER Working Paper No. 26755
February 2020
JEL No. G23,G24

                                          ABSTRACT

Private equity performance, both for buyouts and venture capital, has been highly cyclical:
periods of high fundraising have been followed by periods of low performance. Despite this
seemingly predictable variation, we find modest gains, at best, to pursuing realistic, investable
strategies that time capital commitments to private equity. This occurs, in part, because investors
can only time their commitments to funds; they cannot time when commitments are called or
when investments are exited. There is a high degree of time-series correlation in net cash flows
even across commitment strategies that allocate capital in a very different manner over time.


Gregory Brown                                       Tim Jenkinson
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill         University of Oxford
Kenan-Flagler Business School                       Said Business School
gregwbrown@unc.edu                                  Park End Street
                                                    Oxford OX1 1HP
Robert S. Harris                                    United Kingdom
University of Virginia                              tim.jenkinson@sbs.ox.ac.uk
Darden School of Business
100 Darden Boulevard                                Steven N. Kaplan
Charlottesville, VA 22903                           Booth School of Business
HarrisR@darden.virginia.edu                         The University of Chicago
                                                    5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Wendy Hu                                            Chicago, IL 60637
Burgiss                                             and NBER
111 River Street, 10th Floor                        steven.kaplan@chicagobooth.edu
Hoboken, NJ 07030
WHu@burgiss.com                                     David T. Robinson
                                                    Fuqua School of Business
                                                    Duke University
                                                    100 Fuqua Drive
                                                    Durham, NC 27708
                                                    and NBER
                                                    davidr@duke.edu
               Can Investors Time Their Exposure to Private Equity?

                                             Abstract
       Private equity performance, both for buyouts and venture capital, has been highly
       cyclical: periods of high fundraising have been followed by periods of low
       performance. Despite this seemingly predictable variation, we find modest gains, at
       best, to pursuing realistic, investable strategies that time capital commitments to
       private equity. This occurs, in part, because investors can only time their
       commitments to funds; they cannot time when commitments are called or when
       investments are exited. There is a high degree of time-series correlation in net cash
       flows even across commitment strategies that allocate capital in a very different
       manner over time.



1.   Introduction

     This paper uses data on over 3500 private equity funds (both buyout and venture capital) to

investigate a distinguishing feature of many alternative assets which use closed-end fund

structures. In these structures, limited partner investors can only time their capital commitments to

funds; they cannot time when their commitments are called or when their investments are exited;

these decision rights over cash flows are vested with the general partner. While there is

considerable research on returns to private equity investing (e.g., see Kaplan and Sensoy (2015)

for a survey) and a long literature on timing in public equity markets (e.g., see Ferson and Mo

(2016)), this study is the first to investigate investor timing in private equity using comprehensive

data spanning three decades.

     Our first set of results are immensely practical for investors. We find the gains from

implementable timing strategies (pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical) are modest at best and likely

lead to organizational difficulties for large asset managers investing in private equity. This is

despite well-documented cyclicality in private equity performance that associates high levels of




                                                  2
fund raising with lower subsequent fund performance. 1

     The second set of results displays a key reason these timing benefits do not materialize and

surfaces an uncertainty faced by investors in such funds. There is a high degree of time-series

correlation in net cash distributions even across commitment strategies that allocate capital in a

very different manner over time. In effect, the thread between performance and the timing of

limited partner capital commitments is frayed by the commitment risk associated with delegating

investment and exit activity to the general partner. The high correlations reflect general partners

with funds in adjacent vintage years reacting to similar entry and exit conditions.

     A feature of many `alternative' assets is that investors must commit capital to funds, but

decisions on when to invest the capital and eventually exit those investments are made solely by

the fund manager. Such investment vehicles are typically structured as limited partnerships with

the fund manager as general partner (GP) and capital being drawn down over the first few years

of the fund life from limited partner (LP) investors. These partnerships are also usually self-

liquidating within a defined time period. Examples of assets with such structures include private

equity, infrastructure, private credit, natural resources, real estate, and funds-of-funds. This

`commitment' model of investing contrasts with conventional asset classes, such as listed equity

and fixed income, in which capital is immediately invested once investors make an allocation

decision.

     In private equity, this commitment model provides the GP with the resources and flexibility

to buy, manage and sell companies using its expertise, and in turn offers potentially higher returns

to LP investors from tapping into GP talent. Since LP ownership interests are generally illiquid,

returns typically come from waiting for GPs to exit and distribute cash, not from selling LP claims


1
 For evidence see Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014), Kaplan and Stromberg (2009) or Robinson and Sensoy
(2016).

                                                      3
on the fund. The distinction between commitment and cash flow creates challenges for investors

seeking to allocate capital to alternative assets.

     The temptation for investors to time commitments to private equity likely derives from the

perception that private equity markets, both buyouts and venture capital (VC) are highly cyclical. 2

The aggregate amount of capital committed to the sector varies substantially from peak to trough,

and periods of high fundraising activity are followed by periods of low performance for the asset

class. But can investors use realistic strategies to time their commitments to private equity to take

advantage of this cyclicality in performance? For instance, if periods of high fundraising are

known to be followed by low performance, then why not allocate capital in some appropriately

counter-cyclical manner to avoid the well-documented episodes of low performance?

     Using our data, we document the cyclical nature of performance in private equity over three

decades. This is consistent with prior research, showing that periods of high fundraising are

followed by lower performance. The effect is more pronounced in venture capital than in buyout;

moreover, the effects on absolute performance are larger than on performance relative to public

equity investing.

     Despite these clear patterns, however, we show that there are only modest performance

benefits from commitment strategies that investors might actually use to harness potential timing

gains. These fall well short of the gains that might be hoped for from statistical patterns found in

research; moreover, they must be weighed against organizational difficulties encountered in




2
  Other challenges include hitting a target asset allocation (which require larger commitments than the target, given
that committed capital is, on average, not fully invested) and management of liquidity (to meet capital calls when they
occur). Furthermore, if public markets fall dramatically (as in 2008), LPs can find themselves with capital
commitments that are higher than the desired allocations to private equity. Managing cash flows requires effort in
forecasting capital calls and distributions, a subject of considerable modeling in the industry (see for instance, Meads,
Morandi and Carnelli (2016)). See Gredil (2015) for an analysis of the potential agency problems that fund managers face
regarding the timing of exits.

                                                           4
constantly shifting private equity allocations. We create a range of potential timing strategies with

rules on how much to commit and whether this varies based on observable conditions in the

private and public markets. This allows us to contrast contrarian (counter-cyclical) strategies,

which reduce commitments in high fundraising periods, with pro-cyclical strategies and with

neutral strategies which do not try to adjust for the fundraising cycle. Our timing strategies are

based on measures of "hot" markets (high fundraising levels). For each strategy, we examine

performance based on the full time-series of cash flows (cash calls and distributions) and net asset

values that a limited partner investor would have experienced over our three decade sample

period.

        For buyouts, private equity investing beats public market returns, consistent with prior

research, but the extra benefits of timing strategies are modest. A neutral strategy which does not

time commitments pays back $1.80 for every dollar invested (a multiple of 1.80 of absolute

performance). Adjusted for the opportunity costs of not investing in the public markets, that

multiple translates to a 1.15 public market equivalent (PME) of relative performance for the

neutral strategy­that is 1.15 as much wealth as would have resulted from putting equivalently

timed cash in public equity. 3 By contrast, when we calibrate the fundraising cycle based on recent

levels of fundraising scaled by the value of the stock market, a counter-cyclical (pro-cyclical)

commitment strategy generates a multiple 1.86 (1.74) and a PME of 1.17 (1.09), quite comparable

to the figures for the neutral strategy.

        For venture capital, the more pronounced impact of the fundraising cycle on subsequent

performance identified by our analysis and earlier research suggests even higher potential timing

gains in VC than in buyout. Our results suggests these are hard, if not impossible, to harvest in



3
    See Kaplan and Schoar (2005) for a discussion of the public market equivalent performance metric.

                                                          5
practice. The timing gains resulting from the implementable strategies are generally modest;

moreover, timing measures to gauge the fundraising cycle send different signals on whether a

counter-cyclical strategy is useful, complicating any attempt to adopt timing in practice. The

patterns in VC reflect the difficulty in predicting market peaks ex ante; for example, 1997 and

1998 looked like fundraising peaks for venture capital from a historical standpoint, but were

eclipsed by fundraising in 1999 and 2000, which made counter-cyclical strategies benchmarked

against recent fundraising levels scale back too soon from an ex post perspective.

     Since investors in private equity funds are typically large institutions, the potential timing

benefits of adjusting annual allocations must be weighed against organizational frictions and costs

due to swings from one year to the next. Even for strategies that completely skip vintage years

(zero allocations), however, we find only limited gains to commitment timing unless the investor

were willing to skip the vast majority of all vintages--a policy likely inconsistent with any long

term program to evaluate and invest in private equity funds. These considerations reinforce our

earlier conclusions about the potential for any substantive net gains from timing policies.

     As a contrast to potential timing benefits, we find that commitment strategies that focus on

fund selection provide higher performance gains than those based on vintage year timing for both

buyout and venture. Giving a higher weighting to larger funds and more experienced GPs leads

to higher relative performance; these effects are modest in buyouts but more substantial in venture

capital.

     To follow up our findings that the benefits of timing commitments are limited, we explore

the time-series properties of cash flows that emerge from alternative capital allocation strategies.

Our findings here highlight the importance of the commitment model for understanding private

equity cash flows. We find that diametrically opposite capital commitment strategies lead to



                                                 6
capital calls that are only modestly negatively correlated. These strategies result in distributions

that are highly positively correlated. Thus, the thread between cash flow performance and the

timing of limited partner capital commitments is frayed by the commitment process that delegates

investment and exit activity to the GP.

    To illustrate this further, we build benchmark returns series that invest capital in a public

market index to explore the implications of different timing choices. One series mimics the

patterns of capital calls and distributions actually made by GPs. A second series mimics the

pattern of calls, but instead of facing endogenously determined exits, the holding periods are

constant. This provides a counter-factual return series in which the endogeneity of exit, but not

of initial investment, is broken. A third series further replaces the endogenous capital calls with

a fixed investment schedule. Using these series we explore the performance of both buyout and

venture capital funds. When we compare these strategies with an observed commitment strategy

to private equity, we find low correlation in cash flows even when commitments are made on

exactly the same schedule. This illustrates how the endogeneity of a general partner's timing

decisions (especially exits) is central to understanding the time-series of capital calls and

distributions. While the commitment fund structure in private equity can create substantial

benefits for LPs tapping into GP expertise, it comes at a cost of reducing the LPs' opportunity to

make timing decisions.

    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a discussion of data and performance

metrics and then provides direct evidence that periods of high fundraising are followed by periods

of low performance. This stylized fact is, in part, the motivation behind our analysis. Then, section

3 examines different strategies for timing capital commitments to buyout and venture capital

funds. In section 4 strategies that focus on fund size or GP experience are presented, as well as



                                                  7
information or time-weighted returns and risks from differing commitment strategies. Section 5

explores how the timing of capital calls and distributions is correlated even when the

commitments are not. Finally, section 6 concludes.

2.   Data and Empirical Approach

     The data for this study are provided by Burgiss, a global provider of data management

services for the limited partner community. We use fund-level cash flows from Burgiss beginning

in 1987 through September 2016. Sourcing directly from LPs, Burgiss provides a set of detailed,

verified and cross-checked cash-flow histories for a nearly exhaustive sample of institutional-

quality private equity funds (including buyout and venture capital). These cash flows are net of

fees and profit shares (also called carried interest) paid to the GP, and thus represent the actual

cash inflows and outflows earned by the limited partner. Burgiss data have been used extensively

in recent academic work (see, for instance, Brown, Gredil and Kaplan (2019), Harris, Jenkinson

and Kaplan (2014, 2016)). We study all funds formed around the world between 1987 (the first

year with meaningful numbers of funds in the data) and 2013. In total, we have data for 1,826

buyout funds and 1,845 venture funds.

 2.1 Measuring Private Equity Performance

     First, we calculate two widely used metrics in the industry: the internal rate of return (IRR)

and the investment multiple (also referred to as the multiple of invested capital, or MOIC). The

former measures an LP's annualized IRR based on cash contributions and distributions, net of

fees and carried interest. The IRR calculation includes the estimated value of any unrealized

investments (the residual net asset value, or NAV) as a final "cash flow." The investment multiple

compares the sum of all cash contributions by investors to the sum of all cash distributions and




                                                 8
the NAV, again net of fees and carried interest. Neither the IRR nor the investment multiple

provides a direct way to compare investments in public and private equity.

     Our preferred measure of performance is the Public Market Equivalent (PME) developed by

Kaplan and Schoar (2005). This relative performance measure directly compares an investment

in private equity to an equivalently-timed investment in the public equity market. The PME

calculation discounts (or invests) all cash distributions and the remaining NAV at the public

market total return and divides the resulting value by the similarly discounted (or invested) value

of all cash contributions. The PME can thus be viewed as a market-adjusted multiple of invested

capital. A PME of 1.20, for example, implies that at the end of the fund's (or portfolio's) life,

investors end up with 20% more than if they had invested in the public markets. PMEs compare

two ways investors can have residual equity claims on companies: LP stakes in a private equity

fund or ownership of publicly traded stocks. Implicitly, PME assumes that funds not invested in

private equity would be allocated to public equity markets. Despite differences between the two

forms of ownership, portfolio managers increasingly see them both as forms of equity rather than

as completely separate asset classes. The result has been increasing use of PMEs in both research

and practice. 4 We use the S&P 500 index to proxy for the public market though are results are not

sensitive to the choice of benchmark.

     To convert PME into an annualized measure of excess return (over and above a public equity

index), we use the Direct-alpha (Direct-) methodology of Gredil, Griffiths and Stucke (2014). 5

This approach starts with the same set of cash flows used in a PME calculation, but instead of

calculating PME as a performance measure, the approach finds an annual excess return (alpha)



4
  See Morten and Jagannathan (2015) for a theoretical justification for using PME to measure private equity
performance.
5
  Gredil et al (2014) discuss the Direct- method. Kocis et al. (2009) discuss difficulties with interpreting IRRs.

                                                          9
which, added to the index rate, discounts the flows to a value of 1.0. This excess return measure

is positive when the PME is greater than one and negative when the PME is less than one but has

the advantage of being an annual excess return measure.

    Prior research has found that increased aggregate capital commitments (or fund flows) to

buyout and venture capital (VC) funds are related to subsequent performance, especially for VC

funds. We analyze the relation between private equity fundraising and performance that we

observe in our data. Similar to prior research (see Kaplan and Schoar (2005), Harris, Jenkinson

and Kaplan (2014, 2016)), we measure fund flows into the industry using capital committed to

buyout and VC funds during a vintage year. This provides an (imperfect) estimate of the amount

of capital available to fund deals. To compare these capital flows over a longer period of time,

we deflate the annual capital commitments by the total value of the U.S. stock market (CRSP

total market index) at the beginning of the vintage year. Measures are developed separately for

buyout and venture. We combine all funds of a given vintage year into a single portfolio to

measure (pooled) performance.

    Regression results are presented in Table I. For buyout funds, Panel A shows that vintages

with high fundraising have lower subsequent performance whether measured on an absolute basis

(IRR and MOIC) or relative to public equity (PME). This is signaled by the significant negative

coefficients on fundraising in each of the three regressions. Comparison of the results, however,

shows that the impacts of fundraising are stronger for absolute performance than for performance

relative to public equity. The fact that the fundraising/performance relation is weaker in buyout

when using the PME measure is an indication of positive co-movement between conditions in the

buyout market and public equity market.




                                               10
    When we examine performance cyclicality for venture capital (Panel B), we see a highly

significant relationship between fundraising and all three measures of performance. This indicates

that when current fundraising in VC is high, subsequent venture performance is low, even relative

to public market performance.

    In summary, results in Table 1 confirm the widely held view that periods of abnormally high

fundraising levels are followed by periods of low performance. The challenge is whether

measures of fundraising can be constructed in real time to take advantage of this pattern. The

metric used in our regressions and past research is based on the full set of vintage year

observations; thus using it directly for timing decisions would require perfect foresight of future

fundraising levels.

 2.2 Private Equity Commitment Strategies

    This section discusses our methods for forming commitment strategies in private equity.

Each year, limited partners decide how to allocate capital to new private equity funds that are

seeking commitments. The decisions involve choices about the overall exposure to private equity

and about manager selection in hopes of identifying high performing funds. Since LPs are

typically large institutional investors, these decisions also involve organizational frictions and

costs that can arise if allocation patterns swing dramatically year to year. For instance, making

low or no allocations for series of years likely makes it harder, if not impossible, to maintain

relationships with and analyze seasoned GPs who raise new funds every few years. There may

also be agency costs; for example, a private equity team inside a large institutional LP may be

hesitant to ask for a small capital allocation when private equity markets are hot, fearing that they

would lose influence inside the organization, or the ability to command larger capital allocations

in the future when markets cooled down. Or, LPs may not be prepared to increase investment in



                                                 11
the sector when overall fundraising is subdued, even if these conditions typically result in good

returns for funds raised in such periods. Moreover, even if a timing policy were put in place, there

are risks that the investor may not, in practice, stick to a plan. Our analysis considers allocation

weightings in a setting where the LP can face tradeoffs between aggressively pursuing timing

gains and maintaining a long-term capability in private equity investing.

    We focus on private equity exposure through capital commitments to newly raised funds

which buy and sell companies. This has long been the dominant route for exposure to private

equity and available to LPs over our entire sample period. Recent history has seen the rise of

secondary markets for private equity claims and of co-investing where LPs invest alongside a GP

and thus may exert more influence on cash flow timing. These are interesting areas for research

but were not routes available over much of our sample period and involve additional issues and

potential costs (see, for instance, Nadauld et al. (2019), Braun, Jenkinson and Schemmerl (2019),

Fang, Ivashina and Lerner (2015)). Funds-of-funds, whose holdings are the private equity funds

themselves, are also channels to private equity exposure but are likely most attractive to smaller

investors seeking to diversify. Funds-of-funds also involve an extra layer of fees that can erode

any benefits, especially in buyout (see Harris, Jenkinson, Kaplan and Stucke (2018)).

     To construct specific strategies, we begin by assuming that the set of funds raising capital in

a given vintage year is known at the beginning of the year. We do this primarily for analytical

simplicity and convenience, but this is not an unreasonable assumption for two reasons: (a)

investors learn informally about future fundraising plans through annual meetings and other

industry networking events, and (b), fundraisings typically play out over periods of many months.

Another important factor is the overall amount of capital deployed over time and to any single

vintage year. Large asset managers may have difficulty allocating a fixed proportion of their



                                                 12
portfolio to private equity in a given year because their portfolios are so large that the capital

allocation would dwarf the demand for new capital in a given year. To remove this possibility, and

to keep the strategies on an equal footing in terms of the total amount of capital overall that is

allocated, we assume that an average amount of $100 per year is committed to the asset class and

require each of our strategies to satisfy this scaling constraint. The simplest version of such a

strategy would not try to time private equity and just allocate $100 in each vintage year ("fixed

annual commitment").

     Using this framework, we generate a range of timing strategies, each of which presents

different statistical and organizational issues. At one end of the spectrum are strategies that require

perfect foresight and clearly cannot be implemented by investors allocating capital in real time.

Since our intention is to estimate bounds on the gains from a disciplined timing strategy for a large

institutional investor we have placed limitations on swings in annual allocations. Our "foresight"

strategy assumes that with complete foreknowledge of the future performance of subsequent

vintage years, an investor allocates $200 per year in years with above median performance and $0

per year in the other half of the years. In addition to a foresight strategy, we also construct an "anti-

foresight" strategy which invests $200 in the bottom half of the years and $0 in the better half.

Figure 1 illustrates time-series of commitments for these strategies. In practice, some investors

have changed their private equity allocations over time quite dramatically. For instance, CalPERS

is one of the largest investors in private equity and, as a public pension fund, is required to reveal

the commitments it makes each year. These have varied considerably over time. CalPERS

committed a total of $27 billion to private equity funds over the two-year period 2007-2008, but

only $2.2 billion from 2009-2010. This is nearly as extreme as the `double or nothing' strategy

that we model and is driven by many factors--not just timing.



                                                   13
         Other possible timing strategies may be feasible in a statistical sense (e.g. not requiring

foresight), but still difficult to implement organizationally because they entail large swings in

annual allocations. We devise a set of strategies based on observable conditions in the private and

public markets (and thus feasible statistically) and that constrain swings in annual allocations (thus

reducing organizational challenges). Given the research findings of a negative relationship

between fundraising and subsequent performance, our approach identifies vintage years with

"high" or "low" fundraising levels. We create four alternative ways to gauge fundraising that could

be identified by investors (without foresight) and use these to adjust vintage year allocations. The

first measure compares annual fundraising to recent fundraising levels. We compute three-year

rolling average levels of fundraising, separately for buyout and venture capital, and commit more

or less capital to a given vintage year based on how current fundraising compares to this trend. As

a pro-cyclical measure, we compute the ratio of the current year total fundraising amount to the

average value of the previous 3 years and allocate an amount equal to $100 times that ratio. For

example, if the vintage year's ratio is 1.3, then we allocate $130 to that vintage year in the pro-

cyclical strategy and $70 ($70 = $200 - $130) in the counter-cyclical strategy. We cap the

maximum annual commitment at $200 and scale the time series of pro-cyclical allocation ratios so

it averages 1.0 over our sample period. 6 Using this approach, Figure 2 depicts the pattern of capital

allocations for buyout, and Figure 3 depicts the pattern for venture capital. These patterns involve

allocation swings over time but continue to make commitments to each vintage year.

     Our second measure scales fundraising over a longer term using the size of the public stock

market. To do this, for each vintage year we form a ratio of fundraising to the level of the stock


6
  Because these ratios will not generally average to 1.0, we rescale them with respect to the values based on average
ratios for the full sample. Rescaling allows us to consider average commitment amounts that are the same (e.g., $100)
across different strategies. This adjustment generates a look-ahead bias beyond the current year, but this rescaling
effect is small and does not affect the interpretation of our results.

                                                         14
market. 7 We then scale this by computing a dynamic, backward-looking average of that ratio from

the prior year back to 1980. Thus this method uses data from periods prior to the allocation

decision. We use the same proportional adjustments of allocations as for our first measure and set

a maximum annual commitment of $200.

       Our third and fourth timing measures follow the same general procedure for determining

vintage year allocations (separately in buyout and venture) but use "dry powder" (the sum of all

capital committed to GPs but not yet called from Burgiss data) rather than the annual level of

fundraising. The third timing measure scales dry powder by its rolling three-year average. The

fourth is similar but scales dry powder by the total net asset value of all active funds. We compare

the current year's ratio to those from the past, using a dynamic, backward-looking average starting

in 1981, our earliest year of dry powder data. Later in the paper we consider other investment

strategies to test for sensitivity.

3.     Performance Results for Market-timed Commitment Strategies

    3.1 Timing Strategies for Buyout Funds

       Panel A of Table II displays the long-run portfolio performance results from timing strategies

in buyout. The fixed annual commitment strategy provides a PME of 1.15 and Direct- of 2.8%,

indicating outperformance relative to public equities. The strategy's IRR is 16.5% with a multiple

of paid-in capital of 1.80. These findings echo earlier research showing that buyout funds have

outperformed a broad public market index (e.g. Harris, Kaplan and Jenkinson (2014)).

       A fixed annual allocation provides a useful reference point and is easy to implement. At the

other extreme are strategies that require foresight. Doubling the capital allocated to above-median


7
  We use the CRSP total market index to measure the value of the US stock market and Private Equity Analyst for
that year's fund raising. PEA is a widely distributed monthly trade publication produced by Dow Jones and tracks
US fundraising activity in the private equity markets.

                                                        15
vintage years (based on pooled PME) and allocating nothing to below-median vintage years

boosts the PME to 1.35, while the anti-foresight strategy (the opposite pattern of capital allocation

over time) reduces it to 0.97. The corresponding Direct- figures are 7.4% and -0.6%, respectively.

The foresight IRR is 21.4% with a MOIC of 1.94, but the anti-foresight IRR and multiple fall to

13.4% and 1.65, respectively.

    Looking at these foresight strategies sets a range for possible gains if a LP could avoid

underperforming vintage years. Compared to the PME of 1.15 if capital is committed equally

across all years (the fixed commitment), the foresight strategy's PME offers a possible upside

in PME of 0.20 (0.20 = 1.35-1.15) and corresponding benefits in the other performance metrics.

    The next four sets of results in Panel A are for feasible timing strategies. As discussed earlier,

each strategy is based on a measure to gauge whether a particular vintage year appears to be an

abnormally high or low year in terms of the fundraising cycle. These signals lead to commitment

strategies: a pro-cyclical strategy over-weights high fund-raising years, while a counter-cyclical

strategy over-weights low fund-raising years.

    Rows 4 and 5 report results when commitments are adjusted based on the year's fundraising

activity relative to the previous 3-year average. These results indicate a timing gain for PME of 0.05

relative to the fixed annual commitment strategy: specifically, the counter-cyclical strategy

provides a PME of 1.20 (0.05 higher than the fixed strategy) and the pro-cyclical strategy provides

a PME of 1.10 (0.05 lower than the fixed strategy). The differences in Direct-, IRR and MIOCs

are also consistent with gains to a counter-cyclical strategy in buyouts.

    Rows 6 and 7 reflect scaling fundraising by the value of the stock market. Timing gains are

similar to those when scaling is by recent fundraising. The counter-cyclical strategy provides a

PME of 1.17 and the pro-cyclical strategy's PME is 1.09.


                                                  16
     The next two sets of rows turn to dry powder to drive allocation strategies. When dry powder

is weighted by its recent levels, the performance statistics looks very similar to those from

strategies using fundraising levels. At least in our data, the two measures provide very similar

allocation strategies. Weighting dry powder by the net asset value in funds produces smaller

differences between the pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical strategies than does weighting by recent

levels.

     Overall, our "foresight" results for buyout suggest potential timing gains in both absolute

performance (IRR and MOIC) and performance relative to public equity markets (PME and

Direct-). However, attempts to exploit these benefits in real time based on observable patterns

in the fundraising cycle provide modest benefits, less than a third of the magnitude suggested by

foresight strategies.

 3.2 Timing Strategies for Venture Capital Funds

     Panel B of Table II reports analogous results for venture capital. The fixed allocation strategy

provides a PME of 1.54 and robust values for the other metrics, in line with substantial wealth

creation over the last quarter century of VC investing history.

     A foresight strategy that doubles allocations to above-median vintages and that has no

exposure to below median vintages generates strong relative performance (PME of 1.84) and

leads to substantial increases in the other metrics. The anti-foresight strategy's PME is 0.99 with

similarly dramatic reductions in all performance metrics. Compared to buyout (Panel A), the

larger potential for gains in VC reflects the higher variability over time of returns in VC compared

to buyout. This shows up, for instance, in the higher sensitivity of VC returns to capital flowing

into that sector as demonstrated by regressions in Table I.




                                                  17
     The next four sets of rows of Panel B of Table II show results of pro-cyclical and counter-

cyclical strategies in VC. Using fundraising scaled by its recent levels, the first pair of rows

reveals a counter-cyclical PME of 1.43, while the pro-cyclical PME is 1.62. The other

performance measures are also lower for the counter-cyclical strategy. As a result, and perhaps

surprisingly, simply relying on recent fundraising to scale timing measures actually makes

counter-cyclical investing in VC look slightly worse. If fundraising is scaled by the value of the

stock market, the next two sets of rows show essentially no timing gains in terms of PME. There

is, however, a modest advantage in absolute performance; the counter-cyclical strategy provides

an MOIC of 2.59 compared to 2.39 for the pro-cyclical allocations.

     The final two sets of rows in Panel B turn to measures based on dry powder. When dry

powder is scaled by recent levels of dry powder, the pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical strategies

provide very similar performance (e.g., a spread of only 0.03 in PME). Weighting dry powder by

net asset values, the counter-cyclical strategy outperforms pro-cyclical allocations on all measures

but the improvements still fall far short of the potential gains shown in the perfect foresight

strategies.

     Overall, the potential timing gains in VC shrink to less than a fourth of the apparent gains (from

perfect foresight) once we use strategies that could be implemented. Moreover, some of our timing

measures send different signals on whether a counter-cyclical strategy is useful, complicating any

attempt to adopt timing in practice. The patterns in Panel B reflect the difficulty in predicting

market peaks ex ante; for example, 1997 and 1998 looked like fundraising peaks for venture

capital from a historical standpoint, but were eclipsed by fundraising in 1999 and 2000, which

made counter-cyclical strategies benchmarked against recent fundraising levels scale back too

soon from an ex post perspective.



                                                  18
    Overall, the results in Table II suggest that operational strategies to time commitment

strategies in buyout and venture capital based on private equity market conditions (e.g.

fundraising or dry powder levels) will find difficulty in creating substantive performance benefits.

3.3 Additional tests for the effects of timing capital commitments

    We also conducted additional test using different approaches for allocation adjustments. In

the case of buyouts, we used the average multiple of EBITDA (from SDC Platinum) paid in

buyout transactions during a year as an alternative measure of market conditions. Allocation

strategies based on these multiples compared to past levels lead to very modest differences

between pro-cyclical (high multiples) and counter-cyclical strategies; a PME difference of only

0.07, which is smaller than the difference resulting when we use dry powder scaled by its recent

levels which was reported earlier in Table II.

    In another set of tests, we adjusted assumptions on weighting allocations to allow for more

extreme variation in vintage year allocations. These changes might improve timing benefits but

exacerbate organizational problems in maintaining a long term capability in private equity

investing. First, we relaxed the constraint of a maximum allocation of $200 in one year and did

not scale the allocation weights to sum to one (which would have guaranteed an average

commitment of $100). The effects of these adjustments on timing benefits were minor. To

illustrate, Table III compares results when we scale fundraising by the value of the stock market.

The first two rows replicate the figures in Table II using our earlier scheme of weighting. The

second set of rows makes the adjustments and allows for more extreme variations in allocations.

Results for all four performance measures are very similar between the two sets of weightings for

both buyout (Panel A) and venture capital (Panel B).




                                                 19
    Table IV goes a step further and illustrates a "binary cyclical" approach to "avoid high

fundraising years" altogether. This counter-cyclical strategy skips vintage years (assigns a zero

allocation) if the fundraising metric in that year exceeds a threshold multiple of its historical

average, and invests $100 in all other years. We use fundraising scaled by the stock market as

done in Table III. We consider thresholds set at 1 times, 1.5 times, 2 times and 2.5 times the

historical average fundraising level. For instance, if X=1.5 the "avoid high funding years" strategy

would be to allocate nothing to any vintage year which has fundraising more than 50 percent

higher than the historical average. For buyout, the column headed X=1.5 provides an interesting

comparison since that threshold value splits the sample years in roughly half; the strategy to avoid

the high fundraising years commits capital to 14 out of the 27 vintage years in our sample period.

The PME of 1.21 for avoiding the high fundraising years is essentially the same as PMEs for the

counter-cyclical buyout strategies in Table II. Interestingly, the X=2.5 threshold shows the clear

problems of investing in high fundraising years. If one took the approach of only allocating to

high fundraising vintages, this pro-cyclical "invest only in high years" strategy has a PME= 0.92;

however, only five of 27 years qualify as "high" at this threshold. Avoiding those five years,

creates a PME of 1.24 at X=2.50 providing only a small boost from PMEs at lower thresholds.

    Turning to venture capital, results in the lower part of Table IV again illustrate the difficulty

of implementing a timing strategy in real time. For X=1.0 it appears better to invest in high

funding years, echoing results from some pro-cyclical strategies shown in Table II. For X=1.50

there are modest PME gains from avoiding high fundraising years but only five years are deemed

high fundraising. Once X=2.0 only two vintage years qualify as high fundraising in VC.

    Overall our additional tests confirm the rather limited benefits of trying to time

commitments. Moreover, the strategies often lead to large swings in allocations that may create


                                                 20
substantial organizational issues for large institutional investors with a long term plan for private

equity investing.

 3.4 Diversification and the number of funds in the portfolio

    To focus on timing, the previous analysis uses commitment strategies assuming an LP can

commit to all funds in a vintage year. In practice, LP portfolios will not commit to all funds that

are fundraising at a given point in time. To explore the implications of this limitation, we simulate

the performance assuming an LP randomly selects a given number of funds each year. Figure 4

shows the distribution of simulated PMEs from a fixed annual capital commitment across vintage

years for different numbers (N) of funds in each year's portfolio.

    Panel A shows results from 10,000 simulations for buyout funds. The distribution of PMEs

narrows appreciably as funds are added. For example, for N=7, the standard deviation is only 0.04,

much reduced from 0.12 when N=1. For VC funds (Panel B), the results are much more dispersed

than for buyout funds, as would be expected given the larger range of performance among

individual VC funds. For N=7, the standard deviation is 0.14, down from 0.36 for N=1 but still

quite large compared to buyout. For both buyout and VC funds there are meaningful continued

reductions in the standard deviation of simulated portfolio returns as the number of funds

increases to N=15 and N=30. We repeated all simulations weighting funds equally rather than by

fund size. The patterns in standard deviation are quite similar. Despite the variation in possible

performance due to a limited number of funds, almost all realizations have a PME great than 1.0 for

portfolios with 5 or more funds (for both buyout and venture).

    Overall, Figure 4 suggests that the previous buyout results would generally fit the experience

of LPs even if they had more limited portfolio sizes. For venture, deviations from the previous

results could be substantial once LPs try to implement them with limited portfolio sizes. In



                                                 21
practice, these deviations would be even more pronounced if an LP cannot select funds randomly

but is denied access to certain funds, which are likely high performing. Thus, in the case of venture

funds, LPs likely benefit more from fund access and manager selection skills than from attempts

to time aggregate commitments.

4.   Performance Results for Strategies Not Based on Timing the Market

 4.1 Variations of a Fixed Annual Commitment

     Table V explores other strategies that do not explicitly try to time the market. We focus on

PME, our preferred performance measure. The first row of Panel A repeats the base-line case of

fixed annual commitments from Table II. For buyout (the first column of numbers), comparison of

the first two rows shows that when making fixed annual commitments, it makes little difference

in the PME (1.13 versus 1.15) whether one uses equal- or value-weighting of funds. The third

row shows results from growing the annual commitment at 5 percent (to approximate anticipated

portfolio growth) and again provides a similar PME (1.16) for buyout. Finally, the fourth row

simply has the LP adjust commitments in proportion to the level of annual fundraising. Again, the

PME is similar (1.14).

     The second column of numbers in Table V tracks strategies for commitments to venture.

Unlike buyout, there are marked differences across some of the strategies in Panel A. Equal

weighting of funds in a given vintage year (second row) reduces PME to 1.37 versus 1.54 for

value-weighting of fund commitments (first row). In contrast, the strategy of growing

commitments at a constant rate (third row) provides a PME similar to that of the fixed value-weight

strategy. Adjusting commitments in line with venture fundraising (fourth row) creates a sharply

lower PME (1.20) as a consequence of loading up on under-performing vintage years.




                                                 22
    Thus, for venture, the PMEs in Table V suggest that some form of smoothing commitments

over time is beneficial. Simply following the market cycles of fundraising to trigger commitments

likely reduces performance. Moreover, within venture, weighting larger funds more heavily has

provided performance benefits in the past. While operationally feasible strategies to proactively

time venture commitments are hard to identify (as shown in Table II), some form of dollar

averaging across years seems appropriate.

 4.2 Strategies based on GP Experience

    The first set of rows in Panel B of Table V explores allocations based on GP experience, not

timing. In each year, we partition funds into those being raised by "experienced GPs" and "new

GPs" (inexperienced). Managers are classified as experienced if they have raised at least two prior

funds within the same asset class (buyout or VC). We then track a fixed annual commitment

strategy using either only experienced or only new GPs.

    For buyout, the "experienced GP" strategy provides a higher PME, suggesting modestly better

performance for experienced GPs in the buyout space. For venture, the experienced GP strategy

has a much higher PME (1.71) than the new GP strategy (1.15); moreover, the gap in venture is

much larger than in buyout. The findings suggest that GP experience is more important for picking

venture funds than buyout funds. This suggests that the skills for venture investing may be harder

to learn or replicate than for buyout investing. GP experience may be a proxy for manager ability in

that the GP is able to raise additional funds based on a track record of prior funds.

 4.3 Strategies Based on Fund Size

    The second set of rows in Panel B of Table V focuses on allocations based on fund size. We partition

funds on size, separately for buyout and venture. Large funds are those obtaining capital committed

in excess of the median of all funds from the vintage year; other funds are classified as small. For



                                                  23
buyout, the large fund strategy has a higher PME than for small funds, a 0.07 difference between

the two groups. The gap is substantially larger for venture with a PME advantage of 0.34 for large

versus small funds. The more pronounced effect for venture echoes earlier results showing that

VC strategies that value-weight within vintage years provide higher PMEs than equal-weighting

strategies.

     In summary, for venture investing there appears to be appreciable performance advantages to

committing capital to more experienced GPs and larger funds. This is consistent with the potential

gains from strategies for manager selection (e.g., picking top quartile funds in VC as illustrated in

Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2016)). In practice, whether such strategies are implementable

likely depends on the LP. For instance, venture funds raised by experienced top-performing GPs

may limit access to a small set of previous investors. In buyout, the potential performance gains

from focusing on GP experience or fund size are much smaller. The findings reinforce research

showing the more valuable role of fund selection and access in venture investing.

 4.4 Time-weighted Returns, Volatility, and Sharpe Ratios

     PME measures value creation compared to a public market alternative. Importantly, PME is

quite different from time-weighted returns that are often used to measure performance in public

stocks. Investors in public markets can readily control the timing of cash flows through purchases

and sales, unlike the situation in private equity. Once a LP makes a commitment, the timing of a

fund's cash flows is largely determined by the GP. Moreover, an LP cannot readily sell partnership

claims due to the lack of liquidity in private equity. For this and other reasons, time-weighted

returns are problematic performance measures for private equity. Nonetheless, time-weighted

returns are often used in practice to try to gauge the returns and risk of private equity relative to




                                                 24
other assets. In this section, we examine what signals such time-weighted returns provide relative

to our earlier findings.

     Table VI revisits commitment strategies from Table V, adding the average annual return,

volatility and Sharpe ratio based on time-weighted returns. For buyout, the second column of Panel

A shows that average returns are lower for equal-weighting of funds within vintage years (row 2)

than for value-weighting (row 1). Equal-weighting results in lower volatility and, as a

consequence, a slightly higher Sharpe ratio. However, a t-test comparing the returns for row 1

(value-weighting) and row 2 (equal-weighing) shows no significant difference in the two return

series. Similarly, there are not significant differences between the annual return for the fixed

allocation from row 1 and returns from any of the other strategies that commit across all buyout

funds (rows 2 through 4).

     The last four rows of Panel A report on variants of the fixed allocation strategy which focus

on subsets of buyout funds. Focusing commitments on experienced GPs provides a mean annual

return of 16.0% (row 6), higher than for new GPs (row 7) and is accompanied by a higher Sharpe

ratio. This advantage to experienced GPs mirrors PME findings. However, a paired t-test

comparing returns for the experienced GP strategy (row 6) with the simple fixed strategy (row 1)

results in a t-statistic of only 1.66. The last two rows of Panel A show that the large buyout fund

strategy has a higher mean return (14.9%) than does a small fund strategy but it is very close to the

14.5% mean for the simple fixed value-weighted strategy (in the first row).

     For venture, Panel B of Table VI shows that equal-weighting within vintage years reduces

mean returns compared to value-weighting, as it did in buyout. Unlike buyout, the difference is

statistically significant; testing the paired differences between returns from the first two rows

results in a t-statistic of 4.23. The other strategies for venture which commit to all funds (rows 3



                                                 25
and 4) produce essentially the same mean returns and none are significantly different from the

fixed annual strategy (row 1) based on a paired t-test of returns. Volatility is similar among the

venture strategies. Not surprisingly, volatility for venture strategies is much higher than volatility

for buyout (reported in Panel A). These high volatilities result in Sharpe ratios that are lower for

VC than buyout.

     The bottom four rows of Panel B show that mean returns mirror differences in PMEs:

committing to experienced venture GPs provides higher returns than committing to new GPs, and

committing to large venture funds provides higher returns than committing to small venture funds.

The return differences in venture based on GP experience and fund size are higher than in buyout

and are also statistically different.

5.   The Timing of Cash Flows from Different Commitment Strategies

     The results thus far indicate that private equity investing leads to higher returns compared to

public equity, confirming earlier research findings. Such relative outperformance flows from a

private equity fund structure which allows the LP to take advantage of GP specialization in buying,

managing and selling companies. At the same time, however, our findings show that there are

limited performance gains from implementable strategies to time private equity commitments. A

key complication for these strategies, as noted earlier, is that private equity fund structures mean

that the actual cash flows resulting from investor (LP) commitments are determined by GPs. Thus,

quite different commitment strategies might produce cash flow patterns (calls and distributions)

that are themselves not as different. This section explores the cash flow properties of alternative

commitment timing strategies to examine effects of the endogenous investment (call) and exit

(distribution) decisions made by GPs.




                                                 26
     To illustrate the disconnection between the timing of commitments and cash flows, we

examine the capital calls and distributions from three different commitment strategies: fixed, pro-

cyclical, and counter-cyclical based on annual fundraising. Figure 5 plots results for buyout funds.

Panel A shows that cash calls cluster over time even for the negatively correlated commitments

made by pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical allocation strategies. Even more obvious is the strong

positive correlation across distributions from all three strategies shown in Panel B. For instance,

the correlation of distributions between the pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical strategies is 0.81,

even though the commitments are negatively correlated. In short, the timing of cash distributions

from different allocation strategies are likely to be very similar for buyout funds as funds from

nearby vintages respond to the same market-wide investment and exit opportunities. This result

echoes earlier research showing that exits from buyout funds are highly cyclical (Robinson and

Sensoy, 2016).

     Figure 6 plots results for venture funds. The correlation of calls for the pro-cyclical and

counter-cyclical allocations in venture are lower than for buyout, but capital distributions are again

positively correlated. In fact, the distributions are very similar across vintage years for the pro- and

counter-cyclical strategies with the notable exceptions of 1999 and 2000, when the pro-cyclical

(and fixed) distributions are much higher than for the counter-cyclical allocation strategy. This

short window also explains why our earlier performance results found that this counter-cyclical

plan underperforms the pro-cyclical strategy in venture: the counter-cyclical strategy dialed back

allocations too quickly in the 1990s and was underweighted in the exceptionally good vintages in

the late 1990s.

     Overall, the plots of contributions and distributions presented in Figures 5 and 6 reinforce the

idea that GPs tend to exit investments in a highly correlated manner even when capital was



                                                  27
committed with quite different weights to individual vintage years. In general, strategies with very

different capital commitment patterns result in only mildly negatively correlated capital calls and

positively correlated distributions, as GPs pursue market-wide opportunities to buy and sell

companies.

    To explore the timing of cash flows in more depth, we contrast the performance of private

equity with hypothetical strategies of investing in public equity. This allows us to see the effects

of changing timing decisions from those made by GPs. By construction, any such public equity

strategy earns the public return over periods in which it invests and thus has no relative

performance advantage to public equity (and as a result has a PME of 1.0 and Direct- of zero).

Such strategies can, however, have quite different absolute performance and patterns of

distributions depending on how they time purchases and sales.

    For a series of strategies, Table VII reports information on the distributions to LPs, absolute

performance (IRR, MOIC), the remaining net asset value at the end of our sample period and how

the distributions are correlated to the observed pattern of distributions from investing in private

equity. These figures highlight both the level of performance as well as how the time series

properties of distributions change as timing assumptions are altered. The first row depicts the fixed

commitment strategy of investing in private equity (as reported earlier in Table II). Row two is

based on a hypothetical portfolio that invests in public equity (SP500) and mimics GP timing on

calls and distributions. One way to think of this portfolio is as a fund set up by a money manager

who invests only in the public market index. The fund structure is designed so that the investor

(LP) makes a capital commitment to the manager who then has decision rights on when to call and

distribute capital. Even though investing in public equities, the manager times purchases (calls)

and sales (distributions) by looking at what GPs in private equity are doing. The manager calls



                                                 28
funds at the same time and at the same percentage of commitments as do GPs, and distributes

money when GPs do at the percentage of NAV distributed by GPs The fund thus mimics the timing

of GPs but by definition would always earn the public market return on all investments. At

any point in time, the NAV of this portfolio is the accumulated value of all capital calls (at the

public market return) adjusted downward for any distributions. The remaining rows in Table VII

show strategies that, in stages, decouple timing decisions from those made by GPs.

     Panel A focuses on buyout. The 16.5% return (IRR) from investing in private equity (row 1)

is over 200 basis points higher than a public equity strategy return of 14.0% (row 2) from exactly

mirroring GP cash flow timing. This spread illustrates the positive relative performance (e.g.,

Direct- reported earlier 8) of the fixed commitment strategy and is consistent with prior research

that buyout funds have outperformed public equity (e.g. Harris, Jenkinson and Kaplan (2014),

Robinson and Sensoy (2016)). The higher returns show up directly in cash benefits: quarterly

distributions from private equity (mean of 35.44) are 20% higher than for the public strategy

(29.42) with comparable variability quarter to quarter. 9 The distribution series in rows 1 and 2 are

very highly correlated since they share the same GP timing of calls and distributions.

     The final three sets of rows in Panel A examine how adjustments away from GPs' actual

timing decisions affect cash distributions and performance. One set of strategies mimic GP timing



8
  The assumption made in row two is to distribute cash as a percent of net asset value in the same proportion as GPs
do. This is in order to avoid the potential of making a distribution in excess of the value of the portfolio. That result,
and hence a short position in the public index, might occur if private equity distributions were large based on private
equity returns which were not achieved in public markets. As a consequence, this is a slightly different assumption
than goes into a direct alpha calculation. That said, the two approaches provide very similar results in terms of the
relative outperformance of private over public equity in our sample.
9
  To understand the scale of these numbers, recall that a fixed $100 per year is being committed. We obtain very
similar figures and the same conclusions if we equally weight funds rather than value weight. As a comparison, the
14% return shown in row 2 is slightly higher than the 13.7% IRR from a cruder "dollar averaging" timing
assumption of investing 100 a year in public equity (all invested immediately) and holding for five years. The
absolute return is, however, notably higher than the 9.1% return from a simple buy and hold strategy in public equity
over our sample period.


                                                           29
of capital calls but adopt a fixed length investment period, thus decoupling the timing of sale from

the time series variation in GP exit decisions. We consider three holding periods: 3 years, 5 years,

and 7 years, spanning the range of average holding periods often cited for GP investments. These

strategies result in smaller cash distributions than we observe for buyout and come with higher

variability for the longer horizons. Moreover, the IRRs remain well below buyout returns for all

horizons and are lowest for the seven-year horizon. The main result, however, concerns the

correlation between the distribution series and the actual buyout series: at the three-year holding

period, the correlation is 0.35 and correlations fall to 0.17 at the five-year horizon and 0.22 at the

seven-year horizon. Thus, strategies that exactly match both the amount and timing of capital

commitments and the endogenous timing of GP capital calls but miss the endogenous timing of

exits generate distributions that have low correlation with the actual distribution series

experienced by buyout fund investors, even if the holding period roughly matches the average

holding period for the asset class. This stands in stark contrast to the high correlations of

distribution series from pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical commitment strategies to buyout (and

hence subject to GP exit timing) shown in Figure 5.

    The final two sets of public equity strategies in Panel A exogenously set both the timing of

investment and the holding period; they thus remove the time series variation in GP behavior on

both calls and distributions. We show results for two different schedules of investment. The first

follows the average we observe in the data: 30% of committed capital in the first year, 20% in

year 2, 18% in year 3, 12% in year 4, and 10% in year 5. The second calls (invests) capital in

equal installments over five years. Again, the strategies result in smaller distributions than for

buyout except for the seven-year horizon over which they are roughly the same. The higher MOIC

for the seven-year holding period, reflects a longer holding period than appears implicit in the



                                                  30
buyout series; the IRR for that seven-year strategy is 14.1% well below that of buyout and

essentially the same as for the public investing series that mimics GP timing (row 2). What stands

out again in the figures is the reduction in correlation of distributions with those from buyout

which is 0.24 at the seven-year horizon as shown in the last row of Panel A.

    Turning to venture capital, the first two rows of Panel B display the pronounced relative

outperformance of investing in VC versus public equity-echoing earlier results. As shown in row

2, a strategy of investing in public equity and mimicking timing decisions from venture capital

GPs leads to an IRR of 14.9%, well below the VC IRR of 29.1% from row 1. The actual quarterly

distributions from VC (mean of 47.04) are substantially larger than for buyout (Panel A) but the

volatility of distributions is over four times as high. This reflects how dramatically venture capital

exit opportunities vary with market conditions. Likewise, all the strategies of investing in public

equity provide much smaller and less volatile distributions than the actual VC series. Notably, the

correlations of the public strategies with venture capital distributions are generally higher than they

are for buyout strategies, ranging from 0.45 to 0.69 and reflecting the importance of aggregate

market conditions for exit in venture capital. High correlation is consistent with high market

valuations disproportionately favoring strong VC exits, and at the same time, high market

valuations coinciding with strong realizations of the fixed holding-period benchmarks in public

equity. This is consistent with the higher return from a public investing strategy that mimics GP

timing in VC (IRR of 14.9%, row 2 of Panel B) versus buyout (IRR of 14.0%, row 2 of Panel B).

    Overall, our results illustrate how the thread between performance and an investor's timing

of capital commitments is frayed by a commitment model which delegates investment and exit

activity to the fund manager; diametrically opposite capital commitment strategies can lead to

capital calls that are only modestly negatively correlated and distributions that are highly positively



                                                  31
correlated. While commitment fund structure creates substantial benefits for LPs tapping into GP

expertise, it comes with a reduction in the LPs opportunity to time investing.

6. Summary and Conclusions

    Due to a lack of accurate and comprehensive historical data on fund-level cash flows, little is

known about the practical aspects of investing in private equity across market cycles. Yet these

practical issues have important implications for our understanding of the institutional structure of

this market as well as the liquidity properties of the asset class. Unlike public markets in which

assets (e.g. stocks) can typically be purchased or sold almost immediately, limited partner investors

who commit capital to private equity funds face significant delays and uncertainty about the timing

of purchases and sales which are controlled by the general partner. As a consequence, there is

substantial `commitment risk': the investor has pledged capital but does not control the timing of

when the money is put to work or returned.

    This paper explores, in the context of this commitment risk, limited partners' ability to protect

themselves against downturns in private equity performance that come on the heels of strong

periods of fundraising in the industry. Using comprehensive Burgiss data from over 3,500 private

equity funds going back to the 1980s, we create the full series of cash flows and net asset values

that an LP would have experienced for a variety of capital commitment strategies. This allows us

to explore if `commitment timing' based on market cycles can improve performance.

    In buyout, hypothetical timing strategies that rely on perfect foresight of the future suggest

potential timing gains in both absolute performance and performance relative to public equity

markets. However, attempts to exploit these benefits in real time based on observable patterns in

the fundraising cycle provide modest benefits, less than a third of the magnitude suggested by

foresight strategies. In venture capital, there is more room for commitment timing to affect


                                                 32
performance, but at a practical level, it is difficult, if not impossible, to do so. These finding suggest

that devoting substantial limited partner resources to timing private equity commitments based on

fundraising conditions leads, at best, to modest performance improvements. Moreover, these have

to be weighed against organizational costs and frictions that allocation swings may be pose for

maintaining a long-term capability in private equity investing. Our findings also suggest that

selection strategies focusing on fund and manager characteristics appear to provide more potential

for enhanced performance than does commitment timing.

     Investigating the time patterns of cash flows highlights the importance of commitment risk:

diametrically opposite capital commitment strategies lead to capital calls that are only modestly

negatively correlated, and in turn to distributions that are highly positively correlated. Thus, the

thread between performance and the timing of limited partner's capital commitments is frayed by

the commitment process associated with delegating investment and exit activity to the general

partner. These findings call for more work understanding how the nature of delegation in private

equity affects the performance and liquidity properties of the asset class.




                                                   33
References

Braun, Riener, Tim Jenkinson and Christoph Schemmerl, 2019, Adverse Selection and the
       Performance of Private Equity Co-investments, forthcoming Journal of Financial
       Economics.

Brown, Greg, Robert Harris, Tim Jenkinson, Steve N. Kaplan and David Robinson, 2015, What Do
      Different Commercial Data Sets Tell Us About Private Equity Performance?, Working
      Paper, Private Equity Research Consortium. SSRN paper 2706556.

Brown, Gregory, Oleg Gredil and Steven N. Kaplan, 2019, Do Private Equity Funds Manipulate
      Reported Returns? forthcoming Journal of Financial Economics.

Cornelius, Peter, 2011, International Investments in Private Equity: Asset Allocation, Markets, and
       Industry Structure (Academic Press, London, UK).

Driessen, Joost, Tse-Chun Lin, and Ludovic Phalippou, 2012, A New Method to Estimate Risk and
       Return of Non-traded Assets from Cash Flows: The Case of Private Equity Funds, The
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 47(3), 511-535.

Fang, Lily, Victoria Ivashina and Josh Lerner, 2015, The Disintermediation of Financial Markets:
       Direct Investing in Private Equity, Journal of Financial Economics 116(1), 160-1778.

Ferson, Wayne and Haitao Mo, 2016, Performance Measurement with Selectivity, Market and
       Volatility Timing, Journal of Financial Economics 121, 93-110.

Gredil, Oleg, 2015, Market-Timing and Agency Costs: Evidence from Private Equity. Working
        Paper, Tulane University.

Gredil, Oleg, Barry Griffiths and Rudiger Stucke, 2014, Benchmarking Private Equity: the Direct
        Alpha Method, SSRN paper 2403521.

Harris, Robert, Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2014, Private Equity Performance: What Do
        We Know? Journal of Finance 69(5), 1851-1882.

Harris, Robert, Tim Jenkinson, and Steven N. Kaplan, 2016, How Do Private Equity Investments
        Perform Compared to Public Equity? Journal of Investment Management 14(3), 1-24.

Harris, Robert, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and Rudiger Stucke, 2015, Has Persistence
        Persisted in Private Equity? Working paper, University of Chicago. SSRN paper 2304808.

Harris, Robert, Tim Jenkinson, Steven N. Kaplan, and Rudiger Stucke, 2018, Financial
        Intermediation in Private Equity: How Well Do Funds of Funds Perform? Journal of
        Financial Economics 129(2), 287-305.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Antoinette Schoar, 2005, Private Equity Returns: Persistence and Capital
      Flows, Journal of Finance 60(4), 1791-1823.

                                                 34
Kaplan, Steven N., and Berk Sensoy, 2015, Private Equity Performance: A Survey, Annual Review
      of Financial Economics 21(11), 1-18.

Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Stromberg, 2009, Leveraged Buyouts and Private Equity, Journal of
      Economic Perspectives 23(1), 121-146.

Kauffman Foundation, 2012, We Have Met the Enemy. . . And He is US: Lessons from Twenty
      Years of the Kauffman Foundation's Investment in Venture Capital Funds and The Triumph
      of Hope over Experience, White Paper.

Kocis, James M., James C. Bachman, Austin M. Long, and Craig J. Nickels, 2009, Inside Private
       Equity (John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, N.J., USA).

Lerner, Josh, Antoinette Schoar, and Wan Wongsunwai, 2007, Smart Institutions, Foolish
        Choices? The Limited Partner Performance Puzzle, Journal of Finance 62(2), 731- 764.

Meads, C., N. Morandi and A. Carnelli, 2016, Cash Management Strategies for Private Equity
      Investors, Alternative Investment Analysts Review, Quarter 1.

Nadauld, Taylor, B. Sensoy, K. Vorkink and M. Weisbach, 2019, The Liquidity Cost of Private
      Equity Investments; Evidence from Secondary Market Transactions, Journal of Financial
      Economics, Vol. 132, No. 3, 158-181.

Robinson, David T. and Berk Sensoy, 2016, Cyclicality, Performance Measurement and Cash Flow
      Liquidity in Private Equity, Journal of Financial Economics, 122(3), 512-543.

Sensoy, Berk, Yingdi Wang, and Michael Weisbach, 2014, Limited Partner Performance and the
       Maturing of the Private Equity Market, Journal of Financial Economics 112(3), 320-343.

Sorensen, Morten, and Ravi Jagannathan, 2015, The Public Market Equivalent and Private Equity
       Performance, Financial Analysts Journal 71(4), 43-50.

Stafford, Erik, 2015, Replicating Private Equity with Value Investing, Homemade Leverage, and
       Hold-to-maturity Accounting, Working paper, Harvard Business School.




                                               35
      Figure 1. Capital Commitments to Foresight Strategies for Buyout and Venture

  This figure provides the capital commitment schedule for the "foresight" strategies for buyout funds and venture
  capital funds. The commitment is two times that in the fixed commitment strategy for vintage years where the
  pooled fund PME is above the median, and zero in other years. 2013 has a 1.0 (100% of fixed) allocation to even
  out overall contributions because of the odd number of vintage years in the sample period.




2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
      1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013

                                       Buyout       Venture Capital




                                                      36
             Figure 2. Buyout Capital Commitments for Alternative Strategies

This figure provides the capital commitment schedule for buyout funds for the fixed, pro-cyclical, and
counter-cyclical strategies discussed in the text based on annual fundraising relative to its rolling 3-
year average. Annual commitments are capped at 200%.




               Figure 3. Venture Capital Commitments for Alternative Strategies

This figure provides the capital commitment schedule for venture capital funds for the fixed, pro-
cyclical, and counter-cyclical strategies discussed in the text based on annual fundraising relative to
its rolling 3-year average. Annual commitments are capped at 200%.




                                                  37
          Figure 4. Diversification and Portfolio Effects on Performance
This figure plots the distribution of portfolio PMEs for a fixed annual allocation strategy based on
simulated portfolios with different numbers of randomly selected funds (N=1, 3, 5, 7, 15, 30) in each
vintage. Panel A shows results for buyout funds, and Panel B shows results for venture capital funds.
                                     Panel A. Buyout Funds




                              Panel B: Venture Capital Funds




                                                 38
                          Figure 5. Buyout Cash Calls and Distributions
This figure provides the capital calls (Panel A) and distributions (Panel B) for the fixed annual, pro-cyclical ,
and counter-cyclical strategies based on recent fundraising scaled by a three year rolling average as discussed
in the text. We assume a $100 commitment per year in the fixed allocation and average of $100 per year in
the pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical strategies.


                                     Panel A: Capital Calls (Drawdowns)

   $50

     $0

  -$50

 -$100

 -$150

 -$200



                      Constant               Pro-Cyclical               Counter-Cyclical


                                         Panel B: Capital Distributions


  $600

  $500

  $400

  $300

  $200

  $100

     $0



                      Constant               Pro-Cyclical               Counter-Cyclical

                                                       39
                          Figure 6. Venture Capital Cash Calls and Distributions
  This figure provides the capital calls (Panel A) and distributions (Panel B) for the fixed annual, pro-
  cyclical, and counter-cyclical strategies based on recent fundraising scaled by a three year rolling
  average as discussed in the text. We assume a $100 commitment per year in the fixed allocation and
  average of $100 per year in the pro-cyclical and counter-cyclical strategies.
                                Panel A: Capital Calls (Drawdowns)

 $100


   $0


-$100


-$200


-$300



                  Constant              Pro- Cyclical                Counter-Cyclical



                                    Panel B: Capital Distributions


$1,000


 $750


 $500


 $250


   $0



                  Constant               Pro- Cyclical               Counter-Cyclical




                                                    40
         Table I. Fundraising and Aggregate Performance in Private Equity
This table reports regressions of private equity performance on aggregate fundraising in a vintage
year. Panel A focuses on buyout funds, while Panel B focuses on venture capital funds. Dependent
variables are measures of performance: the internal rate of return (IRR), multiple of invested capital
(M0IC,) and the public market equivalent (PME) all estimated based on pooling across all funds of
that vintage year. The independent variable is the current year's total fundraising from Burgiss scaled
by the CRSP value-weighted market index as described in the text. The vintage years are 1987
through 2013, and the data go through Q3 2016. ***, ** and * denotes significance at the 1%, 5%
and 10% levels respectively.

                                  Panel A: Buyout Performance

                                                  IRR              MOIC           PME
       Fund Raising Scaled by                  -13.76***         -0.81***        -0.23*
       Stock Market Value                        [-4.18]          [-4.40]        [-1.83]

       Constant                                 21.73***         2.14***         1.28***
                                                 [12.47]         [21.90]         [18.91]

       Observations                                27               27              27
       R-Squared                                  0.41             0.44            0.12


                             Panel B: Venture Capital Performance

                                                   IRR            MOIC            PME
       Fund Raising Scaled by                 -216.73***        -14.36***        -5.87**
       Stock Market Value                       [-2.82]           [-3.36]         [-2.60]

       Constant                                 48.92***         3.98***         2.04***
                                                 [5.38]           [7.87]          [7.63]

       Observations                                27               27              27
       R-Squared                                  0.24             0.31            0.21




                                                  41
           Table II. The Performance of Alternative Capital Allocation Strategies
  This table reports performance statistics for alternative private equity commitment strategies. MOIC is
  the ratio of total value to paid-in capital. Total value is the sum of the cash returned to investors and the
  remaining NAV as estimated by the private equity (PE) fund manager. PMEs compare PE returns to
  equivalent-timed investments in the S&P 500. Direct- (direct alpha) is the rate which added to the public
  market rate leads to a PME of 1.0. Panel A focuses on buyout funds, and Panel B on VC funds, as
  classified by Burgiss. The strategies cover vintage years 1987 through 2013, and the data go through Q3
  2016.

                                          Panel A: Buyout Funds

Commitment Strategy                                             PME         Direct-         IRR         MOIC

Fixed Annual Commitment                                         1.15          2.8%        16.5%          1.80

Strategies relying on foresight (using actual PMEs)
 Foresight                                                      1.35          7.4%        21.4%          1.94
 Anti-foresight                                                 0.97         -0.6%        13.4%          1.65

Allocations based on fundraising scaled by 3-year rolling average
 Pro-cyclical                                                   1.10          1.8%        14.3%          1.74
 Counter-cyclical                                               1.20          4.0%        18.9%          1.89

Allocations based on fundraising scaled by stock market
 Pro-cyclical                                           1.09                  1.8%        14.9%          1.75
 Counter-cyclical                                       1.17                  3.5%        18.1%          1.86

Allocations based on dry powder scaled by 3-year rolling average
 Pro-cyclical                                           1.10                  1.8%        14.7%          1.79
 Counter-cyclical                                       1.21                  4.6%        19.7%          1.81

Allocations based on dry powder scaled by NAV of active funds
 Pro-cyclical                                         1.12                    2.1%        14.6%          1.78
 Counter-cyclical                                               1.18          3.9%        19.1%          1.81




                                                       42
   Table II. The Performance of Alternative Capital Allocation Strategies (continued)

                                 Panel B: Venture Capital Funds

Commitment Strategy                                       PME       Direct-   IRR     MOIC

Fixed Annual Commitment                                    1.54     10.2%     29.1%   2.52

Strategies relying on foresight (using actual PMEs)
 Foresight                                                 1.84     13.8%     33.8%   3.49
 Anti-foresight                                            0.99     -0.3%      9.3%   1.56

Allocations based on fundraising scaled by 3-year rolling average
 Pro-cyclical                                              1.62     11.9%     31.2%   2.54
 Counter-cyclical                                          1.43      8.7%     27.2%   2.38

Allocations based on fundraising scaled by stock market
 Pro-cyclical                                              1.54     10.4%     29.0%   2.39
 Counter-cyclical                                          1.51     10.0%     29.1%   2.59

Allocations based on dry powder scaled by 3-year rolling average
 Pro-cyclical                                             1.52      10.1%     28.6%   2.42
 Counter-cyclical                                         1.55      10.4%     29.5%   2.62

Allocations based on dry powder scaled by NAV of active funds
 Pro-cyclical                                            1.42        9.6%     28.3%   2.12
 Counter-cyclical                                          1.61     10.5%     29.4%   2.94




                                                43
 Table III. The Performance of Timing Strategies with Different Restrictions on Annual
                          Variations in Capital Allocations
  This table reports performance statistics for two alternative private equity commitment strategies. The
  first sets a maximum annual allocation and constrains allocation weights over the study period. The
  second relaxes those constraints, allowing for more variation in allocations across vintage years. MOIC
  is the ratio of total value to paid-in capital. Total value is the sum of the cash returned to investors and
  the remaining NAV as estimated by the private equity (PE) fund manager. PMEs compare PE returns to
  equivalent-timed investments in the S&P 500. Direct- (direct alpha) is the rate which added to the public
  market return leads to a PME of 1.0. Panel A focuses on buyout funds, and Panel B on VC funds, as
  classified by Burgiss. The strategies cover vintage years 1987 through 2013, and the data go through Q3
  2016.


                                          Panel A: Buyout Funds

Commitment Strategy                                                PME       Direct-       IRR        MOIC

Fundraising scaled by stock market, with maximum allocation and allocation weights constrained
 Pro-cyclical                                           1.09       1.8%     14.9%      1.75
 Counter-cyclical                                       1.17       3.5%     18.1%      1.86

Fundraising scaled by stock market, no constraints on maximum value or weights
 Pro-cyclical                                                      1.07        1.2%       14.3%        1.77
 Counter-cyclical                                                  1.18        3.5%       18.2%        1.86


                                     Panel B: Venture Capital Funds

Commitment Strategy                                                PME       Direct-       IRR        MOIC

Fundraising scaled by stock market, with maximum allocation and allocation weights constrained
 Pro-cyclical                                           1.54      10.4%     29.0%      2.39
 Counter-cyclical                                       1.51      10.0%     29.1%      2.59

Fundraising scaled by stock market, no constraints on maximum value or weights
 Pro-cyclical                                             1.50    10.0%     28.4%                      2.26
 Counter-cyclical                                         1.51    10.0%     29.1%                      2.61




                                                      44
   Table IV. The Performance of Binary-Cyclical Strategies for Private Equity Allocations

       This table reports performance results for binary-cyclical strategies that are based on whether
       fundraising is high in a given year. In an "avoid allocations in high years" strategy, a vintage year has
       a zero allocation if fundraising is high in that year, $100 otherwise. Entries are the public market
       equivalent (PME) and number of vintage years with non-zero allocations in that strategy. "High"
       fundraising is defined by setting threshold values as multiples of past levels. For each year, we
       separately scale venture and buyout fundraising by total stock market capitalization. We then compute
       a dynamic, backward-looking, average from year 1980 to the previous year. A year is classified as a
       "high" fundraising year if the current year's scaled fundraising level is above a threshold of X times
       the dynamic average. The data include all funds with 1987-2013 vintage years, with data going through
       the third quarter of 2016.



                                           Threshold for vintage to classify as "high" fundraising year
                                           X = 1.0             X = 1.5             X = 2.0             X = 2.5
                                                No. of              No. of              No. of              No. of
Strategy                               PME                 PME                 PME                 PME
                                                Alloc.              Alloc.              Alloc.              Alloc.

Buyout Funds
 Avoid Allocations to High Years 1.17              4       1.21        14      1.22       15       1.24       22
 Allocate Only to High Years           1.14       23       1.09        13      1.06       12       0.92        5


Venture Capital Funds
 Avoid Allocations to High Years 1.51             16       1.55        22      1.57       25       1.57       25
 Allocate Only to High Years           1.58       11       1.40        5       0.77        2       0.77        2




                                                         45
  Table V. The Performance of Strategies that Do Not Attempt to Time Allocations
This table reports public market equivalents (PMEs) for different commitment strategies. Panel A focuses
on variations of a fixed annual commitment strategy which makes the same dollar commitment to each
vintage year and invests in all funds. Panel B reports results for strategies that have a fixed commitment
per year but invest only in funds that fit certain characteristics in terms of the experience of the general
partner (GP) or the fund size A fund is designated as "experienced GP" if the GP has raised at least two
prior funds; "new GP" otherwise. Large funds are raising more than the median fund that vintage year;
otherwise the fund is small. A strategy invests in only one type of fund, e.g. the experienced GP strategy
places all of a vintage year's capital with experienced GPs weighted by fund size. The strategies cover
vintage years 1987 through 2013 with data going through the third quarter of 2016.


                   Panel A: Variations of Fixed Annual Commitment Strategy


Commitment Strategy                                                  Buyout PME         Venture PME

Fixed Annual Allocation (funds value-weighted)                            1.15               1.54
Fixed Annual Allocation (funds equal-weighted)                            1.13               1.37
Growing Annual Allocation at 5% per year                                  1.16               1.50
Proportional to Annual Fundraising levels                                 1.14               1.20


                    Panel B: Strategies Based on GP Experience or Fund Size


Commitment Strategy                                                  Buyout PME         Venture PME

Experienced GPs (value-weighted)                                          1.23               1.71
"New" GPs (value-weighted)                                                1.13               1.15


Larger than median-sized funds                                            1.16               1.61
Smaller than median-sized funds                                           1.09               1.27




                                                    46
               Table VI. Time-weighted Returns and Risks to Alternative Strategies
This table reports the public market equivalent (PME), as well as the quarterly mean net return, standard deviation
(Volatility), and Sharpe ratio for a variety of commitment strategies in buyout funds (Panel A) and venture capital
funds (Panel B). Returns are stated on an annual basis.

                                              Panel A: Buyout Funds

     Commitment Strategy                                        PME      Return        Volatility      Sharpe

     Fixed Annual Allocation (funds value-weighted)             1.15      14.5%         12.2%           1.19
     Fixed Annual Allocation (funds equal-weighted)             1.13      12.4%          9.6%           1.29

     Growing Annual Allocation at 5% per year                   1.16      14.6%         12.2%           1.19
     Proportional to Annual Fundraising levels                  1.14      13.3%         12.8%           1.04

     Experienced GPs (value-weighted)                           1.23      16.0%         13.6%           1.18
     "New" GPs (value-weighted)                                 1.13      13.3%         12.7%           1.05

     Large Funds (variant of row 1)                             1.16      14.9%         12.6%           1.18
     Small Funds (variant of row 1)                             1.09      11.6%         11.4%           1.02



                                         Panel B: Venture Capital Funds

     Commitment Strategy                                        PME      Return        Volatility      Sharpe

     Fixed Annual Allocation (funds value-weighted)             1.54      13.3%         21.1%           0.63
     Fixed Annual Allocation (funds equal-weighted)             1.37      11.0%         20.0%           0.55

     Growing Annual Allocation at 5% per year                   1.5       13.6%         21.5%           0.63
     Proportional to Annual Fundraising levels                  1.2       13.5%         21.7%           0.62

     Experienced GPs (value-weighted)                           1.71      14.2%         22.8%           0.62
     "New" GPs (value-weighted)                                 1.15      10.3%         16.2%           0.63

     Large Funds (variant of row 1)                             1.61      14.4%         22.1%           0.65
     Small Funds (variant of row 1)                             1.27       9.4%         19.2%           0.49




                                                        47
                                             Table VII. The Effects of Altering Timing Decisions on Investing Strategies
  This table reports profiles of distributions and performance that result from a strategy of a fixed annual commitment of 100 to private equity and to a series of hypothetical
  strategies of making the same fixed annual commitments to a fund that then invests only in public equity (SP500). The public equity strategies make different assumptions
  about the timing of calls and distributions. One exactly mimics the timing of calls (investments) and distributions (sales) made by general partners in private equity funds.
  Other strategies change timing assumptions about calls or distributions or both. Strategies with a fixed holding period earn the observed public market return for a period of
  3, 5 or 7 years and then the holding is sold. Investments are timed based on three schedule of calls: exactly mirroring GP calls, calling capital according to the historical
  average pattern : 30% in year 1, then 20%, 18%, 12%, and 10% in year five and finally spread evenly across the first five years. Figures reported are the mean (value
  weighted) quarterly distribution, the standard deviation of distributions and the correlation of distributions to those from the actual fixed commitment strategy in private equity.
  The table also reports the internal rate of return (IRR), multiple of invested capital (MOIC), the total of all distributions and the remaining net asset value at the end of the sample period.
  The strategies are over the period 1987 through Q3 2016. The quarterly mean reported is for the entire period and matches the total distribution figures over the 119 quarters. The
  standard deviation and correlations are calculated over data beginning in 1994 since some of the fixed holding period strategies do not make distributions until then by design. Panel A
  is for buyout and Panel B for venture capital.
                                                                                Panel A: Buyout Funds
                                                                         Distribution       Distribution Distribution                                        Total            Final Valuation
Strategy/Benchmark                                                                                                               IRR        MOIC
                                                                            Mean                Std.     Correlation                                      Distribution            (NAV)

Fixed Annual Commitment                                                       35.4              20.9              1.00          16.5%         1.80              4,218                   584
Strategies Investing in Public Equity
Mimic GP Timing of calls and distributions                                    29.4              19.2              0.92          14.0%         1.50              3,502                   495
Mimic GP capital calls with fixed holding periods
 Three-year holding period                                        27.8          18.6                              0.35          14.3%         1.34              3,307                   287
 Five-year holding period                                         30.9          26.8                              0.17          14.0%         1.60              3,676                   599
 Seven-year holding period                                        33.0          29.5                              0.22          13.0%         1.83              3,929                   965
Calls based on historical average pattern for investment period, fixed holding period
 Three-year holding period                                        27.2           9.6                              0.52          15.2%         1.41              3,232                   164
 Five-year holding period                                         30.4          15.8                              0.37          14.7%         1.69              3,620                   472
 Seven-year holding period                                        32.8          20.1                              0.24          14.1%         1.97              3,902                   853
Calls spread equally over five years, fixed holding period
 Three-year holding period                                                    29.5              10.7              0.52          15.3%         1.4               3,512                   227
 Five-year holding period                                                     33.0              17.7              0.39          14.8%         1.68              3,922                   570
 Seven-year holding period                                                    35.3              22.8              0.24          14.1%         1.94              4,196                   994



                                                                                               48
                        Table VII. The Effects of Altering Timing Decisions on Alternative Investing Strategies (continued)


                                                              Panel B: Venture Capital Funds


                                                             Distribution   Distribution Distribution                     Total       Final Valuation
Strategy/Benchmark                                                                                      IRR     MOIC
                                                                Mean            Std.     Correlation                   Distribution       (NAV)

Fixed Annual Commitment                                         47.1           89.5          1.00       29.1%   2.52       5,601            1,018

Strategies Investing in Public Equity
Mimic GP Timing of calls and distributions                      27.4           25.7          0.82       14.9%   1.57       3,257              866
Mimic GP capital calls with fixed holding periods
 Three-year holding period                                        27.7          14.4         0.46       14.0%   1.36       3,300              258
 Five-year holding period                                         30.9          21.1         0.69       14.2%   1.63       3,678              606
 Seven-year holding period                                        32.7          25.1         0.57       13.3%   1.88       3,889            1,050
Calls based on historical average pattern for investment period, fixed holding period
 Three-year holding period                                        27.2           9.6         0.45       15.2%   1.41       3,232              164
 Five-year holding period                                         30.4          15.8         0.64       14.7%   1.69       3,620              472
 Seven-year holding period                                        32.8          20.1         0.63       14.1%   1.97       3,902              853
Calls spread equally over five years, fixed holding period
 Three-year holding period                                      29.5           10.7          0.45       15.3%   1.4        3,512              227
 Five-year holding period                                       33.0           17.7          0.64       14.8%   1.68       3,922              570
 Seven-year holding period                                      35.3           22.8          0.61       14.1%   1.94       4,196              994




                                                                              49
