                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     AN EXPLORATION OF TREND-CYCLE DECOMPOSITION METHODOLOGIES
                          IN SIMULATED DATA

                                      Robert J. Hodrick

                                     Working Paper 26750
                             http://www.nber.org/papers/w26750


                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   February 2020




Hodrick is the Nomura Professor of International Finance at the Columbia Business School, a
Research Associate at the NBER, a Visiting Fellow at the Hoover Institution, and a Visiting
Scholar at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. e-mail: rh169@gsb.columbia.edu. I am
grateful to Michael Bauer, John Cochrane, Jim Hamilton, Laurie Hodrick, Oscar Jordà, Bob
King, Marianna Kudlyak, and Jim Wilcox for useful discussions and valuable comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Robert J. Hodrick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
An Exploration of Trend-Cycle Decomposition Methodologies in Simulated Data
Robert J. Hodrick
NBER Working Paper No. 26750
February 2020
JEL No. E32

                                         ABSTRACT

This paper uses simulations to explore the properties of the HP filter of Hodrick and Prescott
(1997), the BK filter of Baxter and King (1999), and the H filter of Hamilton (2018) that are
designed to decompose a univariate time series into trend and cyclical components. Each
simulated time series approximates the natural logarithms of U.S. Real GDP, and they are a
random walk, an ARIMA model, two unobserved components models, and models with slowly
changing nonstationary stochastic trends and definitive cyclical components. In basic time series,
the H filter dominates the HP and BK filters in more closely characterizing the underlying
framework, but in more complex models, the reverse is true.


Robert J. Hodrick
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
rh169@columbia.edu




An online appendix is available at http://www.nber.org/data-appendix/w26750
1       Introduction
The purpose of this paper is to explore how well or poorly three univariate methodologies that seek to
decompose a time series into a growth or trend component and a cyclical component perform in controlled
simulation environments. Such results should provide guidance to those seeking to decompose actual eco-
nomic time series. The three filtering methodologies are the HP filter of Hodrick and Prescott (1997), the
BK filter of Baxter and King (1999), and the H filter of Hamilton (2018).
     Each of the simulated time series is calibrated to the natural logarithm of quarterly U.S. Real GDP
from 1947 to 2019, and each series has approximately the same sample mean and standard deviation as
the continuously compounded rate of growth of real GDP.1 I examine six series beginning with a random
walk and an ARIMA model, in which there is no distinction between trend and cycle. I then examine
two unobserved components models with well-defined time series trends and cycles. Finally, I consider two
models with slowly changing nonstationary trends and definitive cyclical components. In the models without
definitive cyclical components, I adopt the trend and cycle definitions in Hamilton (2018), which are defined
below.
     The findings indicate that the HP filter and the BK filter are quite similar and do relatively poorly at
identifying cyclical components in straightforward time series environments in which the first-differenced
series is stationary. The H filter does much better in these simple environments. As the time series become
more complex, the performance of the HP and BK filters more closely characterize the underlying cyclical
frameworks than the H filter. This is true even when the simulations are from well-defined unobserved
components models with constant parameters. Thus, which methodology one might use depends on one's
priors about the nature of the series.


2       Background Motivation
Economists have long sought to understand the nature of business cycles. In 1978, the stylized facts of
business cycles utilized the NBER's methodology as exemplified in Burns and Mitchell (1946). That approach
required the investigator's judgment to identify peaks and troughs in a time series and then to compare
specific cycles and reference cycles. It was not well suited to the computer age.
     Hodrick and Prescott (1997) sought to develop an alternative to the NBER's methodology that was
designed to be easily applied to a variety of time series.2 They wrote (p.1):

        The purpose of this paper is to document some features of aggregate economic fluctuations
        sometimes referred to as business cycles. The investigation uses quarterly date from the postwar
    1 All
        remaining references in the paper to GDP will refer to the natural logarithm of quarterly U.S. Real GDP.
    2 Theoriginal paper, Hodrick and Prescott (1980), was started in 1978. The paper was submitted to the American Economic
Review and was rejected by a referee who advocated use of Bayesian smoothness priors. At the fall 1980 Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Prescott discussed the paper with William Dewald, who was the editor of the Journal of Money, Credit, and
Banking (JMCB). Dewald solicited the paper for the JMCB with the promise that it would be reviewed by a top referee, who
revealed himself in his referee's report to be Milton Friedman. Friedman argued that the paper should not be published because
it was "measurement without theory," a reference to Koopmans (1947) criticism of Burns and Mitchell. Dewald felt compelled
to accept Friedman's recommendation. In 1995, after the paper had become one of the most widely cited unpublished papers
in economics, Stephen Cecchetti, the editor of the JMCB, approached the authors about publishing the paper in the JMCB
without the knowledge that it had been previously rejected. The authors accepted the invitation with the restriction that they
would only revise the paper to update its tables with current data and that they would not be required to address any of the
controversies about the paper that had arisen over the years. All future references to the paper in this paper will be to the
published version.



                                                              2
     U.S. economy. The fluctuations studied are those that are too rapid to be accounted for by slowly
     changing demographic and technological factors and changes in stocks of capital that produce
     secular growth in output per capita.

Hodrick and Prescott (1997) sought to develop stylized facts that could guide the development of equilibrium
models of the business cycle. They stated (p.2):

     This study should be viewed as documenting some systematic deviations from the restrictions
     upon observations implied by neoclassical growth theory. Our statistical approach does not utilize
     standard time series analysis. Our prior knowledge concerning the processes generating the data
     is not of the variety that permits us to specify a probability model as required for application
     of that analysis. We proceed in a more cautious manner that requires only knowledge that
     can be supported by economic theory. The maintained hypothesis, based on growth theory
     considerations, is that the growth component of aggregate economic time series varies smoothly
     over time.

Section 3 of this paper develops the formalities of the HP filter and discusses some of the criticisms that
have arisen over the years.
   An alternative econometric approach to decomposing a time series into growth and cyclical components
is the unobserved components model. Early examples of this class of models were developed by Nelson
and Plosser (1982), Harvey (1985), Watson (1986), and Clark (1987). These formal econometric approaches
take a stand on the time series aspects of the growth component and the cyclical component as well the
correlations of their innovations. Section 4 presents the Clark (1987) model. Because of the complexity of
estimating such unobserved components models, especially in simulation environments in which the model
is clearly false, I do not include unobserved components models in the simulations. On the other hand, I do
use the Clark (1987) model estimated over the full sample as one of the simulated time series.
   Baxter and King (1999) provide another way of isolating the business cycle component of a time series
using filtering methods based on frequency domain analysis. Their analysis is motivated by reasoning similar
to Hodrick and Prescott (1997). They wrote (p.575):

     Contemporary students of the business cycle still face the same basic issue as Burns and Mitchell
     (1946) did fifty years ago: How should one isolate the cyclical component of an economic time
     series? In particular, how should one separate business-cycle elements from slowly evolving
     secular trends and rapidly varying seasonal or irregular components?

Their solution involves defining what one means by the business cycle and transforming or filtering the
macroeconomic series to coincide with this definition. They wrote (p.575):

     Technically, we develop approximate band-pass filters that are constrained to produce stationary
     outcomes when applied to growing time series. For the empirical applications in this paper,
     we adopt the definition of business cycles suggested by the procedures and findings of NBER
     researchers like Burns and Mitchell. Burns and Mitchell specified that business cycles were
     cyclical components of no less than six quarters (eighteen months) in duration, and they found
     that U.S. business cycles typically last fewer than 32 quarters (eight years).



                                                      3
Their solution is a band-pass filter. I discuss the BK filter in Section 5.
       Hamilton (2018) offers the most recent alternative methodology for decomposing a time series into growth
and cyclical components. As the title of his paper suggests, Hamilton (2018) first examines several perceived
flaws in the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) approach. Hamilton (2018) then states (p. 836):

         Here I suggest an alternative concept of what we might mean by the cyclical component of a
         possibly nonstationary series: How different is the value at t + h from the value that we would
         have expected to see based on its behavior through date t? This concept of the cyclical component
         has several attractive features. First, as Den Haan (2000) noted, the forecast error is stationary
         for a wide class of nonstationary processes. Second, the primary reason that we would be wrong
         in predicting the value of most macro and financial variables at a horizon of h = 8 quarters ahead
         is cyclical factors such as whether a recession occurs over the next two years and the timing of
         recovery from any downturn.

Section 6 presents the H filter, which Hamilton (2018) notes is related to the Beveridge and Nelson (1981)
decomposition of a time series into a stochastic trend that is a random walk and a stationary cyclical
component. I consequently discuss the Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition and how it differs from
the Hamilton (2018) decomposition.
       Section 7 examines the Morley, Nelson, and Zivot (2003) ARIMA model of GDP and their critique of
the implications of unobserved components models for the relative importance of the unit root process in
the Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition. I also use this ARIMA model as one of the simulated time
series.
       Section 8 considers the variance ratio analysis of Cochrane (1988). Examining long-horizon variance
ratios is an alternative way to analyze the importance of the unit root component in a time series.
       Section 9 provides statistical analysis of the actual GDP series, and section 10 provides the simulation
analysis. I explore six different time series of increasing in complexity. While the H filter dominates the
HP and BK filters in simple environments, the reverse is true when the simulated models contain growth
components that vary slowly over time.
       Section 11 considers another possible trend series: potential GDP as calculated by the Congressional
Budget Office. After demonstrating that this trend changes significantly over time because it is substantively
revised as new information arrives, I find that the volatility of the cyclical component derived using the most
recent version of potential GDP is in between the volatilities of the HP and H cycles.
       Section 12 provides concluding remarks. A series of Appendixes provides some technical details, and an
Online Appendix contains results of the simulations for a sample size that is double the size considered in
the paper. These simulations suggest that none of the implications of the analysis is changed in this larger
sample size.


3        The Hodrick and Prescott (1997) Filter
The HP filter decomposes a time series, yt , into a growth or trend component, gt , and a cyclical component,
ct :
                                                   yt = gt + ct .                                             (1)



                                                         4
The decomposition constructs the sequence of growth components to minimize the sum of the squared
deviations of the actual series from the growth component subject to a penalty for changes in the rate of
growth. The specific functional form is

                                         T
                               min             (yt - gt )2 + [(gt - gt-1 ) - (gt-1 - gt-2 )]2 .                 (2)
                             {gt }T
                                  t=-1   t=1


The cyclical component is then found by subtracting the growth component from the actual value.
   The Appendix provides a discussion of the solution of the HP filtering problem. Here, I merely note that
the growth component and consequently the cyclical component are filtered versions of the yt series. That
is, they are two-sided weighted averages of the raw data. Hamilton (2018) writes the solution for the vector
of growth components as g  = A y , where y is the vector of observations on yt and the rows of A represent
the filter weights for the trend components. Hence, from equation (1), the rows of I - A represent the
weights for the cyclical components.
   The weights for the cyclical HP filter associated with an infinite sample are given in the Appendix and
are presented in Figure 1 along with the weights from the BK filter that will be discussed below. The cyclical
component is approximately equal to the current value of the series minus a declining weighted average of
five years of quarterly values on either side of the current quarter. Away from the end points of the series,
the cyclical weights in a sample of 289 observations differ from the infinite sample weights by less than 0.001.
   In deciding on the size of  that controls the magnitude of the penalty for changes in the rate of growth,
Hodrick and Prescott (1997) described a probability model that they suggested might provide some intuition
for its appropriate value. They wrote (p.4):

        The following probability model is useful for bringing to bear prior knowledge in the selection
        of the smoothing parameter . If the cyclical components and the second differences of the
        growth components were independently and identically distributed, normal variables with means
                            2       2
        zero and variances 1  and 2   (which they are not), the conditional expectation of gt , given the
                                                                      
        observations, would be the solution to the program (2) when  = 1 /2 ... Our prior view is
        that a 5 percent cyclical component is moderately large as is a one-eighth of 1 percent change in
                                                           
        the growth rate in a quarter. This led us to select  = 5/(1/8) = 40 or  = 1600.

It is important to note that Hodrick and Prescott (1997) explicitly argued that this specific probability model
was false, and they were sensitive to the fact that the results could depend on the choice of . Therefore,
they noted that the standard deviation and the autocorrelations of the cyclical component of real GNP (p.
4-5),

        ... change little if  is reduced by a factor of four to 400 or increased by a factor of four to 6400.

Examination of Table 1 in Hodrick and Prescott (1997) confirms that statement.


3.1      Some Criticisms of the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) Filter
One of the first criticisms of the HP filter was that the only formal probability model for which the de-
composition is optimal is the explicit probability model discussed above regarding the choice of , which as
mentioned, Hodrick and Prescott (1997) noted was explicitly false. Hamilton (2018) presents a version of


                                                                5
this criticism in his Proposition 1 proving that if a researcher sought to estimate the growth component by
minimizing the expected squared difference between the true growth component and a linear combination of
y , that is
                                                       min E (gt - at y ),                                                    (3)
                                                        at

the solution for the vector of estimated growth components, g
                                                            ~, would be

                                                             g   ~
                                                             ~ = Ay.                                                          (4)

Then, if the true model of the growth component were

                                                   gt = 2gt-1 - gt-2 + t ,                                                    (5)

                                                                                                          ~
where t is a white noise uncorrelated with ct , and if the cyclical component is also a white noise, then A
would converge to the HP trend filter weights, A . Hamilton (2018) then notes that if this situation were
true, the person applying the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) filter would be "unhappy" because the resulting
cyclical series would be white noise.
    From a statistical perspective, there is nothing wrong with this argument, and indeed, this probability
model is the one described by Hodrick and Prescott (1997) in their discussion of the choice of . But, they
also explicitly stated that they did not believe that knowledge of the nature of the growth component was
sufficient to permit the application of a specific probability model.
    A second criticism concerns the ability of the HP filtered data to induce cycles where none exist. Just
as Nelson and Kang (1981) warned that linearly detrending a time series that is a random walk induces
spurious periodicity that is a function of the length of the sample, Cogley and Nason (1995) demonstrated
that applying the HP filter to a series that is a random walk imposes complex dynamic properties on the
growth and cyclical components that obviously are not present.
    As in any two-sided filter, it is also the case that observations near the beginning and the end of the
sample have different weights in their growth components than those far from either end, which further
distorts the dynamics of the cyclical component. It is certainly worthwhile keeping these criticisms in mind
when applying any filtering technique.


4     The Clark (1987) Unobserved Components Model
If one thinks that they have sufficient information to formulate a statistical model of the growth and cyclical
components, estimation of an unobserved components model is possible.3 Here, I examine the Clark (1987)
model it does not assume that GDP is stationary after first differencing, or I (1).4 Below, I provide maximum
likelihood estimates from the full sample of the coefficients with their standard errors in parentheses.5
    Clark's (1987) unobserved components model postulates that GDP is the sum of a stochastic trend and
a stochastic cycle as in equation (1), and the change in the trend is modeled with a time-varying conditional
   3 Of course, one could also estimate a multivariate model of the underlying causes of growth and cycles, but I leave this

important issue to future discussions.
   4 A series that is stationary after taking d differences is said to be integrated of order d or an I (d) series.
   5 The Appendix compares the estimation in Clark (1987) with estimates of the model from my data using the same sample

period as Clark (1987), and the differences are minor. In the full sample estimation, all of the changes in parameters are smaller
than one of their respective standard errors.


                                                                6
mean, dt-1 , and a homoskedastic innovation. If the lag operator, L, is defined by Lk yt = yt-k , and the first
difference operator is  = (1 - L), the second equation of the model is

                                            gt = dt-1 + 0.545 wt ,                                         (6)
                                                            (0.114)


where wt is N (0, 1). The conditional mean of the change in the trend is postulated to be a random walk
whose innovation has a relatively small estimated standard deviation:

                                             dt = dt-1 + 0.021 ut ,                                        (7)
                                                            (0.016)


where ut is N (0, 1). The cyclical component is modeled as an ARIMA(2,0,0):

                                    ct = 1.510 ct-1 - 0.565 ct-2 + 0.603 vt ,                              (8)
                                         (0.122)      (0.127)         (0.126)


where vt is N (0, 1). The three innovations, ut , wt , and vt , are mutually uncorrelated.
   After estimating the model, the cyclical component of the model can be inferred from the application of
Kalman smoothing, and Figure 2 presents the implied unobserved components cycle (the dashed line) along
with the HP cycle (the solid line). The correlation of the two series is 0.786.
   This finding is similar to that of Harvey and Jaeger (1993) who advocate estimation of formal statistical
unobserved components models of the trend and cyclical components in which the trend is an ARIMA(0,2,1)
and the cycle is an ARIMA(2,0,1). They note (p. 232),

      We argue that there are series where it is unreasonable to assume a smooth trend a priori and
                                            2
      therefore the question whether or not   is set to zero is an empirical one.
     2
Here   in their notation refers to the variance of the innovation in equation (7). Although the cyclical
component of GDP estimated by Harvey and Jaeger (1993) is quite similar to the Hodrick and Prescott
(1997) series, they find that this is not true of the Australian real GDP series.
   One might argue that allowing the conditional mean of the rate of growth of GDP to be a random walk
with a normal innovation is absurd since doing so allows the expected, and therefore realized, rate of growth
of GDP to explode over time. Nevertheless, such an assumption can be defended as the appropriate small
sample estimation technique. Clark (1987) defends the assumption on a priori grounds (p. 800):

      In addition, it seemed inappropriate to assume a constant growth rate in advance, given the
      decline of U.S. productivity growth in the 1970s and reduction of labor force growth in the 1980s,
      both of which should have shifted the underlying growth of output.

Figure 3 presents the smoothed estimation of the conditional mean of the rate of growth from estimation of
the Clark (1987) model on the full sample. One sees the slowly declining growth rate from the almost 0.95%
per quarter in the 1950's to the 0.53% per quarter after the financial crisis of 2008 and the great recession.
   The Appendix demonstrates that the univariate time series process for yt implied by the Clark (1987)
model is an ARIMA(2,2,3),
                                              (L)2 yt = (L) t ,                                            (9)

where (L) = 1 - 1 L - 2 L2 , and (L) = 1 - 1 L - 2 L2 - 3 L3 .


                                                        7
    To assess whether one could use standard unit root tests to demonstrate the necessity to second difference
the yt series to induce stationarity, I conducted 5,000 simulations with 289 observations from the estimated
Clark (1987) model, and I estimated augmented Dickey and Fuller (1979) (ADF) tests of the form

                    yt = c + yt-1 + 1 2 yt-1 + 2 2 yt-2 + 3 2 yt-3 + 4 2 yt-4 + t .                                       (10)

Failure to reject the null hypothesis  = 1 would indicate that second differencing is appropriate, yet in
all of the simulations, the value of the test statistic rejected this null hypothesis at the .05 marginal level
of significance in favor of the stationary alternative. The mean value of the ADF test statistics in the
simulations was -7.073.6 Thus, the ADF tests strongly reject the presence of a unit root in the rate of
growth of the simulated GDP series even though a unit root is actually present and the underlying yt series
is truly I (2). In the actual data, the ADF test statistic is -8.427, and its nominal p-value is 0.001. Given the
findings of the simulations, the size of the test is clearly not correct for this type of economic time series.
    Morley et al. (2003) note that to achieve identification in unobserved components models, including
the Clark (1987) model, the models are typically estimated under the assumption that the innovations
are uncorrelated. The parameters of the corresponding ARIMA model in equation (9) are consequently
constrained. I return to this issue below in discussing the implications of various models for the importance
of the unit root component in GDP.


5     The Baxter and King (1999) Filter
Baxter and King (1999) use a frequency domain methodology to estimate the cyclical component of a time
series.7 The Appendix contains a more formal discussion of these methods. Here, I merely note that
the Baxter and King (1999) band-pass methodology is a symmetric, two-sided filter such that the cyclical
component is a weighted sum of the underlying data,

                                                            K
                                                    ct =            wk yt-k ,                                             (11)
                                                           k=-K


where the weights sum to zero. For quarterly observations Baxter and King (1999) recommend the BP(6,32)
band-pass filter that seeks to capture variation in the series with periodicity between 6 and 32 quarters, and
they set K = 12. The weights, which are given in their Table 4, are plotted in Figure 1, and are reproduced
in the Appendix for the reader's convenience.8 The Appendix in Baxter and King (1999) demonstrates that
any symmetric, two-sided filter, whose weights sum to zero, contains a backward difference, (1 - L), and
a forward difference, (1 - L-1 ). The BK filter consequently produces a stationary series if the underlying
series is I (2).
    While Hodrick and Prescott (1997) and Baxter and King (1999) approach the problem of defining the
    6 The .05 critical value of the ADF test with more than 250 observations is -2.88. The percentage of the simulations that

rejected the null hypothesis of a unit root was the same with up to seven lags on the right-hand side of equation (10), and it
was also the same when I doubled the sample size.
    7 Stock and Watson (1999) use the BK filter to discuss the cyclical components of 71 economic time series.
    8 See the Appendix for additional discussion of low-pass and band-pass filters. When discussing the simulations below, I

estimate the trend associated with the Baxter and King (1999) methodology using a low-pass filter that keeps fluctuations
with a periodicity greater than 32 quarters. Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) provide an alternative band-pass filter that uses
different weights for different time periods and is not symmetric. I also discuss this approach in the Appendix.



                                                                8
cyclical component of a series from quite different directions, both approaches filter the data, albeit with
somewhat different weights as demonstrated in Figure 1. Nevertheless, the estimated cyclical components of
GDP are remarkably similar as demonstrated in Figure 4 in which the BK cycle is the dashed line and the
HP cycle is the solid line. The correlation between the two definitions of the cyclical component of GDP is
0.963. Baxter and King (1999) note that this finding of similar cycles from the two methods does not hold
true for all series as the HP filter allows more high frequency variation into the cyclical component, and
some series, such as inflation, have significant high frequency variation.


6     The Hamilton (2018) Filter
Hamilton (2018) develops a decomposition of a time series into trend and cyclical components by regressing
the h-period-ahead value of the series, yt+h , on a constant, the current value of the series, yt , and (p - 1)
additional lags, yt-1 , ..., yt-p+1 . In practice, for quarterly macroeconomic time series, Hamilton (2018)
suggests h = 8 and p = 4, as in

                            yt+8 = 0 + 1 yt + 2 yt-1 + 3 yt-2 + 4 yt-3 + t+8 .                              (12)

The trend component at time t + 8, denoted gt+8 , is defined to be the fitted value from this regression,

                                 gt+8 = 0 + 1 yt + 2 yt-1 + 3 yt-2 + 4 yt-3 .                               (13)

The cyclical component at time t + 8, denoted ct+8 , is defined to be the deviation of the realized value of
yt+8 from the estimated trend,
                                              ct+8 = yt+8 - gt+8 .                                          (14)

    Figure 5 presents the H cycle as the dashed line and the HP cycle as the solid line. The correlation of
the two series is 0.731, but the H cycle is more than twice as volatile as the HP cycle.
    Hamilton (2018) notes that if d yt is stationary and p > d, the regression in equation (12) will use d of
the coefficients to induce stationarity in the residuals, because otherwise the sum of the squared residuals
would explode, and the remaining p +1 - d coefficients will reflect the regression of a stationary representation
of the future process onto the stationary lagged values of the process. For example, if yt is stationary, the
sum of the slope coefficients in equation (12) would converge to one as the sample size gets large, and the
regression in equation (12) would be equivalent in large samples to running the following regression,

                            yt+8 - yt = 0 + 1 yt + 2 yt-1 + 3 yt-2 + t+8 .                                  (15)

Hamilton (2018) notes that if predictability is low, the left-hand side of equation (15) suggests that his
cyclical fluctuations would be quite similar to those found from simply taking the 8-th difference of the data.
That is, the cyclical component would be defined as

                                               cD
                                                t+8 = yt+8 - yt ,                                           (16)

which imposes a unit root but without the adjustment for the constant term or the forecasts from current



                                                       9
and lagged yt s that arise in the definition of ct+8 . Hamilton (2018) finds that these two cyclical components,
ct+8 and cD                                                                                  D
          t+8 , do indeed look very similar, although ct+8 is zero mean by construction and ct+8 contains the
average growth rate over a two-year period.
   To see the importance of this growth rate, Figure 6 plots the difference between the H cycle and 8-th
differenced GDP. Because the average growth rate in the first half of the sample is greater than the average
growth rate in the second half, the difference is negative prior to 1984 and positive thereafter.


6.1     The Beveridge and Nelson (1981) Decomposition
The Hamilton (2018) methodology is related to the Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition of a time
series, yt , into the sum of a stochastic trend, zt , that is a random walk with drift, and a serially correlated
stationary process, ct ,
                                                            yt = zt + ct .                                                       (17)

This decomposition assumes that yt is I (1). From the Wold representation of a stationary time series, yt
can be expressed as an unconditional mean, which I assume to be the only deterministic component, plus
possibly infinite-order moving average process,

                                                      yt = µ + A(L) t ,                                                          (18)

                                               
where A(L) =       j =0   aj Lj , a0 = 1 and   j =0   a2
                                                       j < . In the discussion that follows, it is useful to define the
notation
                                                        
                                               Ak =           aj ,    k = 0, 1, 2, ...                                           (19)
                                                       j =k

Beveridge and Nelson (1981) define the stochastic trend in yt to be the long-run forecast of yt+h based on
time t information. That is,
                                        zt = lim lim E (yt+h |yt , yt-1 , ..., yt-p ).                                           (20)
                                               h p

With this definition, it is straightforward to see that zt evolves as a random walk with constant drift, and
as shown below, the response of zt to an innovation in                    t   is A0 . Thus,

                                                  zt = µ + zt-1 + A0 t ,                                                         (21)

in which case the cyclical component must be

                                          ct = -A1      t   - A2      t-1     - A3   t-2   - ...                                 (22)

6.1.1     On the relative importance of the random walk component

To see that A0 represents the response of zt to an innovation in                      t,   recognize that the aj coefficients give the
impulse responses of the expected growth rate of yt+j in the future to a shock to the process today, that is,
           dyt+j
aj = Et     d t    . Then, use the fact that the level of future output is yt+j = yt-1 + yt + yt+1 + ...yt+j .




                                                                     10
Consequently, the impulse response of the expected level of future output at t + j to an innovation at t is

                                                     dyt+j
                                               Et                = 1 + a1 + ... + aj .                                         (23)
                                                      d t

Thus, A0 represents the long-run impact of a shock to the expected level of future output:
                                                                             
                                                          dyt+j
                                               lim Et                   =          aj = A0 .                                   (24)
                                               j           d t              j =0


If A0 = 1, an innovation to the process has a permanent effect on the long run prediction, which is consistent
with yt being a random walk with drift. If A0 > 1, the expected increase in the long-run level of the process
is larger than the current innovation, and if A0 < 1, the expected increase in the long-run level of the process
is smaller than the innovation.

6.1.2      How Hamilton (1994) Differs from Beveridge and Nelson (1981)

The Hamilton (2018) decomposition into trend and cycle contains two changes relative to the Beveridge and
Nelson (1981) decomposition. First, rather than forecasting the limh Et (yt+h ), Hamilton (2018) considers
Et (yt+8 ). The second change is the timing of the trend. The Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition
defines the trend at time t to be limh Et (yt+h ), but the Hamilton (1994) decomposition defines the trend
at time t to be Et-8 (yt ). Also, whereas the Beveridge and Nelson (1981) requires the underlying time series
to be I (1), the Hamilton (1994) decomposition is well defined as long as the series is I (d) and d  p, where
p is the number of right-hand-side variables in equation (12).


6.2       Potential Problems with the Hamilton (2018) Methodology
The stationary representation in equation (15) highlights two potential problems with the Hamilton (2018)
methodology. First, the approach is designed for classical time series environments, and it may not work
well when samples are small relative to the changes taking place in the underlying economic process or when
the changes in the underlying trend do not allow for straightforward time series models.
   A second problem arises even in large samples if the projection of yt+8 onto yt and the three lagged yt-j 's
does not capture all of the forecasting information in the past history of the process.9
   To understand this criticism, suppose the yt series is I (1) and consider the Beveridge and Nelson (1981)
decomposition in equation (17) and the Wold decomposition in equation (18). Taking the expectation at
time t of equation (17) at t + 8 gives

                                               Et (yt+8 ) = Et (zt+8 ) + Et (ct+8 ).                                           (25)

From equation (21)
                                                       Et (zt+8 ) = 8µ + zt ,                                                  (26)

and from equation (22)
                                        Et (ct+8 ) = -A9     t   - A10      t-1   - A11   t-2   - ...                          (27)
  9 See   Sch¨
             uler (2018) for analysis of the properties of the H filter in the frequency domain and critiques of its properties.




                                                                   11
Substituting into equation (25) gives

                               Et (yt+8 ) = 8µ + zt - A9    t   - A10   t-1   - A11    t-2   - ...                          (28)

or after substituting for zt = yt - ct , we have

                   Et (yt+8 ) = 8µ + yt + (A1 - A9 ) t + (A2 - A10 )          t-1   + (A3 - A11 )      t-2   - ...          (29)

Hamilton (2018) identifies the trend component of a series as the forecast from the regression in equation
(12), and while the lagged yt-j terms will be correlated with the lagged                     t-j     terms in equation (29), the
lagged yt-j terms may not capture all of the dynamic effects.


7     The Morley, Nelson, and Zivot (2003) Model
Those who view many macroeconomic time series as I (1) often estimate ARIMA models, which provide an
easy way to estimate the value of A0 . For example, Morley et al. (2003) model GDP as an ARIMA(2,1,2),

                                                  (L)yt = (L) t ,                                                           (30)

where (L) and (L) are second-order polynomials in the lag operator. In ARIMA models, the long-run
impulse response can be estimated parametrically by

                                                   A0 = (1)-1 (1).                                                          (31)

The Appendix compares estimation of the Morley et al. (2003) model with my data set for their sample
period showing that the results are similar but not identical.10 Estimating this model for my full sample
period gives
                    yt = 0.320 + 1.271 yt-1 - 0.682 yt-2 +               t    - 0.979     t-1   + 0.540      t-2 .          (32)
                            (0.070)   (0.143)         (0.093)                   (0.146)            (0.086)

I will use this model as one of the simulation economies.
    The implied long-run impulse response coefficient from this estimation is

                      A0 = (1)-1 (1) = (1 - 0.979 + 0.540)/(1 - 1.271 + 0.682) = 1.364,                                     (33)

which is also quite similar to the value found by Morley et al. (2003) of 1.276.
    As discussed above, if one believes that GDP is I (1) with constant ARIMA parameters, finding A0 > 1
implies that the Beveridge and Nelson (1981) random walk component of the series contributes more to
the innovation variance of the rate of growth of yt than the corresponding cyclical component because the
innovation to the cyclical component is perfectly negatively correlated with the innovation to the stochastic
trend. Thus, in the full sample, if A0 = 1.364 the implied standard deviation of the innovation to the
stochastic trend would be 1.364 times the standard deviation of the innovation to the rate of growth, and
the standard deviation of the cyclical component must correspondingly be 0.364 times the standard deviation
 10 The differences in the estimated parameters appear to be minor and could be due to revisions in the GDP data or to the
convergence criteria used in the non-linear estimation.



                                                            12
of the innovation to the rate of growth. The next subsection provides a non-parametric way of examining
this conclusion.


8     The Cochrane (1988) Variance Ratio
As just noted, the innovation variance of the random walk component is A2 2
                                                                        0  . Cochrane (1988) suggests
a third way of thinking about the importance of A0 . Because the spectral density of yt at frequency  is
Sy (e-i ) = |A0 (e-i )|2  2 , the innovation variance of the random walk component is equal to the spectral
density of yt at frequency zero, that is

                                           2                -i0
                                             z = A2 2
                                                  0  = Sy (e    ).                                             (34)

Thus, Cochrane (1988) argues that for any I (1) series (p. 905),

      ...we can break it into permanent (random walk) and temporary (stationary) components, we
      can examine the response of long-term forecasts to an innovation, or we can examine the spectral
      density at frequency zero of its first differences. All three interpretations allow us to think of the
      permanence of the fluctuations of a series as a continuous phenomenon rather than a discrete
      choice.

In the Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition, the stochastic trend and the cycle are perfectly corre-
lated. Cochrane (1988) credits Watson (1986) as the first to prove that the Beveridge and Nelson (1981)
decomposition is the only trend-cycle decomposition that is guaranteed to exist, but in Cochrane's (1988)
Fact 2, he demonstrates that if an alternative trend-cycle decomposition exists, with arbitrary correlation
between the innovations to the stochastic trend and the cycle, the innovation standard deviation of the trend
is the same as that of the Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition.
    Rather than assess the importance of the random walk component for the long-run forecast by developing
a parametric estimate of A0 from an ARIMA model, Cochrane (1988) develops non-parametric estimates
using variances of long-run differences. Because the long-run difference is sum of short-run differences,
yt+k - yt = yt+k + yt+k-1 + ... + yt+1 , the variance of the k -period difference times 1/k is
                                                                            
                                                              k-1
                              2     1                             (k - j )  2
                              k =     V (yt+k - yt ) = 1 + 2              j y                                  (35)
                                    k                        j =1
                                                                     k


where j is the j -th order autocorrelation of yt . Cochrane (1988) recognizes that

                                                  2
                                              lim k = Sy (e-i0 ).                                              (36)
                                             k

                       -i0
Thus, since A2 2
             0  = Sy (e    ), this non-parametric approach provides an alternative way of estimating the
innovation variance of the random walk component.
    To obtain a lower bound estimate of A0 , Campbell and Mankiw (1987) recognize that the predictable
fraction of yt is
                                                            2
                                                 R2 = 1 -   2 .                                                (37)
                                                             y



                                                       13
They then divide the variance of the long-run difference by k times the variance of yt to get the variance
ratio, Vk , recognizing that
                                                                   2
                                                    lim Vk = A2
                                                              0    2 .                                                  (38)
                                                   k                y

Hence, Campbell and Mankiw (1987) note that

                                                                Vk
                                                    A0 =               .                                                (39)
                                                             (1 - R2 )
        
Hence,    Vk , for a sufficiently large k, provides a lower bound estimate of A0 because (1 - R2 ) is a fraction.
                                  
    In the simulations I report Vk as a diagnostic statistic on the importance of the random walk component.
It is important to remember, though, that the discussion in the current and last sections presumes that the
time series is I (1). As noted above, in dealing with macroeconomic data that have underlying trends that
change over time, that assumption may be problematic.


9     Statistics for U.S. Real GDP
This section provides statistics for GDP for a sample period from 1947:1 to 2019:1. Table 1 presents two sets
of statistics. The columns in Panel A labeled "H", "HP", and "BK" refer to the respective filtering methods
of Hamilton (2018), Hodrick and Prescott (1997), and Baxter and King (1999), and the statistics are the
standard deviations of the cyclical component and the standard deviations of the changes in the trend. The
values in the tables have units of percentage points per quarter. The standard deviations of the HP and BK
cycles are 1.550 and 1.490, respectively, while the standard deviation of the H cycle is more than twice those
values at 3.295. The standard deviations of the changes in the HP and BK trends are correspondingly quite
close at 0.261 and 0.270, while the standard deviation of the change in the H trend is almost four times as
large at 1.022. Since the average growth rate of GDP over the full sample is 0.774 per quarter, the standard
deviation of the change in the H trend is larger than the average growth rate.
    Panel B of Table 1 reports the square roots of the variance ratios. The estimated lower bounds on A0
from the square roots of the variance ratios are only slightly greater than the parametric estimate of 1.364
from the ARIMA(2,1,2) model in Section 7.
    These results, in which the parametric and non-parametric estimates of A0 are quite similar and imply
a large unit root component in GDP, contrast to the results in Cochrane (1988) who examines annual data
on the log of real GNP per capita from 1869 to 1986 and finds non-parametric estimates of A0 that are
substantively less than one, while the parametric approaches imply values of A0 that are substantively
greater than one.
    Cochrane (1988) reconciles the different implications of the two methodologies by noting that the variance
ratio focuses exclusively on the spectral density at frequency zero, while the maximum likelihood estimation
of an ARIMA model focuses on all frequencies and will trade off doing less well at low frequencies if it can
do better at higher frequencies. Such is not the case here.11
  11 The Online Appendix reproduces Table 1 using data on quarterly GDP per capita. The standard deviations of the cycles

and the changes in the trends are quite similar to those in Table 1 here, but the square roots of the variance ratios decline
monotonically from 1.328 for k = 10 to 1.056 for k = 80. The Online Appendix also reports estimation of the Morley et al.
(2003) model for GDP per capita finding similar coefficients to those reported here and an estimate of A0 = 1.290.



                                                             14
   Morley et al. (2003) note that estimation of unobserved components models in which the data are assumed
to be I (1) often imply cyclical components whose innovation variance is larger than that of the random walk
component, that is estimates of A0 < 1. They reconcile these findings with the opposite conclusion from
estimation of ARIMA models that find estimates of A0 > 1 by noting that the unobserved components
model imply constraints on the ARIMA representation that arise from the assumption in the unobserved
components models that the innovations in the cyclical and growth components are uncorrelated. They note
that these constraint are generally rejected by the data.
   The next section considers simulations of time series to determine both which of the trend-cycle de-
composition methods works the best in particular situations and whether the conclusions of the ARIMA
representations and the variance ratio analysis should be trusted.


10      Analysis of Simulations
This section presents a series of tables that examine the mean values of several statistics from 5,000 simula-
tions of six different time series. The statistics are designed to provide information on the performance of
the filtering methodologies of Hodrick and Prescott (1997), Baxter and King (1999), and Hamilton (2018)
in different time series environments. The simulated time series all have 289 observations, the same length
as the GDP data examined above, and they generally have the same sample mean and standard deviation
as the rate of growth of GDP.12


10.1     The Representative Statistics
In addition to the unconditional standard deviations of the cyclical components and the changes in trend
reported above, each Panel A of the Tables also includes the correlations of the cyclical components from
the respective filters with the simulated cyclical components, the correlations of the changes in the filtered
trends with the changes in simulated trends, and the root mean squared errors (RMSE) of the cyclical
components.13
   Each Panel B in the following Tables includes two regression diagnostics that examine the relative im-
portance of the cyclical components of either the HP or BK filter and the H filter in explaining the simulated
cyclical components. The first regression diagnostic is the estimated slope coefficient in

                                             ct - cj         H    j
                                                   t =  +  (ct - ct ) + t ,                                             (40)

                                                                        j
where ct represents the simulated cycle, cH
                                          t represent the H cycle, and ct is either the HP or BK cycle. The
second diagnostic is the adjusted R2 from this regression. An estimate of  equal to zero indicates that the
HP or BK cycle explains the simulated cycle with no additional explanatory power from the H cycle, while
an estimated  equal to one indicates the opposite, that the H cycle explains the simulated cycle with no
  12 The Online Appendix reproduces the same tables but with 578 observations. The means of the statistics are little changed

with the longer sample.
  13 If the simulated cycle is c and the filtered cycle is c
                                                           ^t , the RMSE is
                                t

                                                                    T
                                              RM SE =      (1/T )               ^t )2 .
                                                                          (ct - c
                                                                    t=1




                                                             15
additional explanatory power from the HP or BK cycle. The adjusted R2 similarly indicates the additional
explanatory power of the H cycle in the presence of the HP or BK cycle.
   Finally, each Panel C of the following Tables includes the square roots of the variance ratios. While
variance ratios are designed to inform the debate about the importance of the variance of a unit root
component in GDP relative to the variance of the cyclical component in time series, I examine these statistics
in environments that are I (1) and not I (1).
   The first two tables examine two I (1) time series with constant unconditional moments in which there
are no distinct growth and cyclical components. These models are a random walk with drift and an
ARIMA(2,1,2) model, calibrated as in the Morley et al. (2003) model estimated above.
   Next, I introduce time series containing distinct growth and cyclical components. The first of these
models has a serially correlated growth component that has a constant unconditional mean. The second
analyzes the Clark (1987) model, as estimated above, in which the conditional mean rate of growth is itself
a random walk.
   Finally, the last two time series allow for changes in the unconditional mean rate of growth. One can
think of these models as capturing realizations of low-probability regime changes in the first case or simply
as slow-downs in the rate of growth in the second case. These final two series do not fall into classic time
series models.


10.2     Defining the Growth and Cyclical Components
Before presenting the results of the simulations, I briefly discuss the different interpretations of trends and
cycles in the various simulations. In the first two models, separately defined growth and cyclical components
do not exist, whereas in the last four models, such components are present. When these components are
present, I take the goal of the HP and BK filters to be to isolate these cyclical components. This is a different
objective than what Hamilton (2018) defines as the cycle.
   When no well-defined growth and cyclical components are present and when they can be calculated, I de-
fine the trend and cycle to be modifications of the Hamilton (2018) definitions. As in equation (13), Hamilton
(2018) defines the trend to be the projection of yt+8 onto the information set {1, yt , yt-1 , yt-2 , yt-3 , }. In the
                                                                      H
first four models, I define the modified Hamilton (2018) trend to be gt+8 = Et (yt+8 ) and the corresponding
cycle to be cH             H
             t+8 = yt+8 - gt+8 . These definitions substitute the full information set at time t rather than
simply the regression of yt+8 onto current and lagged values of yt as I want to see how well the empirical
methodolgies capture the true Et (yt+8 ) and not simply examine the small sample properties of the Hamilton
(2018) regression. While it is straightforward to analytically calculate these values for simple models like
the random walk, the Appendix describes how this is done for the more complicated ARIMA(2,1,2) model
and the two unobserved components models. For the two unobserved components models, in which there
are well-defined growth and cyclical components, I allow for both the model definition of the cycle as well as
the modified Hamilton definition just discussed. In the last two simulations in which there is no well defined
population value of Et (yt+8 ), the only cyclical component is the one that is being simulated.
   Thus, for the random walk model and the ARIMA model, one should expect the HP filter and BK filter
to be dominated by the H filter as the HP filter and BK filters are not designed to produce an estimate of
cH
 t+8 = yt+8 - Et (yt+8 ). Similarly, in the last four simulations, when the goal is to isolate the true cycle, we
should expect the H filter to be dominated by the HP and BK filters. This is indeed what I find. Perhaps the


                                                         16
most interesting cases are the unobserved components models in which both concepts of trend are present.


10.3        A Random Walk Model
The first simulated time series is a random walk with drift. I use this model because Hamilton (2018) states
(p. 833):

       The presumption by users of the HP filter is that it offers a reasonable approach to detrending
       for a range of commonly encountered economic time series. The leading example of a time-series
       process for which we would want to be particularly convinced of the procedure's appropriateness
       would be a random walk.

I am not sure why Hamilton (2018) thinks that a random walk is the 'leading example' of a time series that
one would want to detrend with the HP filter, because such a series does not share the slowly moving growth
component that Hodrick and Prescott (1997) argue characterizes the macroeconomic series that they sought
to detrend. Nevertheless, it is useful to start the simulations with a random walk to demonstrate the pros
and cons of the various decomposition methods.
   The simulations involve 289 observations of

                                            yt = 0.779 + yt-1 + 0.933 t ,                                    (41)

where   t   is independently and identically distributed N (0, 1). The drift and standard deviation of the process
correspond to the sample mean and standard deviation of the quarterly continuously compounded rate of
growth of GDP over the full sample.
   Table 2 presents the results of the simulations. As discussed in the previous subsection, without a clear
distinction between growth and cyclical components, I adopt the Hamilton (2018) definitions modified to
be based on the full information set. The columns in Panel A labeled "H", "HP", and "BK" refer to the
mean values of the row statistics from the 5,000 simulations of the respective filtering methods of Hamilton
(2018), Hodrick and Prescott (1997), and Baxter and King (1999). The column labeled "In Sim" contains
the sample means of the realized values of the row statistics. Panel B presents the mean values of the slope
coefficients and R2 's in regression (40). Panel C presents the mean values from the 5,000 simulations of the
square roots of the variance ratios.
   In this case, as expected, the H filter performs quite well. The mean value of the standard deviation
of the H cycle is 2.539, which is the same as the sample mean in the In Sim column. The mean value of
the standard deviation of the change in the H trend is 0.893 compared to the In Sim value of 0.932. The
correlation of the H cycle with the simulated cycle is 0.979, and the correlation of the change in the H trend
with the change in the simulated trend is 0.972. Because the data are in natural logarithms, the RMSE of
0.632 represents a difference of 0.632%.
   The statistics for the HP and BK cycles and changes in the trend are much farther from the true values.
The average standard deviations of the HP and BK cycles are only 1.190 and 1.073, respectively; and the
standard deviations of the changes in trends are only 0.182 for HP and 0.188 for BK. The correlations of the
HP and BK cycles with the simulated cycle are only 0.660 and 0.632, and the correlations of the changes
in the HP and BK trends with the changes in the simulated trend are 0.144 and 0.149. The RMSE's of the
two methods, at 2.057 and 2.128, are also more than three times the H value.

                                                         17
   The regression diagnostics also indicate that the H cycle clearly dominants the HP or BK cycles as the
means of the slope coefficients are 0.999 for HP and 1.002 for BK, and the means of the R2 's are 0.932 for
HP and 0.940 for BK. Clearly, if the leading economic time series that macroeconomists wanted to detrend
were truly random walks with constant drifts, the H filter would dominate the HP and BK filters.
   Now, consider the Variance Ratio analysis in Panel C of Table 2. With the degrees of freedom adjustment
advocated by Cochrane (1988), the results almost perfectly line up with what is expected in the case of a
random walk. The means across the simulations of the square roots of the variance ratios range from 1.000
for k = 10 to 1.003 for k = 80. Thus, in this case we would correctly conclude that a shock to the process is
permanent.


10.4     An ARIMA Model
The next simulations utilize the ARIMA(2,1,2) model of Morley et al. (2003) estimated on the full sample
as in equation (32). As in the previous subsection, without a clear distinction between growth and cyclical
components, I adopt the modified Hamilton (2018) definitions of the trend and cycle based on the full
information set.
   Notice how well the H filter tracks the simulated cycle and the change in the simulated trend. The
standard deviation of the H cycle is 3.238, only slightly smaller than the In Sim value of 3.306. The standard
deviation of the change in the H trend is 1.084, which is only slightly above the In Sim value of 1.075. The
correlations of the H cycle with the true cycle, 0.977, and of the change in the H trend with the change in
the true trend, 0.944, are also quite high. The RMSE of the H cycle remains relatively low at 0.837, and the
slope coefficients in the regression diagnostic have means of 0.986 for HP and 0.989 for BK indicating once
again essentially no role for the HP or BK cycles in explaining the true cycle in the presence of the H cycle.
   These findings might perhaps be anticipated because the simulated process is a well defined I (1) time
series process with constant parameters. With 289 observations and enough lags as regressors, the estimated
parameters in the H filter forecasting regression should converge to be relatively close to the true model.
The presence of MA terms does cause problems in this regard, but once one forecasts out eight quarters,
this concern becomes relatively minor.
   The HP and BK filters again show relatively poor ability to replicate the underlying modified Hamilton
(2018) trend and cycle decomposition. The means of the standard deviations of the HP and BK cycles are
only about half of the In Sim value, and the means of the standard deviations of the changes in the HP
and BK trends are well below the In Sim value. The correlations of the estimated HP and BK cyclical
components with the true cycle are 0.685 and 0.676, respectively. The correlations of the estimated changes
in trend with the true changes in trend are also quite low, and the RMSE's remain substantively elevated
relative to the H filter.
   Consistent with the estimated results from the actual U.S. data, the mean values of the square roots of
the variance ratios are essentially 1.26 indicating that the unit root component of the process is dominant
compared to the implied cyclical component in the Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition.


10.5     An Model with a Constant Unconditional Mean Change in Trend
For the third set of simulations I examine a model in which the simulated time series, yt , is the sum of a
stochastic trend, gt , and a stochastic cycle, ct , as in equation (1). In this case there are well-defined trend


                                                       18
and cycle components to be identified by the decomposition techniques.
   The stochastic trend is modeled as an ARIMA(1,1,0), and the change in the trend is highly serially
correlated:
                                      gt = 0.07786 + 0.900gt-1 + wt .                                     (42)

The innovations, wt , are drawn from a N (0, 0.002). The cyclical component is modeled as an ARIMA(2,0,0),

                                        ct = 1.25ct-1 - 0.45ct-2 + vt ,                                   (43)

and the innovations, vt are drawn from a N (0, 0.6385). The innovations in the trend and cycle are uncorre-
lated.
   The unconditional mean of the change in the trend is 0.7786, which is the same as the sample mean of the
quarterly growth rate of GDP. The standard deviation of yt also matches the actual standard deviation of
the rate of growth of GDP, which is 0.933. The unconditional standard deviation of the cyclical component
of 1.766 is large relative to the unconditional standard deviation of the change in the change in the trend of
0.103. The ratio of these standard deviations is 1.766/0.103 = 17.146.
   Table 4 presents the results of the simulations. While the means of the standard deviations of the HP
and BK cycles of 1.423 and 1.364 understate the target of 1.766 by 19% and 23%, respectively, the mean of
the standard deviations of the H cycles of 2.419 overstates the target by 37%.
   The mean of the simulated standard deviations of the changes in the trend of 0.098 is closely matched by
the means of the standard deviations of the changes in the HP and BK trends of 0.104 and 0.115, respectively.
In contrast, the mean of the simulated standard deviations of the changes in the H trend is 0.797, which is
7.74 times larger than the target value.
   The means of the correlations of the implied cycles with the true cycles are 0.741 for the H cycle and
0.887 and 0.857 for HP and BK cycles, respectively. Thus, this correlation metric also favors the latter
methodologies. Similarly, the mean of the correlations of the estimated changes in the H trend with the
changes in the simulated trend of 0.041 is much lower than the comparable statistic of 0.543 for the HP filter
and 0.495 for the BK filter.
   The RMSE of the H cycle of 1.638 is also substantively larger than those of the HP and BK methods,
which are 0.840 and 0.936, respectively. Finally, the means of the slope coefficients of 0.087 for HP and 0.150
for BK and the R2 's 0.041 for HP and 0.082 for BK clearly indicate that in the presence of the HP or BK
cycles, the H cycle has very little ability to explain the simulated cycle.
   The Appendix demonstrates that the stationary univariate time series representation of the simulated
data in this subsection is a constrained version of an ARIMA(3,1,2). With 289 observations, one might have
thought that the formal time series method of the H filter would be able to isolate the separate trend and
cyclical components, but doing so requires convergence of the estimates to the true parameters. There are
three free parameters in the true model and four regressors in the H filter, but recall that the sum of the
coefficients in the regression converges to one in this case. Thus, one conjecture why the methodology fails
is because the MA terms are not orthogonal to the included regressors, and thus the OLS estimates cannot
converge to the true parameters. Nevertheless, there is also a difference between the simulated trend and
Et (yt+8 ), which is what Hamilton (2018) seeks to estimate.
   When I calculate the alternative definition of the trend, Et (yt+8 ) within the model, and I measure the



                                                       19
alternative cycle as yt+8 - Et (yt+8 ), I find that the average correlation of this definition of the cycle with
the cycle in the model, ct , is 0.962. It is perhaps unsurprising then that the averages of the correlations of
this alternative cycle with the HP and BK cycles are larger, with values of 0.854 and 0.825, respectively,
than the average correlation of this alternative cycle with the H cycle, which is 0.744. Similarly, the average
RMSE of the alternative cycle minus the H cycle of 1.632 is larger than the corresponding values of 0.974
for the HP cycle and 1.059 for the BK cycle.
   The average values of the square roots of the variance ratios in these simulations decline from 0.915 for
k = 10 to 0.563 for k = 80, which is consistent with the fact that in these simulations, the unit root in the
trend does not having a dominant influence on the evolution of the yt process. Because the square roots of
the variance ratios start below one and decline with increases in k , this artificial process, while matching
some characteristics of the actual data, does not match the variance ratios estimated from actual GDP.


10.6      An Unobserved Components Model
This section analyzes simulations of the Clark (1987) model with parameter values set at the values estimated
from the full sample as in equations (6) to (8). These simulated data are stationary after taking second
differences. The Appendix demonstrates that this unobserved components model is a constrained version of
an ARIMA(2,2,3) with constant coefficients.
   Once again, it is in this sense that Hamilton (2018) argues that his methodology should do well. He
explicitly addresses this issue on (p.836):

       Suppose that the d-th difference of yt is stationary for some d. For example, d = 2 would mean
       that the growth rate is nonstationary, but the change in the growth rate is stationary.

He then states Proposition 4 and notes (p.837):

       Proposition 4 establishes that if we estimate an OLS regression of yt+h on a constant and the
       p = 4 most recent values of y as of date t,

                             yt+h = 0 + 1 yt + 2 yt-1 + 3 yt-2 + 4 yt-3 + vt+h ,

       the residuals,
                             ^t+h = yt+h - 
                             v             ^0 - ^1 yt - ^2 yt-1 - ^3 yt-2 - ^4 yt-3 ,

       offer a reasonable way to construct the transient component for a broad class of underlying
       processes. The series is stationary provided that fourth differences of yt are stationary,

Table 5 presents the results of the simulations. Once again, the means of the standard deviations of the HP
and BK cycles of 1.631 and 1.557 understate the target by 39% and 42%, respectively; while the mean of
the standard deviations of the H cycles of 3.445 overstates the target by 29%. Although the change in the
trend is not a stationary variable in these simulations, I continue to use the sample standard deviation of the
change in trend as a metric to compare the detrending methods. The mean of the simulated sample standard
deviations of the changes in the trend is 0.564, and the means of the standard deviations of the changes
in HP and BK trends of 0.234 and 0.246 understate that value by half, while the mean of the simulated
standard deviations of the changes in the H trend of 1.238 is more than double that sample value.


                                                       20
    The correlations of the HP and BK cycles with the true cycle of 0.651 and 0.676 are higher than the
analogous correlation for the H method of 0.510. This is also true of the correlations of the filtered changes
in trends with the changes in the simulated trend although here none of the three methods is particularly
highly correlated with the changes in the simulated trend.
    The RMSE's of the HP and BK cycles of 2.130 and 2.089, respectively, are also better than the RMSE
of the H cycle of 3.168. Finally, the slope coefficient of 0.080 for the HP cycle and 0.084 for the BK cycle
and the R2 's of 0.032 for HP and 0.034 for BK demonstrate that the H cycle adds little to the ability of the
HP or BK cycle to explain the simulated cycles.
    When I calculate the alternative definition of the trend, Et (yt+8 ), within the model, and I measure the
alternative cycle as yt+8 - Et (yt+8 ), I find that the average correlation of this definition of the cycle with the
true cycle in the model is 0.767. This lower correlation than in the ARIMA simulations means that there
is more of a difference between the two concepts of the cycle, and I now find that the correlation of the H
cycle with alternative cycle of 0.831 is larger than the correlation of the alternative cycle with the HP and
BK cycles of 0.762. The average RMSE of the alternative cycle minus the H cycle of 1.962 is slightly smaller
than the corresponding values of 2.020 for the HP cycle and 2.046 for the BK cycle.
    The means of the square roots of the variance ratios range from 1.382 for k = 10 to 1.433 for k = 80. It
is interesting that these statistics match the sample statistics from the actual data quite well even though
the variance ratios are not well-defined statistics because the underlying data are I (2). This is one sense in
which the Clark (1987) model has good small sample statistics.


10.7      Models with Changing Unconditional Mean Growth
The final two simulated series retain the trend plus cycle model of the previous subsection, but in this
subsection, changes in the trend also reflect the declining rate of growth observed in the sample. Because
the cyclical components are the same in these two simulations, and the simulated average statistics are also
quite similar, I discuss the two models together.
    The first model reflects what one might think of as ex post regime changes in the growth process, but
without a probability model associated with such changes, while the mean growth rate in the second model
contains a linear trend reflecting the ex post slowly declining rate of growth observed in the data. In
each case, the change in the stochastic trend is also serially correlated and the sample mean of the growth
component coincides with the sample mean of the growth rate from the actual data.14
    The first model of the change in the trend is

                                               gt = µi + 0.900gt-1 + t ,                                                     (44)

and the innovations, t , are drawn from a N (0, 0.002). The intercepts, µi , take on three different values,
µ1 = 0.1 for the first third of the sample, µ2 = 0.07786 for the second third of the sample, and µ3 = 0.0554
for the last third of the sample. With these values, the average growth rate of the simulated series matches
the sample mean of the data while also allowing for the observed slowdown in the growth rate of GDP.
The unconditional standard deviation of the change in the trend is 0.103 within each regime, but there
is no unconditional value for the full process because of the changing unconditional means. If there were
  14 The absence of a formal time series model for the trend in the first case also implies that it is impossible to calculate the

alternative Hamilton (2018) definition of the trend.



                                                               21
a constant unconditional mean, the model would match the standard deviation of the data, and with the
changes in unconditional means, the average of the standard deviations of the rate of growth of yt increases
only to 0.951, which is just slightly larger than the 0.933 value in the data.
   The second model of the change in the trend is

                             gt = 0.07786 + 0.04428(145 - t)/289 + 0.900gt-1 + t ,                          (45)

where t runs from 1 to 289, and the innovations, t , are again drawn from a N (0, 0.002). Here, the sample
mean rate of growth during the 289 observations coincides with the sample mean rate of growth of GDP,
but the rate of growth declines slowly over time.
   In both cases, the cyclical component is modeled as an ARIMA(2,0,0),

                                          ct = 1.25ct-1 - 0.45ct-2 + t ,                                    (46)

and the innovations,    t,   are drawn from a N (0, 0.6385). The innovations to the cyclical component are
uncorrelated with the innovations to the trend component.
   The results of the two simulations are presented in Tables 6 and 7, which have the same format as the
previous tables. Because the results are very similar, in discussing them I simply present the results from
the second simulations in parenthesis after the results from the first simulations. While the means of the
standard deviations of the HP cycles of 1.426 (1.423) and the BK cycles of 1.367 (1.362) understate the
target of 1.766 by 18% (18%) and 22% (22%), the mean of the standard deviations of the H cycles of 2.448
(2.408) overstates the target by substantially more, 41% (38%).
   The mean of the simulated standard deviations of the changes in the trend is 0.205 (0.152), which is
essentially matched by the means of the standard deviations of the changes in HP and BK trends of 0.206
(0.156) and 0.207 (0.160), respectively. In contrast, the mean of the simulated standard deviations of the
changes in the H trend is 0.801 (0.792), almost (more than) four times larger than the true value.
   The means of the correlations of the implied cycles with the true cycles are 0.731 (0.744) for the H cycle,
and 0.885 (0.887) and 0.855 (0.857) for the HP and BK cycles, respectively. The latter approaches similarly
dominate the mean of the correlations of the estimated changes in trend with the true changes in trend as
the H trend produces 0.202 (0.133), which is much lower than the comparable statistic of 0.885 (0.800) for
the HP trend and 0.851 (0.750) for the BK trend. The means of the RMSE's of the H and BK cycles of
0.845 (0.840) and 0.945 (0.940) are substantively less than the corresponding values of 1.682 (1.623) for the
H cycle. Finally, the slope coefficients for the HP regression of 0.081 (0.091) and the BK values of 0.139
(0.156) as well as the R2 's of 0.043 (0.045) for HP and 0.078 (0.086) for BK again indicate that the H filter
adds little to the ability of either the HP filter or the BK filter to identify the cycle in the underlying data.
   Although the variance ratios for these processes are not well-defined statistics, their sample values can
be computed. In both sets of simulations, one sees variances ratios that increase with k , from 1.081 (0.987)
for k = 10 to 1.673 (1.152) for k = 80. Since there is no stationary unit root component in the underlying
trend, the variance ratios give a false reading of the importance of the trend relative to the importance of
the cyclical component in the variation of the underlying yt series.




                                                       22
11     Potential GDP as a Trend
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) produces a potential GDP series that is often used to produce the
GDP Gap measured as the log difference between actual and potential GDP. In this section, I first describe
the process that the CBO uses in constructing potential GDP and then demonstrate that the revisions
of the process are substantive and imply relatively large changes in trend growth. Finally, I examine the
correlations of the GDP Gap, calculated with the latest revision in the potential GDP series, with the H and
HP cycles.15
   The CBO calculates a potential GDP series twice a year and typically publishes them in January and
August. Shackleton (2018) describes the process that the CBO uses. He states (p.2-3):

     CBO builds its estimate of aggregate potential output from estimates of the potential output in
     several different sectors of the overall economy. Those estimates, in turn, depend on estimates of
     the potential inputs to sectoral production processes as well as their potential productivity.
     CBO's approach to identifying underlying productive capacity is to focus on fundamental deter-
     minants of supply rather than on fluctuations in aggregate demand. That approach is based on
     the notion that the economy has an underlying but unobserved trend path along which output,
     employment, and investment could develop without triggering inflationary instability or recession.

There are six sectors in the CBO model: non-farm business, farm, household, non-profit, federal government,
and state and local government. The modeling involves linear regressions with business cycle factors, but
they also estimate sequences of linear trends that allow for changes in the growth rate of the economy.
Shackleton (2018) (p. 10) describes how this process can lead to large changes in potential GDP over time:

     Particularly significant changes in CBO's estimates of potential output can occur after the econ-
     omy is determined by NBER to have reached a new business cycle peak, an event that usually
     leads the agency to change the period over which it estimates various trends. For example, ac-
     cording to the data available in early 2007, the United States was in the midst of a business cycle
     that had begun in the first quarter of 2001 but had not yet peaked; the last full peak-to-peak
     business cycle had begun in the third quarter of 1990 and ended in early 2001. As a result,
     the historical trends used to project future potential series in 2007 began in the third quarter of
     1990. After NBER determined (in 2010) that a peak had occurred in the final quarter of 2007,
     CBO introduced new trends that began at the peak in the first quarter of 2001 and that were
     distinct from the trends estimated for the 1990­2001 business cycle. Consequently, the projected
     growth rates of potential series were no longer strongly influenced by actual growth rates during
     the 1990­2001 cycle and were more strongly influenced by growth rates that occurred after the
     2001 peak.

To demonstrate how the CBO's procedure leads to change in potential GDP as additional data accumulate,
Figure 7 displays a sequence of the percentage deviations of updated, subsequent forecasts of potential GDP
relative to the first forecast made in 2007. The five subsequent forecasts begin with the second potential
GDP series released in 2007 and end with the second release of 2009. Notice that they decline systematically
over time. Figure 7 demonstrates two features of the data. The potential output forecast in 2009 for 2015 is
 15 Given   the similarity of the HP and BK cyclical components, I only report results for the former.


                                                               23
substantively below what was previously forecast in early 2007 by 4.5%, but also, the historical values prior
to 2007 are also revised in 2009 to be 1% below what was previously considered to be potential. Clearly,
although the CBO uses a multivariate economic approach to developing the trend of the economy, there are
substantial revisions to this trend as the economy evolves.
   To examine the relation of the GDP Gap to other measures of the business cycle, I construct the GDP
Gap using the most recent version of the CBO's potential GDP. Then, the question to be addressed is how
different is this estimate of the business cycle from the cyclical components of the various filtering methods
discussed above.
   Figure 8 plots the HP cycle as the solid line, the H cycle as the dashed line, and the GDP Gap as the
dotted line. The standard deviation of the GDP Gap is 2.405 which is 0.890 below the standard deviation of
the H cycle and 0.855 above the standard deviation of the HP cycle. The correlations of the GDP Gap with
the two cycles are 0.680 for the H cycle and 0.746 for the HP cycle. The RMSE of the HP cycle compared to
the GDP Gap is 1.715 which is substantively smaller than the RMSE of the H cycle compared to GDP Gap
of 2.848. Thus, along this dimension, the HP filter is better than the H filter. Similarly, in the regression
diagnostic of equation (40), the estimate of  is 0.215 (s.e. 0.085), and the adjusted R2 is 0.102 indicating
only marginal additional explanatory power of the H cycle for the GDP Gap once the HP cycle is taken into
account.
   While the strong correlations of the GDP Gap with the HP cycle and the H cycle are apparent in Figure
8, close examination of the Figure also suggests that for the GDP Gap, negative values outweigh positive
ones. In contrast to the HP and H cycles, which are zero mean by construction, the sample mean of the
GDP Gap is actually negative. During the sample, potential GDP overstates actual GDP by 0.616%..
   This is not an intentional feature of the CBO's construction of potential GDP. Shackleton (2015) begins
his discussion of the possible reasons why the CBO's potential output systematically exceeds realized GDP
by stating (p. 4):

     The causes of the average shortfall of output relative to its potential during recent business cycles,
     and during the past half-century as a whole, are not entirely clear.

After considering several sources, he concludes that the CBO has not systematically overstated potential
GDP. Nevertheless, in forecasting exercises the CBO realizes its forecasts of potential GDP have typically
exceeded realizations by 0.5% over the last 50 years, and it now builds such a discrepancy into its forecasts
of actual GDP. This seems like an odd methodology.


12     Conclusions
Since Burns and Mitchell (1946), economists have examined alternative methods of decomposing macroeco-
nomic time series into growth and cyclical components with the goal of providing advice to those who seek
to develop stylized facts to guide the development of macroeconomic models of growth and business cycles.
By examining simulations of time series approximately calibrated to actual GDP, this article sheds light on
the desirability of using the alternative methods proposed by Hodrick and Prescott (1997), Baxter and King
(1999), and Hamilton (2018), as well as providing some additional insight into the debate about the relative
importance of unit root components in the Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decomposition.



                                                      24
    The Hamilton (1994) method is grounded in formal time series analysis and provides time series definitions
of the trend at time t + 8 as Et (yt+8 ) and the cycle as yt+8 - Et (yt+8 ). The simulations in this paper
demonstrate that the Hamilton (1994) methodology works almost perfectly for simple time series models,
such as a random walk or an ARIMA(2,1,2) model with constant parameters and 289 observations. In
contrast, the filtering methods of Hodrick and Prescott (1997) and Baxter and King (1999), which are not
designed with forecasting in mind, seem flawed in such situations in their ability to isolate this type of time
series cycle.
    Nevertheless, as the simulated time series models become more complex, the performance of the H filter
deteriorates, and those of the HP and BK filters methods improve dramatically. In the two unobserved
components models that have underlying cyclical component to be identified in addition to the Hamilton
(1994) cycle, the HP and BK filters perform better than the H filter.
    For the final simulations, in which the time series are composed of distinct growth and cyclical components
and in which the growth component varies slowly over time but does not have a well defined time series
representation implying the inability to calculate the Hamilton (1994) cycle, the cycles from HP and BK
filters are much closer to the underlying cycle than the H filter.
    Consequently, the most desirable approach to decomposing a time series into growth and cyclical compo-
nents and hence the advice that one would give to someone that wants to detrend a series to focus on cyclical
fluctuations clearly depends on the underlying model that one has in mind. For GDP, if one thinks that
growth is caused by slowly moving changes in demographics, like population growth and changes in rates of
labor force participation, as well as slowly moving changes in the productivity of capital and labor, then the
filtering methods of Hodrick and Prescott (1997) and Baxter and King (1999) seem like the superior way to
model the cyclical component. To my way of thinking, the title of the Hamilton (2018) paper is clearly too
strong.
    The simulations of the paper also address the issue of the relative importance of the nonstationary
stochastic trend or growth component compared to the stationary cyclical component in generating fluctua-
tions in GDP. The simulations demonstrate that it is relatively easy to generate a series that is not I (1), that
looks like GDP, and in which the growth component does not dominate the cyclical component in contrast
to the conclusions of typical Beveridge and Nelson (1981) decompositions.
    Of course, developing simultaneous multivariate statistical models of the growth component and the
cyclical component based on the underlying economics that drive growth and business cycles remains the
gold standard to which research should strive.16 In thinking about these economic models, though, it is
useful to have stylized facts about the variability and covariability of macroeconomic time series over the
business cycle. In pursuing such research in the future, I intend to use the methods of Hodrick and Prescott
(1997) and Baxter and King (1999).
  16 An example of such an approach is Fernald et al. (2017) who take the unemployment rate as a measure of the cycle and

cyclically adjust variables using Okun's law. They then use a growth accounting analysis on cyclically adjusted series to examine
the slow recovery of output following the Great Recession concluding that the perceived shortfall in GDP growth primarily
reflected two factors: slow growth of total factor productivity, and a decline in labor force participation. They note that both
of these factors reflect forces largely unrelated to the financial crisis and resulting recession and that both forces were in play
before the recession.




                                                                25
References
Baxter, M. and R. G. King (1999). Measuring business cycles: approximate band-pass filters for economic
  time series. Review of Economics and Statistics 81 (4), 575­593.

Beveridge, S. and C. R. Nelson (1981). A new approach to decomposition of economic time series into
  permanent and transitory components with particular attention to measurement of the `business cycle'.
  Journal of Monetary Economics 7 (2), 151­174.

Burns, A. F. and W. C. Mitchell (1946). Measuring Business Cycles NBER, New York.

Campbell, J. Y. and N. G. Mankiw (1987). Are output fluctuations transitory?          Quarterly Journal of
  Economics 102 (4), 857­880.

Christiano, L. J. and T. J. Fitzgerald (2003). The band pass filter. International Economic Review 44 (2),
  435­465.

Clark, P. K. (1987). The cyclical component of us economic activity. Quarterly Journal of Economics 102 (4),
  797­814.

Cochrane, J. H. (1988). How big is the random walk in gnp? Journal of Political Economy 96 (5), 893­920.

Cogley, T. and J. M. Nason (1995). Effects of the hodrick-prescott filter on trend and difference stationary
  time series: Implications for business cycle research. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 19 (1-2),
  253­278.

Den Haan, W. J. (2000). The comovement between output and prices. Journal of Monetary Economics 46 (1),
  3­30.

Dickey, D. A. and W. A. Fuller (1979). Distribution of the estimators for autoregressive time series with a
  unit root. Journal of the American Statistical Association 74 (366a), 427­431.

Fernald, J. G., R. E. Hall, J. H. Stock, and M. W. Watson (2017). The disappointing recovery of output
  after 2009. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , 1­59.

Hamilton, J. D. (1994). Time Series Analysis. Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.

Hamilton, J. D. (2018). Why you should never use the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Review of Economics and
  Statistics 100 (5), 831­843.

Harvey, A. C. (1985). Trends and cycles in macroeconomic time series. Journal of Business & Economic
  Statistics 3 (3), 216­227.

Harvey, A. C. and A. Jaeger (1993). Detrending, stylized facts and the business cycle. Journal of Applied
  Econometrics 8 (3), 231­247.

Hodrick, R. J. and E. C. Prescott (1980). Postwar US business cycles: an empirical investigation. Carnegie-
  Mellon University Working Paper.

Hodrick, R. J. and E. C. Prescott (1997). Postwar US business cycles: an empirical investigation. Journal
  of Money, Credit, and Banking , 1­16.

                                                    26
King, R. G. and S. Rebelo (1993). Low frequency filtering and real business cycles. Journal of Economic
  Dynamics and Control 17, 207­231.

Koopmans, T. C. (1947). Measurement without theory. Review of Economics and Statistics 29 (3), 161­172.

Morley, J. C., C. R. Nelson, and E. Zivot (2003). Why are the Beveridge-Nelson and unobserved-components
  decompositions of gdp so different? Review of Economics and Statistics 85 (2), 235­243.

Nelson, C. R. and H. Kang (1981). Spurious periodicity in inappropriately detrended time series. Econo-
  metrica , 741­751.

Nelson, C. R. and C. R. Plosser (1982). Trends and random walks in macroeconmic time series: some
  evidence and implications. Journal of Monetary Economics 10 (2), 139­162.

Sch¨
   uler, Y. S. (2018). On the cyclical properties of Hamilton's regression filter. Deutsche Bundesbank
  Discussion Paper No. 03/2018.

Shackleton, R. (2015). Why CBO projects that actual output will be below potential output on average.
  Congressional Budget Office, Report 49890.

Shackleton, R. (2018). Estimating and projecting potential output using CBO's forecasting growth model.
  Congressional Budget Office, Working Paper 3.

Stock, J. H. and M. W. Watson (1999). Business cycle fluctuations in US macroeconomic time series.
  Handbook of Macroeconomics 1, 3­64.

Watson, M. W. (1986). Univariate detrending methods with stochastic trends. Journal of Monetary Eco-
  nomics 18 (1), 49­75.



A     Solution of the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) Model
A closed-form solution for the trend in the Hodrick and Prescott (1997) model can be obtained by defin-
ing some matrix notation. Let T be the sample size, and define T        ~ = T + 2. Define the T dimensional
                                                                   ~
vector of observations by y = (yT , yT -1 , ..., y2 , y1 ) and the T dimensional vector of growth components
                                                    ~) matrix H = [IT ×T 0T ×2 ], and define the (T × T
g = (gT , gT -1 , ..., g0 , g-1 ) . Define the (T × T                                                 ~) matrix

                                                                               
                                    1 -2 1   0 ... 0                    0     0
                                    0 1 -2 1    0 ...                   0     0
                                                                               
                                                                               
                                    0 0
                                          1 -2 1   0                    ...   0
                                                                               
                                    .  .  0  0  0  .                    ...   .
                                  Q=.
                                                                               .
                                       .  .  .  .  .                    ...   .
                                                                               
                                    .  .  .  .  .  .                    ...   .
                                                                               
                                    0 0  ... 0  1 -2                    1     0
                                                                               

                                         0   0     0    ...   0    1   -2     1




                                                        27
The objective function in equation (3) can therefore be written as

                                   min (y - H g ) (y - H g ) + (Qg ) (Qg ),                                 (47)
                                     g


and the first-order conditions with respect to g are

                                         -2H y + 2H Hg + 2Q Qg = 0.                                         (48)

Hence, the solution for the growth component is

                                           g = (H H + Q Q)-1 H y,                                           (49)

in which case A in the text equals (H H + Q Q)-1 H . While Hodrick and Prescott (1997) were aware of
                                                  ~×T
this direct solution, it involves inversion of a (T ~) matrix, which they viewed as potentially problematic
given the memory capacity of computers in 1978. The state space nature of the problem offered the simpler
Kalman filtering and smoothing solutions that only involve inversions of (2 × 2) matrixes.
    What the solution for g in equation (49) demonstrates is that the data are being filtered. Hodrick and
Prescott (1997) note that the solution implies

                                                         T
                                                                T
                                                 gt =          wjt yj                                       (50)
                                                        j =1


           T
where the wjt are the elements of the t-th row from the bottom of the A matrix. They also note that if the
sample were infinite, the solution would be
                                                       
                                                                
                                              gt =             wj yt+j ,                                    (51)
                                                     j =-


where
                       
                      wj = 0.8941j (0.056168 cos(0.11168j ) + 0.055833 sin(0.11168j )),                     (52)
                   
for j  0 and wj = w- j for j < 0. See also King and Rebelo (1993) and Hamilton (2018) for additional
discussion of the properties of the solution to the HP filtering problem.


B       The Baxter and King (1999) Band-Pass Filter
In the frequency domain, a time series is characterized by sine waves of frequencies between - and  .
The periodicity of a time series corresponds to the number of units of time over which fluctuations occur.
Periodicity, p, is related to frequency,  , by p = 2/ . For business cycle analysis, Baxter and King (1999)
sought to isolate fluctuations with periodicities between 6 and 32 quarters.
    The basic building block of the band-pass filter is the low-pass filter - a filter that retains only slowly
moving components of the data. An ideal, symmetric, low-pass filter passes only frequencies -           0    .
Baxter and King (1999) derive the properties of such filters demonstrating that in the time domain, the




                                                         28
filter, as a function of the lag operator, would be
                                                             
                                              b(L) =             bh Lh                                     (53)
                                                        h=-


where the bh coefficients are found as
                                                        
                                                  1
                                          bh =                ( )eih d,                                    (54)
                                                 2     -


and  ( ) = 1 for | |   and  ( ) = 0 for | | >  . Solving the integral gives the optimal weights b0 = /
and bh = sin(h )/h for h = 1, 2, .... Baxter and King (1999) also derive that truncating the optimal weights
at h = K gives the optimal two-side filter with (2K + 1) weights. Because the truncated weights do not sum
to unity, the actual weights are ah = bh +  where

                                                              h=K
                                                   1 - h=-K bh
                                             =                 .                                           (55)
                                                      (2K + 1)

Taking the difference between two low-pass filters with different cutoffs,  l and  h , gives the optimal
band-pass filter. The weights for the BP(6,32) filter are w0 = 0.2777, w1 = 0.2204, w2 = 0.0838, w3 =
-0.0521, w4 = -0.1184, w5 = -0.1012, w6 = -0.0422, w7 = 0.0016, w8 = 0.0015, w9 = -0.0279, w1 0 =
-0.0501, w11 = -0.0423, w12 = -0.0119.
   Because the BK filter breaks a time series into three sets of frequencies, I do not define their trend to
be the difference between the realization of a series and its business cycle component. I define their trend
to be fluctuations with a periodicity greater than or equal to 32 quarters and hence a frequency such that
| |  2/32. I also set the truncation level at K = 12 as they do in their preferred cyclical band-pass filter.
   Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) develop an alternative band-pass filter that solves a slightly different
problem than Baxter and King (1999). Let xt represent the raw data, whose estimated drift, defined as
(xT - x1 )/(T - 1), has been removed. Then, the goal of Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) is to decompose xt
into a component yt that has power only at business cycle frequencies and a component x
                                                                                      ~t that has power
only at non-business-cycle frequencies. If the time series were infinite, the solution would use equations (53)
and (54), with yt = b(L)xt where b0 = ( -  )/ and bh = (sin(h ) - sin(h ))/h . Since the data are finite,
this filter is infeasible, and Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) propose choosing the feasible solutions, y
                                                                                                         ^t , to
minimize the T different problems
                                                          ^t )2 |x]
                                                 E [(yt - y                                                (56)

where x is the vector of T observations. The solutions to equation (56), which use all observations, are

                                                        p
                                              y
                                              ^t =            bp,f
                                                              ^
                                                               j xt-j                                      (57)
                                                      j =-f


where f = T - t and p = t - 1.
   By expressing the T problems in equation (56) in the frequency domain and using the definition of the




                                                            29
variance, the problems become
                                                   
                                    min               |b(e-i ) - ^
                                                                 bp,f (e-i )|2 fx ( )d                     (58)
                                bp,f
                                ^
                                 j   ,j =-f...p   -


                                                                   p
wherefx ( ) is the spectral density of xt and ^
                                              bp,f (L) =           j =-f   bp,f
                                                                           ^    j
                                                                            j L .
    Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) stress that the presence of fx ( ) in equation (58) indicates that the
solutions to the minimization problems depend on the properties of the time series representation of the
underlying data, which have to be estimated, in contrast to the weights in the ideal band pass filter that do
not. They also note that the solution uses T different filters, one for each date, that the filters are not sta-
tionary with respect to t, and that the filters weight past and future observations on xt asymmetrically. After
conducting some extensive analysis, Christiano and Fitzgerald (2003) conclude that both non-stationarity
and asymmetry of the filters are useful but non-stationarity is relatively more important, that the degree
of non-stationarity and asymmetry in optimal finite filters is small, and that the gain from using the true
spectral density versus assuming the series is a random walk is minimal.
    Upon implementing the CF filter with the random walk assumption for GDP, the correlations of the CF
cycle with the HP and BK cycles are 0.88 and 0.91, respectively, and the standard deviation of the CF cycle
is 1.508 versus 1.550 for the HP cycle and 1.490 for the BK cycle. Given these values, I choose not to report
additional statistics associated with the CF filter.


C     Estimation of the Clark (1987) Model
For the period 1947:1 to 1985:4 the reported estimates from Clark (1987) are

                                                  gt = dt-1 + 0.64wt ,                                     (59)

                                                   dt = dt-1 + 0.01ut ,                                    (60)

                                        ct = 1.53ct-1 - 0.59ct-2 + 0.74vt .                                (61)

When I estimate this model on my data set for the same sample, I find

                                                  gt = dt-1 + 0.674 wt ,                                   (62)
                                                                 (0.219)


                                                   dt = dt-1 + 0.014 ut ,                                  (63)
                                                                 (0.027)

                                     ct = 1.490 ct-1 - 0.571 ct-2 + 0.746 vt ,                             (64)
                                            (0.186)         (0.192)         (0.237)

The differences in the estimated parameters appear to be minor and could be due to revisions in the GDP
data or to the convergence criteria used in the non-linear estimation.




                                                            30
D      Estimation of the Morley, Nelson, and Zivot (2003) Model
For the period 1947:I to 1998:II the reported estimates from Morley et al. (2003) are

                      yt = 0.378 + 1.342 yt-1 - 0.706 yt-2 +              t   - 1.054     t-1   + 0.519     t-2 .   (65)
                            (0.086)   (0.152)        (0.173)                    (0.196)           (0.225)


In ARIMA models, the long-run impulse response can be found by

                       A0 = (1)-1 (1) = (1 - 1.1054 + 0.519)/(1 - 1.342 + 0.706) = 1.276.                           (66)

When I estimate this model on my data set for the same sample, I find

                      yt = 0.372 + 1.342 yt-1 - 0.770 yt-2 +              t   - 1.086     t-1   + 0.621     t-2 .   (67)
                            (0.074)   (0.116)        (0.084)                    (0.127)           (0.099)


The estimated parameters are reasonably similar, and the implied long-run impulse response for my data is
also quite similar,

                       A0 = (1)-1 (1) = (1 - 1.1086 + 0.621)/(1 - 1.342 + 0.770) = 1.250.                           (68)

The differences in the estimated parameters could be due to revisions in the GDP data or to the convergence
criteria used in the non-linear estimation.


E     The Cochrane (1988) Long Difference Variance Estimator
The Cochrane (1988) estimator of (1/k ) times the variance of the k -difference in yt is

                                                          T
                          2                 T
                          k =                                   (yj - yj -k - (k/T )(yT - y0 ))2 .                  (69)
                                 k (T - k )(T - k + 1)
                                                         j =k


The degrees of freedom adjustment is important for the small sample properties of the estimator.


F     ARIMA Versions of Trend and Cycle Models
This section derives the univariate ARIMA versions of models with different specifications of growth com-
ponents or trends and cyclic components.


F.1    The Changing Trend Model with Constant Unconditional Mean
The model in which yt is composed of a growth component with constant unconditional mean growth, but
serially correlated conditional mean growth, and a cyclical component is summarized by three equations.
The first is the decomposition in equation (1). The second equation postulates an ARIMA(1,1,0) for the
growth component,
                                                gt = µ + gt-1 + wt .                                                (70)



                                                              31
The third equation postulates an ARIMA(2,0,0) for the cyclical component,

                                              ct = 1 ct-1 + 2 ct-2 + vt .                                     (71)

The innovations are independently and identically distributed and are uncorrelated with each other. To relate
this model to a univariate ARIMA model for yt , first define the two AR polynomials in the lag operator,
(L) = 1 - 1 L, and (L) = 1 - 1 L - 2 L2 . Then, take the first difference of equation (1) and substitute
for gt and ct in terms of their innovations,

                            yt = gt + ct = (1)-1 µ + (L)-1 wt + (L)-1 vt .                                    (72)

Multiplying through by (L)(L) gives

                                 (L)(L)yt = (1)µ + (L)wt + (L)vt .                                            (73)

The stochastic part of the right-hand side of equation (73) can be shown to be a second order moving average
process, (L)   t   = 1 + 1 L + 2 L2   t   in which   t   = wt + ut , and the parameters are functions of the  and 
parameters and the variances of the two fundamental innovations. The left-hand side of equation (73) is an
AR(3) in the first difference of yt , and the polynomial in the lag operator is  (L) = 1 - 1 L - 2 L2 - 3 L3 =
(L)(L) where the  parameters are functions of the  and  parameters. Hence, the yt process is an
ARIMA(3,1,2),
                                               (L)yt = (1)µ + (L) t .                                         (74)


F.2    The Clark (1987) Unobserved Components Model
The Clark (1987) unobserved components model, in which the change in trend growth is nonstationary, is
summarized by four equations. The first equation is again the decomposition in equation (1). The second
equation specifies that the change in the growth component has a time varying conditional mean,

                                                     gt = dt-1 + wt .                                         (75)

The third equation specifies that the conditional mean follows a random walk,

                                                      dt = dt-1 + ut .                                        (76)

The fourth equation specifies that the cyclical component is an AR(2):

                                              ct = 1 ct-1 + 2 ct-2 + vt .                                     (77)

To relate this model to a univariate ARIMA model, first define the AR polynomial in the lag operator,
(L) = 1 - 1 L - 2 L2 . From equations (75) and (76) note that taking the second difference of the trend
produces a stationary series,
                                                 2 gt = ut-1 + wt .                                           (78)




                                                             32
Thus, by applying the second difference operator to equation (1) and substituting from equations (77) and
(78), one finds
                                 2 yt = 2 gt + 2 ct = ut-1 + wt + (L)-1 2 vt                                   (79)

Multiplying through by (L) gives

                                     (L)2 yt = (L)ut-1 + (L)wt + 2 vt .                                        (80)

The right-hand side of equation (80) can be shown to be a third-order moving average process, (L)               t   =
                  2     3
(1 + 1 L + 2 L + 3 L )      t   in which   t   = wt + vt , and the parameters are functions of the  parameters and
the variances of the three innovations. Hence, the yt process is an ARIMA(2,2,3),

                                                    (L)2 yt = (L) t .                                          (81)


G      Deriving the Modified Hamilton (2018) Trend and Cycle
This section derives what I refer to as the modified Hamilton (2018) trend and cycle in the ARIMA model
                                                                               H
and in the two unobserved components model. I take the modified H trend to be gt+8 = Et (yt+8 ) and the
modified H cycle to be cH
                        t+8 = yt+8 - gt+8 . These definitions substitute the conditional expectation of yt+8
based on the full information set at time t rather than the regression forecast of yt+8 based on the reduced
information set, {yt , yt-1 , yt-2 , yt-3 }, because I want to see how well the empirical analysis captures the true
conditional mean and not simply to examine the small sample properties of the regression.


G.1     The Modified H Trend and H Cycle in the ARIMA Model
Let yt be characterized by an ARIMA(2,1,2) model as in Morley et al. (2003). Then,

                                                  (L)yt = µ + (L)              t                               (82)

where (L) and (L) are second-order polynomials in the lag operator. Multiplying through by (L)-1
gives the Wold representation
                                                    yt = µ0 + a(L) t ,                                         (83)

where µ0 = (1)-1 µ,
                                                                        
                                           a(L) = (L)-1 (L) =                  aj Lj ,                         (84)
                                                                        j =0

and a0 = 1.
    Now, to find Et (yt+8 ) use the fact that yt+8 - yt = yt+8 + yt+7 + ... + yt+1 , and substitute from
equation (83) to find
                                   yt+8 = yt + 8µ + a(L)(     t+8   +   t+7    + ... +   t+1 ).                (85)

Recall that Ak represents the infinite sum of the aj coefficients beginning at j = k . Then, with a bit of




                                                            33
algebra using equation (85) one finds

                                              8                              
                       yt+8 = yt + 8µ +           (A0 - A9-j )   t+j   +            (Aj +1 - Aj +9 )      t-j .   (86)
                                          j =1                               j =0


To calculate the model's cycle at time t + 8 in the simulations of the ARIMA(2,1,2) model, I use Matlab's
"impulse" command to generate the aj 's from the model's known parameters, and I calculate the modified
H cycle using equation (86) to be the unanticipated part of yt+8

                                                                  8
                               ct+8 = yt+8 - Et (yt+8 ) =               (A0 - A9-j )              t+j .           (87)
                                                                 j =1


The trend is consequently found as gt+8 = yt+8 - ct+8 .


G.2     The Modified H Trend and H Cycle in the First Unobserved Components
        Model
In addition to equation (1), this unobserved components model has two additional equations:

                                                  gt = µ + gt-1 + t                                               (88)

                                              ct = 1 ct-1 + 2 ct-1 + t .                                          (89)

The modified H trend is
                                    H
                                   gt+8 = Et (yt+8 ) = Et (gt+8 ) + Et (ct+8 ).                                   (90)

From equation (88), it can be demonstrated that
                                                                        
                                              8
                    Et (gt+8 ) = gt + µ           (1 - j )(1 - )-1  + (1 - 8 )(1 - )-1 gt .                       (91)
                                          j =1


To derive Et (ct+8 ) write equation (89) in first-order companion form:

                                         ct            1   2      ct-1                t
                                                   =                          +               .                   (92)
                                        ct-1           1   0      ct-2               0

Define e1 = [1, 0] . Then,
                                                                         8
                                                           1      2             ct
                                        Et (ct+8 ) = e1                                   .                       (93)
                                                            1     0            ct-1
                                                           H           H             H
Plugging equations (91) and (93) into equation (90) gives gt +8 , and ct+8 = yt+8 - gt+8 .




                                                           34
G.3     The Modified H Trend and H Cycle in the Clark (1987) Model
In addition to equations (1) and (89) the two other equations of the Clark (1987) unobserved components
model are
                                              gt = dt-1 + wt                                           (94)

and
                                                  dt = ut                                              (95)

It is straightforward to see that

             Et (gt+8 ) = gt + Et (gt+1 + ... + gt+8 ) = gt + Et (dt + dt+1 + ...dt+7 ) = gt + 8dt     (96)

                                                                                       H
because Et (dt+j ) = dt . Since Et (ct+8 ) is the same as in the previous subsection, gt+8 can be found from
equations (93) and (96).




                                                      35
  0.9           BK Weights
                HP Weights
  0.8

  0.7

  0.6

  0.5

  0.4

  0.3

  0.2

  0.1

   0

 -0.1
          -10            -5               0            5             10
Figure 1: Hodrick and Prescott (1997) and Baxter and King (1999) Cycle Weights




                                     36
Figure 2: Clark (1987) and Hodrick and Prescott (1997) Cycles




                             37
Figure 3: Conditional Mean of Change in Trend in the Clark (1987) Model




                                  38
Figure 4: Baxter and King (1999) and Hodrick and Prescott (1997) Cycles




                                  39
Figure 5: Hamilton (2018) and Hodrick and Prescott (1997) Cycles




                              40
Figure 6: Hamilton (2018) Cycle minus 8-th Difference GDP




                           41
Deviations of Potential GDP from 2007:01 by Vintage
                                                          0

                                                      -0.005

                                                       -0.01

                                                      -0.015

                                                       -0.02

                                                      -0.025

                                                       -0.03

                                                      -0.035          2007:2
                                                                      2008:1
                                                       -0.04          2008:2
                                                                      2009:1
                                                      -0.045          2009:2

                                                               1998    2001      2004      2006      2009      2012     2015
                                                          Figure 7: Deviations of Future Potential GDP's from Vintage 2007:01




                                                                                          42
Figure 8: GDP Gap with Hamilton (2018) and Hodrick and Prescott (1997) Cycles




                                     43
                                 Table 1: Statistics on U.S. Real GDP

The table presents two sets of statistics on GDP for a sample period from 1947:1 to 2019:1. In Panel A
the columns labeled "H", "HP", and "BK" refer to the respective methods of decomposing a time series
into trend and cycle of Hamilton (2018), Hodrick and Prescott (1997), and Baxter and King (1999), and
the statistics are the standard deviations of the cyclical components and the standard deviations of the
changes in the trends. Panel B reports the square roots of the Variance Ratios.
                                      Panel A: Standard Deviations
                                 H         HP      BK
Standard Deviation of Cycle      3.295     1.550   1.490
Standard Deviation of Trend      1.022     0.261   0.270
                               Panel B: Square Roots of Variance Ratios
                           k     10        20      30        40       50       60       70        80
                          
                          Vk     1.381     1.392   1.424     1.455    1.446    1.463    1.480     1.410




                                                   44
                           Table 2: Simulated Statistics from a Random Walk

The table presents sample means of statistics from 5,000 simulations of length 289 of a random walk with
drift calibrated such that the drift and the standard deviation coincide, respectively, with the sample
mean and sample standard deviation of the rate of growth of GDP. In Panel A the columns labeled "H",
"HP", and "BK" refer to the respective methods of decomposing a time series into trend and cycle of
Hamilton (2018), Hodrick and Prescott (1997), and Baxter and King (1999). The column labeled "In
Sim" is the sample mean of the realized values of the row statistic in the simulations. Panel B presents
the slope coefficient and R2 in the regression of the simulated cycle minus the HP or BK cycle on a
constant and the H cycle minus the HP or BK cycle. Panel C presents the square roots of the Variance
Ratios.
                    Panel A: Means of Standard Deviations, Correlations, and RMSEs
                                    H      HP      BK     In Sim
Standard Deviation of Cycle       2.539   1.190   1.073    2.539
Standard Deviation of Trend       0.893   0.182   0.188    0.932
Correlation of Cycles             0.979   0.660   0.632
Correlation of Trends             0.972   0.144   0.149
RMSE of Cycles                    0.632   2.057   2.128
                                Panel B: Means of Regression Diagnostics
                                           HP      BK
Slope Coefficient                         0.999   1.002
R2                                        0.932   0.940
                          Panel C: Means of Square Roots of Variance Ratios

                            k      10       20      30      40       50      60      70    80
                           Vk     1.000   1.000   1.000   1.000    1.000   1.002   1.003   1.003




                                                   45
                           Table 3: Simulated Statistics from an ARIMA model

The table presents sample means of statistics from 5,000 simulations of length 289 from the ARIMA(2,1,2)
model of Morley et al. (2003) estimated with GDP data for the full sample. The model is

                    yt = 0.320 + 1.271yt-1 - 0.682yt-2 +      t   - 0.979   t-1   + 0.540   t-2 ,

and t is distributed N (0, 0.7236). In Panel A the columns labeled "H", "HP", and "BK" refer to the
respective methods of decomposing a time series into trend and cycle of Hamilton (2018), Hodrick and
Prescott (1997), and Baxter and King (1999). The column labeled "In Sim" is the sample mean of the
realized values of the row statistic in the simulations. Panel B presents the slope coefficient and R2 in
the regression of the simulated cycle minus the HP or BK cycle on a constant and the H cycle minus the
HP or BK cycle. Panel C presents the square roots of the Variance Ratios.
                     Panel A: Means of Standard Deviations, Correlations, and RMSEs
                                     H      HP      BK     In Sim
Standard Deviation of Cycle        3.238   1.525   1.472    3.306
Standard Deviation of Trend        1.084   0.228   0.236    1.075
Correlation of Cycles              0.977   0.685   0.676
Correlation of Trends              0.944   0.151   0.159
RMSE of Cycles                     0.837   2.569   2.603
                                 Panel B: Means of Regression Diagnostics
                                            HP      BK
Slope Coefficient                          0.986   0.989
R2                                         0.921   0.927
                           Panel C: Means of Square Roots of Variance Ratios

                             k      10       20      30      40        50           60        70    80
                            Vk     1.273   1.268   1.265   1.263     1.262        1.263     1.263   1.264




                                                    46
   Table 4: Simulated Statistics from a Model with Constant Unconditional Mean Change in Trend

The table presents sample means of statistics from 5,000 simulations of length 289 in which the simulated
time series is the sum of a stochastic trend and a stochastic cycle,

                                              yt = gt + ct

The trend is modeled as an ARIMA(1,1,0). The change in the trend is

                                   gt = 0.07786 + 0.900gt-1 + t ,

and the innovations are drawn from a N (0, 0.002). The cyclical component is modeled as an
ARIMA(2,0,0)
                                 ct = 1.25ct-1 - 0.45ct-2 + t ,
and the innovations are drawn from a N (0, 0.6385). The innovations in the trend and cycle are un-
correlated. In Panel A the columns labeled "H", "HP", and "BK" refer to the respective methods of
decomposing a time series into trend and cycle of Hamilton (2018), Hodrick and Prescott (1997), and
Baxter and King (1999). The column labeled "In Sim" is the sample mean of the realized values of the
row statistic in the simulations. Panel B presents the slope coefficient and R2 in the regression of the
simulated cycle minus the HP or BK cycle on a constant and the H cycle minus the HP or BK cycle.
Panel C presents the square roots of the Variance Ratios.
                    Panel A: Means of Standard Deviations, Correlations, and RMSEs
                                    H      HP      BK     In Sim
Standard Deviation of Cycle       2.419   1.423   1.364    1.742
Standard Deviation of Trend       0.797   0.104   0.115    0.098
Correlation of Cycles             0.741   0.887   0.857
Correlation of Trends             0.041   0.543   0.495
RMSE of Cycles                    1.638   0.840   0.936
                                Panel B: Means of Regression Diagnostics
                                           HP      BK
Slope Coefficient                         0.087   0.150
R2                                        0.041   0.082
                          Panel C: Means of Square Roots of Variance Ratios

                            k      10       20      30         40      50      60      70    80
                           Vk     0.915   0.714   0.647      0.612   0.593   0.579   0.570   0.563




                                                   47
          Table 5: Simulated Statistics from the Clark (1987) Unobserved Components Model

The table presents sample means of statistics from 5,000 simulations of length 289 generate from the
Clark (1987) model estimated on the full sample. The simulated time series is the sum of a stochastic
trend and a stochastic cycle,
                                            yt = gt + ct .
The change in the trend has a conditional mean,

                                          gt = dt-1 + 0.545wt ,

and the conditional mean is a random walk with a relatively small standard deviation of its innovation,

                                           dt = dt-1 + 0.021ut .

The cyclical component is modeled as an ARIMA(2,0,0),

                                  ct = 1.510ct-1 - 0.565ct-2 + 0.603vt ,

and the three innovations, ut , wt , and vt , are standard normal random variables. The three innovations
are uncorrelated. In Panel A the columns labeled "H", "HP", and "BK" refer to the respective methods
of decomposing a time series into trend and cycle of Hamilton (2018), Hodrick and Prescott (1997), and
Baxter and King (1999). The column labeled "In Sim" is the sample mean of the realized values of the
row statistic in the simulations. Panel B presents the slope coefficient and R2 in the regression of the
simulated cycle minus the HP or BK cycle on a constant and the H cycle minus the HP or BK cycle.
Panel C presents the square roots of the Variance Ratios.
                    Panel A: Means of Standard Deviations, Correlations, and RMSEs
                                    H      HP      BK      In Sim
Standard Deviation of Cycle       3.445   1.631   1.557     2.667
Standard Deviation of Trend       1.238   0.234   0.246     0.564
Correlation of Cycles             0.510   0.651   0.676
Correlation of Trends             0.028   0.251   0.234
RMSE of Cycles                    3.168   2.130   2.089
                                Panel B: Means of Regression Diagnostics
                                           HP      BK
Slope Coefficient                         0.080   0.084
R2                                        0.032   0.034
                          Panel C: Means of Square Roots of Variance Ratios

                            k      10       20      30       40       50      60      70    80
                           Vk     1.382   1.306   1.288    1.305    1.337   1.374   1.410   1.443




                                                    48
  Table 6: Simulated Statistics from a Model with a Changing Unconditional Mean Change in Trend

The table presents sample means of statistics from 5,000 simulations of length 289 in which the simulated
time series is the sum of a stochastic trend and a stochastic cycle,

                                              yt = gt + ct .

The trend is modeled as an ARIMA(1,1,0) with three different intercepts, µ1 = 0.1 for the first third of
the simulated data, µ2 = 0.07786 for the second third, and µ3 = 0.0554 for the final third. The change
in the trend is
                                     gt = µi + 0.900gt-1 + t ,
and the innovations are drawn from a N (0, 0.002). The cyclical component is modeled as an
ARIMA(2,0,0)
                                 ct = 1.25ct-1 - 0.45ct-2 + t ,
and the innovations are drawn from a N (0, 0.6385). The innovations in the trend and cycle are un-
correlated. In Panel A the columns labeled "H", "HP", and "BK" refer to the respective methods of
decomposing a time series into trend and cycle of Hamilton (2018), Hodrick and Prescott (1997), and
Baxter and King (1999). The column labeled "In Sim" is the sample mean of the realized values of the
row statistic in the simulations. Panel B presents the slope coefficient and R2 in the regression of the
simulated cycle minus the HP or BK cycle on a constant and the H cycle minus the HP or BK cycle.
Panel C presents the square roots of the Variance Ratios.
                    Panel A: Means of Standard Deviations, Correlations, and RMSEs
                                    H      HP      BK      In Sim
Standard Deviation of Cycle       2.448   1.426   1.367     1.742
Standard Deviation of Trend       0.801   0.206   0.207     0.205
Correlation of Cycles             0.731   0.885   0.855
Correlation of Trends             0.202   0.878   0.851
RMSE of Cycles                    1.682   0.845   0.945
                                Panel B: Means of Regression Diagnostics
                                           HP      BK
Slope Coefficient                         0.081   0.139
R2                                        0.043   0.078
                          Panel C: Means of Square Roots of Variance Ratios

                            k      10       20      30           40      50      60      70    80
                           Vk     1.081   1.101   1.216        1.334   1.442   1.536   1.614   1.673




                                                   49
Table 7: Simulated Statistics from a Model with a Slowly Changing Unconditional Mean Change in Trend

 The table presents sample means of statistics from 5,000 simulations of length 289 in which the simulated
 time series is the sum of a stochastic trend and a stochastic cycle,

                                               yt = gt + ct

 The trend is modeled as an ARIMA(1,1,0) with a changing unconditional mean. The change in the trend
 is
                       gt = 0.07786 + 0.04428(145 - t)/289 + 0.900gt-1 + t ,
 where t ranges from 1 to 289, and the innovations are drawn from a N (0, 0.002). The cyclical component
 is modeled as an ARIMA(2,0,0)
                                      ct = 1.25ct-1 - 0.45ct-2 + t ,
 and the innovations are drawn from a N (0, 0.6385). The innovations in the trend and cycle are un-
 correlated. In Panel A the columns labeled "H", "HP", and "BK" refer to the respective methods of
 decomposing a time series into trend and cycle of Hamilton (2018), Hodrick and Prescott (1997), and
 Baxter and King (1999). The column labeled "In Sim" is the sample mean of the realized values of the
 row statistic in the simulations. Panel B presents the slope coefficient and R2 in the regression of the
 simulated cycle minus the HP or BK cycle on a constant and the H cycle minus the HP or BK cycle.
 Panel C presents the square roots of the Variance Ratios.
                     Panel A: Means of Standard Deviations, Correlations, and RMSEs
                                     H      HP      BK     In Sim
 Standard Deviation of Cycle       2.408   1.423   1.362    1.742
 Standard Deviation of Trend       0.792   0.156   0.160    0.152
 Correlation of Cycles             0.744   0.887   0.857
 Correlation of Trends             0.133   0.800   0.750
 RMSE of Cycles                    1.623   0.840   0.940
                                 Panel B: Means of Regression Diagnostics
                                            HP      BK
 Slope Coefficient                         0.091   0.156
 R2                                        0.045   0.086
                           Panel C: Means of Square Roots of Variance Ratios

                             k      10       20      30         40      50      60      70    80
                            Vk     0.987   0.899   0.931      0.980   1.030   1.076   1.117   1.152




                                                    50
