                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       MEDICAID PHYSICIAN FEES AND ACCESS TO CARE AMONG CHILDREN
                    WITH SPECIAL HEALTH CARE NEEDS

                                         Pinka Chatterji
                                         Sandra Decker
                                          Jason U. Huh

                                      Working Paper 26769
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26769


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research or the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Pinka Chatterji, Sandra Decker, and Jason U. Huh. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Medicaid Physician Fees and Access to Care among Children with Special Health Care Needs
Pinka Chatterji, Sandra Decker, and Jason U. Huh
NBER Working Paper No. 26769
February 2020
JEL No. I1,I13

                                           ABSTRACT

The objective of this study is to use data from the National Survey of Children with Special
Health Care Needs (NS-CSHCN) to test whether Medicaid physician fees are correlated with
access to health services and adequacy of insurance coverage among CSHCN. We use a
difference-in-differences method, comparing the effects of Medicaid physician fees on outcomes
of publicly-insured children in states that raised fees vs. in states that did not. We also consider a
triple difference specification using privately-insured children as the comparison group. Our
findings indicate that raising the Medicaid primary care fee level close to at least 90 percent of
the Medicare level reduces the likelihood that publicly-insured CSHCN lack a usual source of
care in a doctor's office by about 15 percent. Fee increases are also associated with improved
access to specialty doctor care, and large improvements in caregivers' satisfaction with the
adequacy of health insurance coverage, among publicly-insured CSHCN. Results for some other
access measures, such as global measures of having difficulties and delays accessing services,
were mixed.

Pinka Chatterji                                   Jason U. Huh
State University of New York at Albany            Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Economics Department                              110 8th St
1400 Washington Avenue                            Troy, NY 12180
Albany, NY 12222                                  huhj2@rpi.edu
and NBER
pchatterji@albany.edu

Sandra Decker
5600 Fishers Lane
MAILSTOP 07W41A
Rockville, MD 20009
USA
Sandra.decker@ahrq.hhs.gov
1.0      Introduction and Background

         In the United States, parents of children with chronic illness and disability often face

challenges in obtaining the health care services their children need. These challenges are

generally not due to lack of insurance coverage. Based on 2009-2010 national data, 96 percent

of children with special health care needs (CSHCN) 1 had some type of insurance coverage at the

time of the survey, with about 44 percent reporting Medicaid, the Children's Health Insurance

Program (CHIP), or some other form of public insurance (USDHHS, 2013). 2 Although private

insurance plans typically exclude coverage for some types of services that CSHCN need,

particularly behavioral treatments, Medicaid and CHIP cover a broad range of services with little

or no cost-sharing (Peele et al., 2002; Davidoff et al., 2004). In addition, Medicaid includes an

Early and Periodic Screening, Diagnosis, and Treatment (EPSDT) benefit, and CHIP programs

are required to cover preventive services and meet national standards for care (Farrell, Hess and

Justice, 2011). Nevertheless, despite comprehensive insurance coverage, parents of publicly-

insured CSHCN still report facing serious difficulties in accessing services. As of 2009-2010,

about 31 percent of parents of CSHCN with public insurance reported that they sometimes,

usually or always are frustrated in obtaining services for their children, due to reasons such as

waiting lists, backlogs, problems getting appointments, issues related to cost and eligibility, and

lack of local services (USDHHS, 2013).

         One important reason that publicly-insured CSHCN may face access problems is due to

issues on the supply side of the market. In particular, low Medicaid physician fees in many

states may reduce physician participation in Medicaid, and may lead to barriers in access to care,


1
  CSHCN are defined as children who have or are at elevated risk for chronic physical, developmental, behavioral,
or emotional conditions and who require a type OR amount of health and related services that is higher what
children typically require (McPherson et al., 1998)
2
  This 44 percent figure includes children whose caregivers report have both public insurance and private insurance.

                                                                                                                   2
particularly specialty care, for families of CSHCN. Medicaid physician fees vary widely across

states. As of July 2016, for example, Medicaid payments for all services were 72 percent of

Medicare payments for the same service on average in the US, although this Medicaid-to-

Medicare fee ratio ranged from 38 percent in Rhode Island to 126 percent in Alaska (Zuckerman

et al. , 2017). These rates tend to be lower for primary care services.

       As part of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), states were required to increase fees paid to

primary care providers to Medicare rates during 2013 and 2014. Based on the 2012 Medicaid-to-

Medicare primary fee ratio for a basket of primary care services, Zuckerman and Goin (2012)

predicted that this would increase Medicaid primary care fees by an average of 73 percent in

2013-2014. Since the fee increase did not apply to all primary care services and possibly due to

some implementation issues (e.g., passing through fee increases to physicians participating in

Medicaid through managed care programs), some evidence suggests that the increase in

Medicaid primary care physicians fees in 2013, although significant, may have been smaller than

expected (Kirby and Hill, 2016; MACPAC, 2015). Early evidence from 10 states suggests that

the increase improved appointment availability for adults on Medicaid relative to adults on

private insurance (Polsky et al., 2015). A recent study based on data from 2009 to 2014 suggests

that Medicaid fee changes during this time period improved access to care, utilization, health,

and school absences among children (Alexander & Schnell, 2019). Other evidence using claims

data (Mulcahy, Gracner and Finegold, 2018) and nationally-representative survey data (Decker,

2018) on physician participation in Medicaid suggests no effect of the fee bump, possibly due to

the temporary nature of the bump. The effect of Medicaid physician fees on access to medical

care among those on Medicaid is an important topic since, as of July 2016, nineteen states have




                                                                                                   3
fully or partially maintained the primary care fee increase, with fourteen of these states having a

Medicaid-to-Medicare ratio above 0.80 (Zuckerman et al., 2017).

       Several prior studies based on variation in Medicaid physician fees across states and over

time suggest that, at least when increases may be expected to be permanent, higher Medicaid

payments to health care providers improve access to care. Decker (2009), for example, uses data

from the 1993-1994 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), and the 1993/1994, 1998/1999

and 2003/2004 National Ambulatory Medical Care Surveys (NAMCS), and the National

Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Surveys (NHAMCS) to test whether Medicaid physician

payments are associated with volume and site of outpatient care among Medicaid patients versus

other patients. She finds that lower Medicaid payments are associated with reductions in the

number of visits, as well as a move towards hospital-based outpatient services among Medicaid

patients relative to other patients (Decker, 2009). In another paper based on the 1989, 1993,

1998, and 2003 NAMCS, Decker (2007) reports that more generous Medicaid physician

payments are associated with higher physician participation in Medicaid, and increases in length

of visits for Medicaid patients versus privately insured patients.

       Only a few recent studies focus specifically on Medicaid payments and children's access

to care, with two papers on dental care. Decker (2011), using data from the 2000 and 2008

NHIS, finds that, on average, a $10 increase in state Medicaid payments to dentists for

preventive care was associated with a 4 percentage point increase in the likelihood a publicly-

insured child visited the dentist in the past 6 months. Buchmueller et al. (2015) also find that

higher Medicaid payments are associated with increased dental services utilization among

children using data from the 2001, 2004 and 2008 panels of the Survey of Income and Program

Participation (SIPP). These researchers additionally find that higher payments are associated



                                                                                                      4
with increases in participation in Medicaid among dentists (Buchmueller et al., 2015). Sonchak

(2015) focuses on the effects of Medicaid reimbursement rates for obstetric care on prenatal care

utilization using the Vital Statistics Natality data from 2001 to 2010. She finds that higher rates

are associated with more prenatal visits, although the findings do not support a causal

relationship between prenatal care and birthweight (Sonchak 2015). Finally, Decker (2015) finds

that Medicaid physician fees and physician participation in Medicaid is correlated with measures

of access to and use of health services among both children and adults. This relationship

appeared to be stronger for children than for adults, and among children, stronger for children

with serious health conditions compared to those without. However, this study only used two

years of data and had a small sample size of children with serious health conditions which

precluded the inclusion of state fixed effects. This limited the study's ability to draw inferences

about the causal connection between Medicaid physician fees and access to medical care among

children with special health conditions since the level of state Medicaid physician fees could be

correlated with other aspects of the Medicaid program or with other state-level variables

affecting publicly-insured children's access to health care. The use of a general health survey

also precluded examination of measures of access to care that may be particularly important for

children with special health conditions.

       This paper builds on the small number of papers on Medicaid physician payments and

children's access to care by focusing on CSHCN, a group that faces serious access problems and

is particularly dependent on public health insurance. The objective of this study is to use two

waves of data from the 2001 and 2009-2010 National Survey of CSHCN (NS-CSHCN) to test

whether Medicaid physician fees are correlated with access to health services and adequacy of

insurance coverage among CSHCN. We use a difference-in-differences method, comparing the



                                                                                                      5
effects of Medicaid physician fees on outcomes of publicly-insured children in states that raised

fees vs. in states that did not. We also consider a triple difference specification using privately-

insured children as the comparison group. The use of both state fixed effects and a comparison

group of children with private insurance helps to isolate the effect of state changes in Medicaid

physician fees on access to medical care for publicly-insured CSHCN.

       Our findings indicate that raising the Medicaid primary care fee level close to at least 90

percent of the Medicare level reduces the likelihood that publicly-insured CSHCN lack a usual

source of care in a doctor's office by about 15 percent. Fee increases are also associated with

improved access to specialty doctor care, and large improvements in caregivers' satisfaction with

the adequacy of health insurance coverage, among publicly-insured CSHCN. Results for some

other access measures, such as global measures of having difficulties and delays accessing

services, were mixed. The findings were strongest for school-aged CSHCN, and, for some

outcomes, CSHCN with less-educated parents and CSHCN with more severe conditions.

2.0    Methods

       We start with a standard difference-in-differences (DD) specification, comparing

publicly-insured CSHCN in states that raised Medicaid fees to publicly-insured CSHCN in states

that did not raise fees, adjusting for other potentially confounding trends. Initially, we limit the

sample to publicly-insured CSHCN, and estimate Equation (1) below:

          =  + 1   + 2  + 3  + 4   +  +                                                            (1)

       In Equation (1), Yijt is an outcome variable for child i in state j at time t; Fee Ratiojt is an

indicator for whether the primary care Medicaid-to-Medicare fee ratio relevant to that state and

year is 0.90 or higher; Xijt represents child and family characteristics; and  is a set of state,

time-varying characteristics. The model includes survey year effects and state fixed effects ( ).


                                                                                                          6
         A fee ratio of 0.90 is close to the 90th percentile in the weighted distribution of the fee

ratio in our sample, which is 0.88. Only one state (Alaska) had a fee ratio of at least 0.90 in 2001

(the first wave of data). We therefore identify the model by comparing the states that raised fees

compared to the 9 that did not. 3 To gauge whether our findings are sensitive to the way in which

we measure the state's fee ratio, we also try specifications of Equation (1) that use two

alternative measures of the fee ratio: (1) whether or not the state's fee ratio is 0.80 or higher; and

(2) the continuous fee ratio itself. 4


         We estimate ordinary least squares models with sample weights, and generate robust

standard errors adjusted for clustering on state. In further analyses, we estimate models

stratified by child age group, gender, race, parental education, and severity category to explore

any differences across these sub-groups in the effect of raising Medicaid fees on outcomes. To

test for statistically significant differences across sub-groups, we estimate a pooled model,

interacting every covariate with sub-group indicators, and then conduct a joint test to determine

whether the interaction terms as group were statistically different from a baseline group.


         The advantage of our DD approach is we are using a very large but fairly homogenous

sample of children ­ all are publicly-insured CSHCN and thus presumably are affected by many

of the same policy changes and trends. Even so, there are a number of threats to the analysis.

First, the validity of our estimation approach relies on the assumption that states that raised

Medicaid fees between 2001 (the first wave of data) and 2009/10 (the second wave of data)

would have had similar trends in outcomes compared to states that did not raise fees if the fee


3
  As we discuss later, only 42 states and DC are included in the study because of missing or incomplete fee ratio data
for eight states (Arkansas, Delaware, Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and Wyoming).
4
  Eleven states raised the fee ratio from under 0.9 to at least 0.9 (AZ ID KS LA NC ND NM NV OK VT WA).
Thirteen states raised the fee ratio from under 0.8 to at least 0.8 (CO GA IA KS KY LA MD NM OK SC SD VA
VT), and 33 states raised their fee ratio at least somewhat.

                                                                                                                    7
increases had not occurred. Unfortunately, we do not have data prior to 2001, so we cannot

visually inspect pre-trends or test for differences in pre-trends across states that did and did not

increase fees.


        We address the potential for divergent pre-trends in the following ways. First, all models

include a set of state-time-varying covariates (described in the next section) to account for

potentially confounding changes in other state polices and state economic conditions. Second,

we implement a triple difference (DDD) approach, using privately-insured CSCHN as a

comparison group. This triple difference specification is shown below in Equation (2).


         =  + 1     + 2  + 3  

                 + 4  + 5  + 6   +  +                                              (2)


         We estimate Equation (2) using a sample that includes both publicly- and privately-

insured CSHCN. 5 The specification now includes an indicator for whether or not the child is

publicly-insured, and an interaction term between the fee ratio and whether or not the child is

publicly-insured. This way, we can test for associations between changes in fee ratios and

changes in outcomes among CSHCN with public coverage, netting out the same changes among

CSHCN who are privately-insured. The advantage of this approach is we control for any time-

varying trends that affect all CSHCN, regardless of insurance status. In addition, using Equation

(2), we test for spillover effects of fee increases on privately-insured CSHCN, captured by 3 .


        Including privately-insured CSHCN as a comparison group will capture effects of trends

specific to CSHCN on outcomes, but there still may remain the possibility of confounding by



5
 The sample excludes children who have both private insurance and Medicaid, as well as children who were
uninsured at any point during the past 12 months.

                                                                                                           8
unmeasured trends that are specific to publicly-insured CSHCN and that are coincident with the

timing of fee increases. Given we have only two waves of data, we are somewhat limited in

addressing this problem. We can build on Equation (2) further, however, by including interaction

terms between whether or not the child is publicly-insured and survey year, and interaction terms

between whether or not the child is publicly-insured and state fixed effects, as shown in Equation

(3) below. To some extent, these additional terms will capture any confounding policies and

changes specific to publicly-insured CSHCN.


     =  + 1     + 2  + 3  

               + 4  + 5  + 6   +  + 7 

                  + 8    +                                                (3)


       In addition to the pre-trends assumption, DD methods also rely on the assumption that the

composition of the treatment and comparison groups remains stable over time. To gauge whether

or not this assumption is reasonable, we conduct a covariate balance test, in which we use the

models above to compare each covariate for publicly- versus privately-insured CSHCN in states

that did and did not raise Medicaid fees. This analysis is a useful check of whether the

composition of the treatment and comparison groups remained similar over time.


       Finally, DD methods are based on the assumption that receipt of the treatment (being a

CSHCN on Medicaid) cannot plausibly be affected by the outcomes. There is some evidence that

higher Medicaid fees may increase take-up of Medicaid among families with eligible children

(Hahn, 2013). Therefore, we conduct an intent-to-treat analysis by examining the effect of

raising Medicaid fees on access measures for CSHCN who do not have a high school or GED




                                                                                                 9
degree. Low parental education is correlated with Medicaid eligibility, although Medicaid fee

changes do not plausibly affect parental education.


3.0      Data

         The National Survey of CSHCN (NS-CSHCN) is a national, cross-sectional, random

digit dial telephone survey of caregivers (primarily mothers) of CSHCN. The survey was

conducted in 2001 (collected between October 2000 and April 2002), 2005-2006 (collected

between April 2005 and February 2007), and in 2009-2010 (collected between July 2009 and

March 2011), and was available in English, Mandarin, Cantonese, Japanese, Korean, and

Russian (2001), in English, Spanish, Mandarin, Cantonese, Vietnamese, and Korean (2005-

2006), and in English and Spanish only (2009-2010). The data are representative of CSHCN

both at the national and state levels. The survey is sponsored by the Maternal and Child Health

Bureau of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) and conducted by the

National Center for Health Statistics' State and Local Area Integrated Telephone Survey

(SLAITS). In the main analyses, we use only the 2001 and 2009-2010 waves because of

guidance obtained from HRSA that the 2009-2010 (which is the only survey wave including a

cell phone sample) is more comparable to 2001 than 2005-2006, when the proportion of cell-

phone-only families had risen (Ghandour RM et al., 2014). More detailed information about the

survey is available from CDC (2008) and CDC (2013a-b). In supplemental analyses, we test the

sensitivity of our findings to including all three waves of data (2001, 2005-2006, and 2009-

2010).


         The NS-CSHCN is a two-stage survey with a complex sampling design. The first stage of

the survey is a screener for special health care needs. The CSHCN screener includes five stem


                                                                                                10
questions about the child's general health care needs, such as need for therapy, need for

prescription drugs, and use of more health services than what is typical among children of the

same age. Each stem question is followed by additional questions regarding whether the child's

health care needs are due to a chronic health condition. CSHCN whose caregivers indicate that

the child has at least one general health care need that is due to a chronic condition meet the

criteria for having a special health care need and are screened into the sample. About 200,000

households with children participate in the screener in order to identify about 40,000 CSHCN in

each survey wave. Each wave includes about 750 CSHCN in each state and in the District of

Columbia (CDC, 2013a-b). The large sample size of CSHCN for each state is especially helpful

for this study.


        In each survey wave (2001 and 2009-2010), there were about 40,000 completed

interviews of caregivers of children who were identified as having special health care needs. In

each wave, all children in each participating household were screened for special health care

needs. In households with more than one child with special health care needs, a single child was

randomly selected to complete the interview. The second stage of the NS-CSHCN includes

detailed information about the nature of the focal child's special health care needs, health care

utilization, access to services, and out-of-pocket spending on health care. Note that only

CSHCN (children who met criteria for having a special health care need) were included in the

second stage of the survey. In 2001, the weighted, overall, national response rate for the special

health care needs interview was 61 percent (Blumberg et al., 2005). In 2009-2010, this same

response rate was 43.7 percent for the landline sample, 15.2 percent for the cell phone sample,

and 25.5 percent for the combined sample (CDC 2008, 2013a-b). All analyses in this paper

employ sample weights adjusting for non-response.


                                                                                                    11
         We merged state fee-for-service (FFS) Medicaid-to-Medicare fee ratios for primary care

visits into NS-CSHCN data (Zuckerman, Williams and Stockley, 2009; Norton and Zuckerman,

2000). The fee ratios are not available for every year, and they are not available for Tennessee

since this state does not have FFS Medicaid. The fee ratios are also not available for Arkansas,

Delaware, Montana, Nebraska, and Wyoming in 1998 because these states declined to participate

in the survey, and are not available for Mississippi and Pennsylvania because they provided

incomplete surveys. Thus, we matched 1998 fee data to the 2001 survey data, and 2008 fee data

to the 2009-2010 survey data, and children from the aforementioned eight states are dropped

from the sample. The state Medicaid fee-for-service ratio is constructed by dividing the

Medicaid payment rate reported by states for a basket of primary care services (weighted by the

distribution of services for a large sample of states) by the Medicare payment rate for the same

basket of services (constructed from relative value units, conversion factor, and geographic

adjustments and Clinical Diagnostic Fee Schedule for the relevant year) (Zuckerman et al.,

2009).


         Many state Medicaid programs have moved toward managed care payment structures,

even for high-need populations such as CSHCN. In such programs, providers often are

reimbursed not using FFS but instead by capitation. Medicaid FFS payments are still a

reasonable measure of physician reimbursement, however, since capitation rates are often

determined based on what FFS rates would have been (Zuckerman and Goin, 2012). Also,

although many children (and adults) on Medicaid are enrolled in managed care programs, about

half of Medicaid enrollees are either in fee-for-service plans, plans which are prepaid only for

inpatient care, or primary care case management programs (PCCMs), in which providers are

often paid on a fee-for-service basis with an additional fee provided for case management (CMS,


                                                                                                   12
2011). Evidence from a sample of states also indicates that payment rates to physicians under

Medicaid managed care are highly correlated with Medicaid FFS payment rates (GAO, 2014).

         In Figure 1, we see that between 1998 and 2008, the Medicaid-to-Medicare fee ratio for

primary care visits changed in most states. Of the 42 states (not including Arkansas, Delaware,

Mississippi, Montana, Nebraska, Pennsylvania, Tennessee, and Wyoming) and the District of

Columbia, the ratio fell between 1998 and 2008 in 7 states, stayed the same in 2 states, and

increased in the remaining 33 states plus the District of Columbia. We use this variation in the

Medicaid-to-Medicare fee ratio within states over time to identify the effect of the fee ratio on

access to health care among CSHCN.

         We focus on a range of caregiver-reported outcomes related to access to care and

adequacy of insurance among CSHCN. All of our measures are binary, and are coded so that

"1" indicates an adverse outcome. The outcomes can be classified into four categories: usual

source of care; adequacy of health insurance coverage; delays/difficulties getting health care; and

child not getting needed services due to insurance, cost, waiting time or availability. To measure

whether or not the child has a usual source of care, we create three dichotomous indicators: (1)

child does not have a place s/he usually goes when s/he is sick or caregiver needs advice about

his/her health; (2) child does not have a doctor's office as a place s/he usually goes when s/he is

sick or caregiver needs advice about his/her health; (3) child does not have a health professional

that knows the child well, and that the caregiver considers to be the child's personal doctor or

nurse.


         The survey includes some global questions on whether the caregiver delayed or did not

get health care (2001 survey) or had difficulties or delays getting services (2009-2010 survey) for

various reasons. The wording for this question varies slightly across the two surveys. From


                                                                                                    13
these questions, we created three indicators: (4) child delayed/did not get/had difficulty getting

health care services due to not having enough money to pay provider (2001) or cost (2009-2010);

(5) child delayed/did not get/had difficulty getting health care services due to waiting too long

(2001) or waiting lists, backlogs, and other problems getting appointments (2009-2010); and (6)

child delayed/did not get/had difficulty getting health care services due to lack of availability in

area.


        Caregivers are also asked to provide information about whether the child received all the

care s/he needed for specific kinds of services. If a caregiver reports unmet need for a type of

service, the caregiver then is asked to select from an extensive set of reasons why the child's

needs were not met. From these questions, we created the following dichotomous indicators: (7)

during the past 12 months, child did not get all routine care that s/he needed due to costs or

insurance or lack of availability issues; (8) during the past 12 months, child did not get all the

specialty physician services (not including psychiatrists and dentists) that s/he needed due to

costs or insurance or lack of availability issues; (9) during the past 12 months, child did not get

all the mental health care or counseling that s/he needed due to costs or insurance or lack of

availability issues; and (10) during the past 12 months, child did not get all physical,

occupational, or speech therapy that s/he needed due to costs or insurance or lack of availability

issues. The specific cost and insurance issues listed as reasons for unmet need are: "cost too

much"; "no insurance"; "health plan problem; and "can't find a provider who accepts child's

insurance." Lack of availability issues were "not available in area/transport problems";

"couldn't find someone"; and "not convenient times/could not get appointment." When

estimating models in which lack of access to a particular type of service due to cost/insurance is




                                                                                                      14
the outcome of interest, we limit the samples to families reporting having a need for routine care,

therapy, specialty physician, and mental health services in the past 12 months.


       Moreover, caregivers are asked a set of questions about the adequacy of their child's

health insurance coverage. Specifically, survey respondents answer "never", "sometimes",

"usually" and "always" to questions about whether health insurance coverage offers benefits and

services that meet the child's needs, whether the costs not covered by health insurance are

reasonable, and whether the health insurance allows the child to see needed providers. From

these questions, we created the following three dichotomous variables to measure inadequacy of

insurance coverage: (11) costs not covered by child's health insurance never or sometimes are

reasonable; (12) child's health insurance never or sometimes allows child to see the health care

providers he or she needs; and (13) child's health insurance benefits and coverage never or

sometimes meet his/her needs.


       Finally, we also look at several outcome variables related to the impact on the family.

Specifically, we constructed the following five dichotomous variables based on the responses

from caregivers: (14) spent over $500 out of pocket for child's health care; (15) child's health

care caused financial problems for the family; (16) parent or other family members had to stop

working due to child's health; (17) parent or other family members had to cut work hours to care

for child; and (18) provided health care at home for child.


       The models include the following child and family characteristics: indicators for 3-year

child age categories; child is female; race/ethnicity; parental education; indicators for household

size; and an indicator for severity, which is a dichotomous variable indicating whether the child's

medical, behavioral, or other conditions affect his/her ability to do things a great deal. The state-


                                                                                                   15
level time-varying covariates included in all models are: poverty rate, unemployment rate,

minimum wage, and TANF payment level for a family of three (University of Kentucky, 2019).

The main analysis sample is limited to 48,405 CSHCN between infancy and 17 years old who

either have private insurance coverage only or public insurance coverage only, maintained the

coverage during the past 12 months, and have non-missing data for all covariates.


4.0    Results

       Table 1 shows weighted means for publicly and privately insured CSHCN in the base year,

2001. Most CSHCN have a usual source of care, which is unsurprising given their elevated need

for medical services. Although publicly insured CSHCN are only slightly less likely than privately

insured CSHCN to have a usual source of care, they are much less likely to have a usual source of

care in a doctor's office. Nearly 40 percent of publicly insured CSHCN lack a usual source of care

in a doctor's office, while this rate is only 20 percent for privately insured CSHCN. Publicly

insured CSHCN also are nearly twice as likely as privately insured CSHCN to lack a regular health

care provider (Table 1).

       Problems accessing services because of cost, waiting times, and lack of availablity are

reported by fewer than 3 percent of families of CSHCN regardless of insurance status. Publicly

insured CSHCN are less likely (about 17 percent) compared to privately insured CSHCN to report

difficulty accessing care due to cost, likely reflecting the low copays in Medicaid compared to

private insurance. However, they are more likely to report difficulties due to waiting time or lack

of availability of care, possibly due to lower provider willingness to accept Medicaid compared to

private insurance.

       Fortunately, less than 1 percent of CSHCN reported not getting needed routine care and

less than 3 percent reported not getting needed specialty care. However, the proportion of CSHCN

                                                                                                16
not getting needed routine care is about 80 percent higher for publicly compared to privately

insured CSHCN. Roughly one-quarter of both publicly and privately insured CSHCN report

problems with insurance covering costs which may signal substantial challenges for families of

CSHCN in general, and that some publicly insured CSHCN are using providers that do not take

Medicaid for some services. Publicly insured CSHCN are much more likely than privately insured

CSHCN to report problems with insurance covering needed providers (a difference of nearly 7

percentage points, or 83 percent) and meeting needs (a difference of about 5.5 percentage points

or 51 percent).

       Publicly insured CSHCN are much less likely to report spending $500 out-of-pocket on

health care compared to privately insured CSHCN; about 9 percent of families of publicly insured

CSHCN report spending more than $500 compared to nearly 30 percent for privately insured. The

fact that 9 percent of publicly insured CSHCN spend more than $500 may mean, though, that some

families are seeking care for services not covered by Medicaid or from providers not accepting

Medicaid. Although fewer public compared to privately insured CSHCN report spending $500

out-of-pocket on health care, they are more likely ­ by about 5 percentage points (or about 33

percent) to report that their child's health care caused financial problems for the family, likely

reflecting the relatively low income level among families of publicly insured CSHCN. Families

of publicly insured CSHCN are much more likely than those of privately insured CSHCN to

indicate that they have cut hours of work or stopped working to care for their child, and slightly

more likely to indicate that they provide health care for the child at home.

       Table 2 reports the results from the covariate balance test. Appendix Table 1 shows similar

results for the covariate balance test for the intent-to-treat analysis. The goal is to see if the

composition of the treatment and comparison groups are changing over time in ways that may be



                                                                                               17
correlated to the evolution of the Medicaid policy changes. There are some statistically significant

results, but the overall pattern of findings is inconsistent. For example, the educational composition

is changing as Medicaid fees increase but we don't see a pattern in race, family size or child

severity. The pattern of findings is inconsistent in the intent-to-treat analysis as well (Appendix

Table 1). We conclude that we do not see a pattern consistent with Medicaid beneficiaries, for

example, becoming more advantaged over time in states that raised fees compared to states that

did not.

       Table 3 reports DD and DDD findings on the effect of raising Medicaid fees to at least

0.90 of Medicare fees on outcomes among CSHCN. Column 1, labeled "no control group",

shows the DD estimate, the estimated coefficient on Medicaid fee ratio, in Equation 1. Columns

2, 3 and 4 show estimated coefficients from the DDD specification shown in Equation 2.

Column 2, labeled "fee effect on private", shows the coefficient on the fee ratio, i.e., the effect of

higher Medicaid fees on the control group of privately insured CSHCN; these effects can be

considered spillover effects of fee increases on privately insured CSHCN. Column 3, labeled

"fee effect on public", shows the effect of higher fees on publicly insured CSHCN, i.e., the sum

of the coefficients on the fee dummy and the interaction of this dummy with the publicly insured

dummy. Column 4, labeled "difference", shows the difference in the first two columns, i.e,,the

coefficient on the interaction in Equation 2.

       Starting with the DD estimates (Column 1 in Table 3), we see that most effects are

negative, indicating that Medicaid fee increases improve outcomes among publicly insured

CSHCN. Increasing fees improves the access to a usual source of care, although only the effect

on "no usual source of care" is statistically significant at conventional levels. Fee increases are

associated with a 6.3 percentage point reduction in publicly-insured CSHCN experiencing



                                                                                                   18
difficulties/delays in accessing services due to waiting lists and backlogs. Column 1 in Panel C

also shows that fee increases are associated with large reductions in not getting needed services.

There are mixed effects on the inadequacy of insurance coverage outcomes (Panel D), and an

unexpected, positive effect on a family member stopping working due to the child's health

(Panel E).

       The pattern of findings in Column 1 of Table 3 is consistent with the idea that fee

increases improve access to care among CSHCN, but some of the magnitudes of the effects are

unreasonably large relative to the sample means of the outcomes. This may be due to other

confounding trends affecting all CSHCN. The remaining columns of Table 3 show findings

from the DDD specification (Equation 2). These models address the potential problem of

confounding trends by including a comparison group in the model ­ privately insured CSHCN.

       First, in column 2 of Table 3, we note that there are no statistically significant effects of

Medicaid fee increases on privately insured CSHCN, which suggests that privately-insured

CSHCN are an appropriate comparison group. Next, in Columns 3-4, we see that many of the

DD effects persist in the DD models. In the DDD models, the interaction between high

Medicaid/Medicare ratio and child has public insurance is not statistically significant for the

models in which "child has no usual source of care" and "child has no regular health care

provider" are the dependent variables. Among publicly insured children relative to privately

insured children, however, a high Medicaid/Medicare ratio was associated with a nearly 6

percentage point reduction in the probability of not having a usual source of care in a doctor's

office (Column 4, Panel A, Table 3). This effect corresponds to about a 15 percent reduction in

lacking a usual source of care in a doctor's office relative to the mean percent of publicly insured

CSHCN with such a source from Table 1. These findings indicate that an increase to a 0.90



                                                                                                   19
Medicaid/Medicare payment for primary care may increase accessibility of physician office-

based visits for publicly insured children relative to privately insured children.

       We did not find a statistically significant effect of higher Medicaid fees on having

difficulties/delays accessing services (Panel B, Table 3). We find some evidence that higher

Medicaid fees are associated with a lower chance of publicly insured CSHCN not getting routine

care or mental health care in higher fee states, though the coefficient on the interaction is not

significant. We do find, though, that higher fees are associated with a nearly 2.5 percentage point

reduction in not receiving needed specialty care. This is a very large (about 87 percent)

improvement relative to the mean for publicly insured CSHCN in 2001.

       There is considerable evidence that higher fees reduce problems with adequacy of health

insurance coverage among publicly-insured CSHCN (Panel D, Table 3). This may imply that

some families with CSHCN covered by Medicaid spend some of their own funds on care for

their children in low Medicaid-fee states, a possibility worthy of future investigation. Families

with publicly insured CSHCN experienced about 7 percentage, 5, and 2 percentage point

reductions in having costs covered by insurance never or sometimes being reasonable, never or

sometimes covering needed providers, and never or sometimes meeting needs, respectively.

These improvements represent changes of about 29, 32, and 14 percent, respectively.

       We also find a reduction of about 2.8 percentage points (8 percent) in families needing to

cut work hours to care for their child, adding to the evidence suggesting that the burden for

families of children with CSHCN may be eased in higher Medicaid-fee states (Panel E, Table 3).

Finally, we find that publicly insured CSHCN are much less likely (about 10 percentage points

or over 100 percent) to have spent over $500 on health care in higher fee states, another

indication that parents may sometimes pay out of pocket for care in lower fee states.



                                                                                                    20
       Appendix Tables 2 and 3 show results from these models when we categorize "high"

Medicaid fees at least 0.80 instead of 0.90 (Appendix Table 2) and replacing the categorical

measure of Medicaid fee generosity with a linear measure (Appendix Table 3). Results are very

similar to the main analyses shown in Table 3, and support the idea that higher Medicaid fees

improve access to care among publicly-insured CSHCN.

       Table 4 presents results for the intent to treat analysis. Results for outcomes measuring

the adequacy of health insurance are very similar to those for the main analysis presented in

Table 3. For example, Table 3 indicated that families with publicly insured CSHCN experienced

about 7 percentage, 5, and 2 percentage point reductions in having costs covered by insurance

never or sometimes being reasonable, never or sometimes covering needed providers, and never

or sometimes meeting needs, respectively. Comparable estimates in Table 4 are about 10, 11,

and 7 percentage points. In contrast to Table 3, there is no statistically significant effect of

raising Medicaid fees on reducing the likelihood that publicly insured CSHCN lack a usual

source of care in a doctor's office. In Table 4, we do find, however improvements in difficulties

or delays in accessing care due to cost and due to waiting lists or backlogs. These improvements

are about 3-4 percentage points in magnitude. The effect of raising fees on whether a publicly

versus privately insured family spends over $500 on health care is also very similar: about 7

percentage points in Table 4 compared to about 10 percentages points in Table 3. Overall, the

intent-to-treat analysis in Table 4 supports prior results in Table 3.

       In Appendix Tables 4 and 5, we show the main specifications from Table 3 and the intent

to treat specifications from Table 4 when we include additional terms in the models ­

interactions between publicly insured and survey year, and a set of interactions between publicly

insured and state fixed effects (Equation 3). Unsurprisingly, many effects are no longer



                                                                                                   21
statistically significant when we include these additional terms, as there is a high degree of

collinearity between the DDD terms and these additional terms. It is notable, however, that the

pattern of findings persists, and the magnitudes remain large in these models. Overall, these

results still support the idea that fee increases improved access to care.

       Finally, in Table 5, we present results of subgroup analyses for the DDD models

(subgroup analyses for the DD models are shown in Appendix Table 6). There are some

interesting patterns by child age. Generally, effects of raising fees on access to care are stronger

for school-aged CSHCN than younger CSHCN, especially school-aged CSHCN aged 6-11 years

old. There are a few exceptions, including an unexpected, positive effect of fee increases on the

probability of a parent quitting work to care for the child among the youngest age group. There

is no consistent pattern by race; some effects are stronger for white CSHCN, while others are

stronger for non-white CSHCN. Effects on having a usual source of care and on having

difficulties and delays accessing services are more robust for CSHCN with a severe condition vs.

CSHCN without a severe condition (Column 6, Panel B, Table 5).

       The analyses thus far were based on the 2001 and the 2009-2010 waves of the NS-

CSHCN. We did not include the 2005-2006 wave due to concerns about the comparability of

these data with the other two waves. One advantage of including the 2005-2006 data, however, is

we add more within-state variation in Medicaid fees and also we have a larger sample size,

which may give us power to detect effects for some less common outcomes. In Appendix Table

7, we show the same models from Table 3 estimated on a sample that includes all three waves

(2001, 2005-2006, and 2009-2010) of the NS-CSHCN. The two sets of findings are very similar

to each other. The only substantive difference is that the beneficial effect on access to needed

mental health care becomes statistically significant when we include three waves (Panel C).



                                                                                                   22
Also, the unexpected, detrimental effect of fee increases on parents cutting work hours to care

for the child becomes statistically insignificant when we include all three waves (Panel E). Thus,

we conclude that our findings are not affected by whether or not we include the 2005-2006 data.

5.0    Discussion and conclusions
       In the US, public insurance programs play a critical role in providing coverage for

CSHCN, but lack of availability and access to services has been a persistent challenge. Some

have suggested that low Medicaid payments to physicians is one underlying problem. One study

based on purely cross sectional data (Decker, 2015) suggested that this could be particularly an

issue for children with special health care needs. Using data on a large sample of children with

special needs and using state-fixed effects and a comparison group of privately-insured children,

this paper substantiates a relationship between Medicaid physician fees and access to care for

children with special health care needs. This is particularly important since children, especially

children with special health care needs, are most likely to be reliant on Medicaid for health care.




                                                                                                   23
References

   1. Alexander, D., & Schnell, M. (2019). The impacts of physician payments on patient
      access, use, and health. NBER Working Paper 26095. July 2019.

   2. Blumberg, S.J., Olson L., Frankel M.R., Osborn L., Srinath K.P., Giambo P. "Design
      and Operation of the National Survey of Children's Health, 2003" National Center for
      Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 1(43). 2005.

   3. Buchmueller, T.C., Orzol, S. & Shore-Shepard, L.D. (2015). The effect of Medicaid
      payment rates on access to dental care among children. American Journal of Health
      Economics 1(2): 194-223.

   4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Design and Operation of the National
      Survey of Children with Special Health Care Needs, 2005-2006, Series 1 Number 45,
      December 2008. http://www.cdc/gov/nchs/series/sr_01/sr01_045.pdf.

   5. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Survey of Children with Special
      Health Care Needs, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/slaits/cshcn.htm, Accessed 4/2013a.


   6. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Frequently Asked Questions, 2009-2010
      National Survey of CSHCN,
      http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/slaits/NSCSHCNfaqs2009.pdf. Accessed 4/2013b.

   7. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2011). Medicaid managed care
      enrollment report summary statistics as of July 1, 2011. Available at
      http://www.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP-Program-Information/
      By-Topics/Data-and-Systems/Downloads/2011-Medicaid-MC-Enroll
      ment-Report.pdf. Accessed June 3, 2016.

   8. Davidoff, A.J., Yemane, A. & Hill, I.. (2004). Public insurance eligibility and enrollment
      for special health care needs children. Health Care Financing Review, 26(1): 119-135.

   9.    Decker S.L. (2018). The temporary nature of the Medicaid primary care fee bump may
        have limited impact on physician Medicaid participation. Health Affairs 37(7): 1092-
        1098.

   10. Decker, S.L. (2015). Acceptance of new Medicaid patients by primary care physicians
      and experiences with physician availability among ahildren on Medicaid or the
       Children's Health Insurance Program. Health Services Research, 50(5): 1508-27.

   11. Decker, S.L. (2011). Medicaid payment levels to dentists and access to dental care
       among children and adolescents. JAMA, 306(2): 187-193.


                                                                                              24
12. Decker, S.L. (2009). Changes in Medicaid physician fees and patterns of ambulatory
    care. Inquiry, 46: 291-304.

13. Decker, S.L. (2007). Medicaid physician fees and the quality of medical care of
    Medicaid patients in the USA. Review of Economics of the Household, 5, 95-112.

14. Farrell, K., Hess, C., & Justice, D. (2011). The affordable care act and children with
    special health care needs: An analysis and steps for state policy makers. Boston, MA:
    National Academy for State Health Policy for the Catalyst Center, Boston University.

15. Ghandour RM, Hirai AH, Blumberg SJ, Strickland BB, Kogan MD. (2014). Financial
    and nonfinancial burden among families of CSHCN: Changes between 2001 and 1009-
    2010. Academic Pediatrics 14(1); 92-100.

16. Government Accounting Office (GAO). (2014). Medicaid Payment: Comparisons of
    Selected Services under Fee-for-Service, Managed Care, and Private Insurance. GAO-14-
    533.Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

17. Hahn Y. (2013). The effect of Medicaid physician fees on take-up of public health
    insurance among children in poverty. Journal of Health Economics, 32: 452-462.

18. Kirby JB, Hill SC. Effects of the affordable care act's Medicaid primary care provider
    fee increase on provider revenue per visit. Draft paper.

19. Medicaid and CHIP Payment and Access Commission (MACPAC). (2015). An update
    on the Medicaid primary care payment increase. https://www.macpac.gov/wp-
    content/uploads/2015/03/An-Update-on-the-Medicaid-Primary-Care-Payment-
    Increase.pdf. Accessed June 3, 2016.

20. McPherson M., Arango P., Fox H., Lauver C., McManus M., Newacheck P., Perrin J.,
    Shonkoff J., Strickland B.. (1998). A new definition of children with special health care
    needs. Pediatrics, 102(1):137-140.

21. Mulcahy A.W., Gracner T, Finegold K. (201). Associations between the Patient
    Protection and Affordable Care Act Medicaid primary care payment increase and
    physician participation in Medicaid. JAMA Internal Medicine 178(8): 1042-1048.

22. Norton S, Zuckerman S. (2000). Trends in Medicaid physician fees, 1993-1998. Health
    Affairs 19(4):A 222-232.

23. Peele, P. S., J. R. Lave, K. J. Kelleher. (2002). "Exclusions and Limitations in Children's
    Behavioral Health Care Coverage." Psychiatric Services. 33:591-594.




                                                                                             25
24. Polsky D, Richards M, Basseyn S, Wissoker D, Kenney GM, Zuckerman S, Rhodes KV.
    (2015). Appointment availability after increases in Medicaid payments for primary care.
    New England Journal of Medicine, 372(6):537-45.

25. Sonchak, L. (2015). Medicaid reimbursement, prenatal care, and infant health. Journal
    of Health Economics, 44: 10-24.

26. University of Kentucky Center for Poverty Research. (2019, Dec.). UKCPR National
    Welfare Data, 1980-2018. Lexington, KY. Available at
    http://ukcpr.org/resources/national-welfare-data (accessed 2/5/20).

27. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (USDHHS), Health Resources and
    Services Administration, Maternal and Child Health Bureau. The National Survey of
    Children with Special Health Care Needs Chartbook 2009­2010. Rockville, Maryland:
    U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2013.

28. Zuckerman, S. & Goin, D. How much will Medicaid physician fees for primary care rise
    in 2013? Evidence from a 2012 survey of Medicaid physician fees. The Kaiser
    Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, Kaiser Family Foundation, December
    2012.

29. Zuckerman, S., Skopec, L. & Epstein, M. Medicaid physician fees after the ACA
    primary care fee bump. Urban Institute, March 2017, Available at:
   https://www.urban.org/sites/default/files/publication/88836/2001180-medicaid-physician-
   fees-after-the-aca-primary-care-fee-bump_0.pdf

30. Zuckerman, S., Williams, A.F. & Stockley, K.E. (April 28, 2009). Trends in Medicaid
    physician fees, 2003-2009. Health Affairs w510-w519.




                                                                                             26
Figure 1: Medicaid-Medicare Fee Ratios for Primary Care Visits




Notes: Figure compares the Medicaid-to-Medicare fee ratios for primary care between 1998 and 2008.
Alaska's fee ratio increased from 1.17 in 1998 to 1.40 in 2008. Alaska is not shown in the figure because
including this point reduces the clarity of the figure.




                                                                                                       27
                                    Table 1: Unadjusted means in 2001

Outcome                                       Private Only            Public Only            Difference
                                                      Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care                            7.06                   6.67              -0.40
No usual source of care in doctor's office        20.20                  38.97             18.77     ***
No regular health care provider                    6.72                  12.51              5.79     ***
                                                Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due to cost            3.23                     2.67             -0.56    **
Difficulty/delay in access due to waiting
                                                   0.86                   2.41              1.55     ***
lists/backlog
Difficulty/delay in access due to lack of
                                                   0.77                   2.78              2.00     ***
availability in area

                                             Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance,
                                                         waiting times, or lack of availability
Did not get needed routine care                    0.55                   0.99                0.44   ***
Did not get needed specialty doctor care           1.98                   2.83              0.85     **
Did not get needed mental health care              7.14                   6.16              -0.98
Did not get needed therapy                         5.67                   3.41              -2.26    ***
                                                 Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
Costs covered by insurance never or
                                                  26.54                  24.53              -2.01    ***
sometimes reasonable
Insurance never or sometimes covers
                                                   8.25                  15.08              6.83     ***
needed providers
Insurance benefits/coverage never or
                                                  10.74                  16.26              5.51     ***
sometimes meet needs

                                                      Panel E: Family affected by child's health
Spent over $500 out of pocket                     29.71                   9.07              -20.64   ***
Child's health care caused financial
                                                  15.71                  20.86              5.15     ***
problem
Stopped working due to child's health              7.13                  20.37             13.24     ***
Had to cut work hours to care for child           20.02                  35.49             15.48     ***
Provided health care at home for child            51.72                  57.61              5.89     ***

                    N                            17,175                  4,860


                                                                                                           28
                                        Table 2: Covariate balance

                                No control group                       With control group
                                 Fee effect on         Fee effect on      Fee effect on
Outcome                              public               private            public         Difference
Age 02                               -0.85                 1.63              -1.68           -3.30 ***
                                    (2.85)               (1.22)             (1.22)          (0.94)
Age 35                               -2.45                -3.49 ***          -3.64 ***       -0.15
                                    (1.67)               (1.09)             (1.26)          (1.77)
Age 68                                0.25                -0.43               1.69            2.12
                                    (3.02)               (1.08)             (1.93)          (1.86)
Age 911                               4.38                 2.03               0.73           -1.30
                                    (3.04)               (1.46)             (2.09)          (2.25)
Age 1214                              2.66                 2.15 *             3.10 **         0.95
                                    (2.29)               (1.22)             (1.29)          (1.28)
Age 1517                             -3.99 **             -1.89              -0.20            1.69
                                    (1.98)               (1.50)             (1.71)          (1.87)
Female                               -0.86                 0.36              -4.21 **        -4.57 ***
                                    (2.42)               (1.38)             (1.77)          (1.69)
White                                 0.01                -1.79               1.76            3.55
                                    (3.40)               (2.05)             (1.94)          (3.04)
Latino                                1.78                 1.74              -0.95           -2.69
                                    (1.76)               (1.73)             (3.31)          (2.88)
African-American                     -2.99                 1.17              -3.53           -4.70
                                    (2.77)               (2.17)             (2.86)          (4.54)
Other                                 2.98                 0.61               1.77            1.15
                                    (1.85)               (1.23)             (1.63)          (2.32)
Parent is high school dropout        -0.93                 0.59              -6.26 ***       -6.85 ***
                                    (3.12)               (1.47)             (1.81)          (2.19)
Parent is high school                -6.15                 1.04               1.05            0.01
graduate                            (3.93)               (2.20)             (2.39)          (1.91)
Parent has more than high             7.08                -1.63               5.21 *          6.84 **
school degree
                                    (4.30)               (2.34)             (2.69)          (2.89)
Household size 2                      2.31 *              -0.81              -0.13            0.68
                                    (1.27)               (1.03)             (0.44)          (1.17)
Household size 3                     -1.99                -0.19              -2.85           -2.66
                                    (3.81)               (1.44)             (2.10)          (1.70)
Household size 4                     -0.90                -0.40               0.70            1.11
                                    (2.82)               (1.68)             (1.98)          (1.55)


                                                                                                         29
 Household size 5                        -4.68                  -0.38                -1.66              -1.29
                                        (4.51)                 (1.06)               (2.40)             (2.07)
 Household size 6 or more                 5.26 **                1.78                 3.94 **            2.16
                                        (2.46)                 (1.76)               (1.57)             (1.94)
 Child's health/behavioral               -0.86                  -0.49                 0.49               0.98
 conditions greatly affect life         (1.53)                 (1.16)               (1.06)             (1.33)

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Two sets of regressions are estimated: "no control group" where the sample is
restricted to publicly-insured children, and "with control group" where the sample also includes privately-insured
children. Table shows estimated coefficients on three variables only: fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; sum of fee ratio is
0.90 or higher and interaction between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; interaction
between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher. Models also include, where appropriate, child
age, female, race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity indicator, state fixed effects, an indicator
for 2010 survey, and state-level controls. The sample size is 48,405. * Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at
5 percent. *** Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                   30
                                  Table 3: Effects of Medicaid physician fees

                                  No control group                          With control group
                                   Fee effect on            Fee effect on       Fee effect on
                                       public                  private             public           Difference
Outcome                                  (1)                      (2)                 (3)               (4)
                                                Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care                 -3.29 *            -0.98               -1.76                 -0.78
                                       (1.92)             (1.57)              (1.48)                (0.81)
No usual source of care in              -5.56               0.94               -4.94 *               -5.88 ***
doctor's office                        (4.93)             (1.82)              (2.88)                (1.90)
No regular health care                  -2.16               1.11               -1.34                 -2.46
provider                               (1.87)             (1.40)              (1.26)                (1.50)
                                              Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due          -3.37                   0.23                -1.50             -1.73
to cost                                (2.33)                 (0.84)               (1.66)            (1.31)
Difficulty/delay in access due          -6.28 ***              -1.09                -2.90 **          -1.81
to waiting lists/backlog               (1.62)                 (0.90)               (1.22)            (1.16)
Difficulty/delay in access due          -0.06                  -0.16                 0.11              0.27
to lack of availability in area        (2.12)                 (0.89)               (1.42)            (1.29)
                                  Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times,
                                                            or lack of availability
Did not get needed routine             -2.13 *               -0.62                 -0.90 **        -0.28
care                                  (1.22)                (0.51)                (0.34)          (0.26)
Did not get needed specialty           -6.91 ***             -1.32                 -3.82 **        -2.50 **
doctor care                           (2.12)                (1.04)                (1.61)          (1.01)
Did not get needed mental              -5.35 **              -0.85                 -3.55 *         -2.70
health care                           (2.31)                (2.45)                (1.89)          (2.76)
Did not get needed therapy             -2.33                  0.81                 -1.60           -2.42
                                      (3.50)                (1.31)                (2.73)          (2.96)
                                             Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
Costs covered by insurance             -0.20                2.74               -4.31 *        -7.05 ***
never or sometimes
reasonable                             (3.67)                 (1.65)              (2.19)            (1.79)
Insurance never or                       1.00                   0.82               -1.27             -2.10 *
sometimes covers needed
providers                              (5.00)                 (1.65)              (2.02)            (1.13)
Insurance benefits/coverage             -1.07                   1.19               -4.11 ***         -5.29 ***
never or sometimes meet
needs                                  (4.01)                 (1.37)              (1.18)            (1.64)


                                                                                                                 31
                                                      Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of                    1.42                   0.66               -9.34 ***         -10.00 ***
 pocket                                  (1.97)                 (1.43)              (2.22)              (1.64)
 Child's health care caused                2.82                   1.45                0.38               -1.06
 financial problem                       (2.49)                 (1.05)              (1.28)              (1.75)
 Stopped working due to                    4.42 *                -0.66                0.98                1.63
 child's health                          (2.58)                 (0.92)              (1.35)              (1.56)
 Had to cut work hours to care             1.69                   0.84               -1.96               -2.80 *
 for child                               (2.23)                 (1.29)              (1.66)              (1.62)
 Provided health care at home             -2.16                  -2.49                0.07                2.55
 for child
                                         (4.46)                  (1.78)              (1.38)             (2.43)

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Two sets of regressions are estimated: "no control group" where the sample is
restricted to publicly-insured children, and "with control group" where the sample also includes privately-insured
children. Table shows estimated coefficients on three variables only: fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; sum of fee ratio is
0.90 or higher and interaction between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; interaction
between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher. Models also include child age, female,
race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity indicator, state fixed effects, an indicator for 2010
survey, and state-level controls. The sample size is 48,405 for all outcomes, except for those in Panel C: not
getting needed routine care (40,624), specialty doctor (24,676), mental health care (11,712), and therapy (10,884).
* Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5 percent. *** Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                   32
 Table 4: Effects of Medicaid physician fees using low parental education (less than high school) as a proxy
                                                for Medicaid

                                  No control group                       With control group
                                   Fee effect on           Fee effect on     Fee effect on
                                       public                 private           public             Difference
Outcome                                  (1)                     (2)                (3)                (4)
                                                Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care                 -9.25 *            -1.11               -3.29                -2.18
                                       (5.21)             (1.51)              (2.72)               (2.58)
No usual source of care in              -9.92              -1.65               -2.77                -1.12
doctor's office                        (7.99)             (2.11)              (5.48)               (4.70)
No regular health care                  -0.53              -0.12                1.22                 1.34
provider                               (5.11)             (1.42)              (3.41)               (4.30)
                                              Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due          -7.08 *                -0.20                -3.40             -3.20 *
to cost                                (4.20)                 (1.04)               (2.28)            (1.75)
Difficulty/delay in access due        -10.50 ***               -1.62                -5.31 ***         -3.69 *
to waiting lists/backlog               (3.73)                 (1.01)               (1.58)            (2.12)
Difficulty/delay in access due          -1.50                  -0.25                 0.98              1.23
to lack of availability in area        (2.11)                 (0.88)               (2.64)            (2.37)
                                  Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times,
                                                            or lack of availability
Did not get needed routine              -2.98 *              -0.75                 -0.66            0.09
care                                   (1.53)               (0.45)                (0.64)          (0.66)
Did not get needed specialty          -15.67 **              -1.98 *               -4.76           -2.79
doctor care                            (5.88)               (1.16)                (2.84)          (2.41)
Did not get needed mental               -7.49                -2.25                 -3.77           -1.52
health care                            (4.88)               (1.76)                (4.27)          (4.31)
Did not get needed therapy              -2.30                -0.09                 -2.74 **        -2.65
                                       (3.32)               (1.66)                (1.30)          (1.82)
                                             Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
Costs covered by insurance             -0.15                0.90               -9.13 **       -10.03 ***
never or sometimes
reasonable                             (7.19)                (1.55)              (4.30)            (3.38)
Insurance never or                      -0.17                  0.49               -6.07 *           -6.56 ***
sometimes covers needed
providers                              (6.89)                (1.61)              (3.04)            (2.02)
Insurance benefits/coverage             -3.24                 -0.03             -10.98 ***        -10.95 ***
never or sometimes meet
needs                                  (6.14)                (1.00)              (2.65)            (2.59)

                                                                                                                33
                                                      Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of                    -1.17                  -2.41              -9.07 **             -6.66 *
 pocket                                   (4.13)                 (1.78)             (4.43)               (3.91)
 Child's health care caused                 0.20                   1.30              -1.87                -3.17
 financial problem                        (5.17)                 (0.79)             (3.32)               (3.47)
 Stopped working due to                     3.81                  -0.31               1.35                 1.66
 child's health                           (5.35)                 (0.78)             (2.83)               (2.88)
 Had to cut work hours to care             -7.91                  -0.19              -3.43                -3.24
 for child                                (6.40)                 (1.31)             (4.73)               (5.05)
 Provided health care at home              -3.94                  -1.71               0.32                 2.03
 for child
                                          (7.65)                 (1.30)               (2.73)             (3.47)

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Two sets of regressions are estimated: "no control group" where the sample is
restricted to children with parental education less than high school, and "with control group" where the sample
also includes children with parental education of at least high school. Table shows estimated coefficients on three
variables only: fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; sum of fee ratio is 0.90 or higher and interaction between parental
education is less than high school and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; interaction between parental education is less
than high school and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher. Models also include child age, female, race/ethnicity, household
size, severity indicator, state fixed effects, an indicator for 2010 survey, and state-level controls. The sample size
is 48,405 for all outcomes, except for those in Panel C: not getting needed routine care (40,624), specialty doctor
(24,676), mental health care (11,712), and therapy (10,884). * Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5
percent. *** Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                    34
                   Table 5: Effects of Medicaid physician fees by subgroup, with control group

                                                   Age Group                                    Gender
                                     Ages 0-5       Ages 6-11      Ages 12-17          Female              Male
Outcome                                 (1)             (2)            (3)                (4)                (5)
                                                     Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care              -1.53            1.29           -2.89 *           -1.19              -0.32
                                    (2.08)          (2.13)          (1.65)            (1.16)             (1.36)
                                                    0.273           0.669                                0.670
No usual source of care in           -3.58           -6.15 **        -7.12 **          -7.97 ***          -4.49 *
doctor's office                     (5.45)          (2.65)          (2.99)            (2.37)             (2.41)
                                                    0.679           0.517                                0.190
No regular health care provider      -0.33           -4.26 ***       -1.66             -5.14 ***          -0.84
                                    (1.80)          (1.54)          (3.54)            (1.72)             (1.60)
                                                    0.081           0.759                                0.013
                                                Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due to     3.30           -5.08 ***       -1.54             -0.95              -2.54
cost
                                    (2.63)          (1.42)          (1.82)            (1.34)             (2.33)
                                                    0.002           0.101                                0.613
Difficulty/delay in access due to    -2.57           -2.43           -1.19             -5.22 **            0.17
waiting lists/backlog               (2.05)          (3.41)          (2.33)            (2.33)             (1.36)
                                                    0.975           0.646                                0.066
Difficulty/delay in access due to     4.31            0.37           -2.54              0.27               0.22
lack of availability in area        (3.48)          (1.94)          (1.66)            (1.55)             (1.46)
                                                    0.160           0.098                                0.971

                                     Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times,
                                                               or lack of availability
Did not get needed routine care      -0.30            0.24          -0.87 **            -0.53         -0.15
                                    (0.44)          (0.53)         (0.42)              (0.35)        (0.46)
                                                    0.371           0.414                            0.574
Did not get needed specialty         -0.34           -5.53 ***      -0.47               -2.80 **      -2.53 *
doctor care                         (1.39)          (2.03)         (2.33)              (1.18)        (1.44)
                                                    0.038           0.969                            0.885
Did not get needed mental            -9.07           -7.64 *         3.13                0.18         -4.64 *
health care                         (7.55)          (3.87)         (3.97)              (5.66)        (2.53)
                                                    0.884           0.187                            0.414
Did not get needed therapy           -0.33           -1.33          -6.24               -2.08         -2.11
                                    (5.89)          (3.09)         (4.82)              (5.08)        (2.77)
                                                    0.877           0.357                            0.995

                                                                                                                   35
                                                Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
 Costs covered by insurance          -13.32 ***    -8.45 ***      -2.13             -7.33 **               -6.81 ***
 never or sometimes reasonable        (4.33)      (2.97)         (3.50)            (3.13)                 (1.81)
                                                  0.367          0.123                                    0.875
 Insurance never or sometimes          -3.71       -4.27 ***       1.07             -4.10 *                -0.99
 covers needed providers              (2.53)      (1.38)         (2.37)            (2.03)                 (2.47)
                                                  0.844          0.173                                    0.461
 Insurance benefits/coverage           -6.05       -8.15 ***      -2.42             -3.35 **               -6.67 ***
 never or sometimes meet needs        (3.86)      (1.98)         (2.54)            (1.43)                 (1.90)
                                                  0.597          0.428                                    0.011
                                                         Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of pocket       -13.29 ***       -10.63 ***        -7.44 **          -9.52 ***      -10.46 ***
                                      (3.18)           (3.64)          (3.13)            (2.45)           (1.91)
                                                       0.617           0.194                              0.740
 Child's health care caused             3.31            -1.66           -2.59             -1.29            -1.03
 financial problem                    (3.46)           (2.44)          (3.31)            (2.44)           (2.22)
                                                       0.273           0.183                              0.935
 Stopped working due to child's         8.34 ***        -0.79            1.31             -2.12             4.13 *
 health                               (2.96)           (2.54)          (1.88)            (1.55)           (2.12)
                                                       0.020           0.062                              0.011
 Had to cut work hours to care         -4.59            -2.17           -2.00             -3.91 **         -2.00
 for child                            (3.59)           (1.92)          (2.58)            (1.78)           (2.12)
                                                       0.570           0.578                              0.406
 Provided health care at home          -2.82             4.30            2.59             -3.60             6.53 *
 for child                            (5.19)           (2.93)          (3.75)            (2.63)           (3.58)
                                                       0.190           0.322                              0.036

                 N                    8,548          18,920           20,937            19,362           29,043

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Table shows estimated coefficient on the main variable of interest only: sum of fee
ratio is 0.90 or higher and interaction between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher. For each
outcome variable, the bottom row reports p-values for differences from the baseline group. Models also include
child age, female, race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity indicator, state fixed effects, an
indicator for 2010 survey, and state-level controls. * Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5 percent. ***
Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                  36
                    Table 5: (Continued) Effects of Medicaid physician fees by subgroup, with control group

                                                Race                       Parental Education                Severity of Conditions
                                                                                       Less than
                                   White               Nonwhite          At least HS      HS             Not severe             Severe
Outcome                              (1)                  (2)                (3)            (4)                (5)               (6)

                                                                Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care          -2.10     **          1.68              -0.06           -16.48              0.14           -4.79      *
                                 (0.92)            (2.19)                (0.76)          (16.40)         (0.95)            (2.43)
                                                   0.134                                   0.331         0.095
No usual source of care in        -5.52    **       -7.61                 -5.62    **     -21.81          -4.56      ***   -15.50      **
doctor's office
                                 (2.58)            (4.55)                (2.28)          (14.14)         (1.35)             (7.63)
                                                   0.718                                   0.309         0.128
No regular health care            -3.75    ***      -0.86                 -2.91    ***     -0.16          -1.57             -6.36      **
provider
                                 (1.16)            (3.64)                (1.03)           (5.30)         (1.62)            (2.37)
                                                   0.452                                  0.597                            0.177

                                                          Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access       -0.61                 -4.56             -0.90            -9.81           -1.75             -4.47      *
due to cost
                                 (1.40)            (3.40)                (1.57)           (8.38)         (1.35)            (2.33)
                                                   0.315                                  0.327          0.282
Difficulty/delay in access        -0.61             -4.11       *         -1.26            -3.52          -0.50            -15.20      ***
due to waiting lists/backlog
                                 (1.59)            (2.25)                (1.27)           (9.00)         (1.67)             (5.62)
                                                   0.236                                  0.802          0.025
Difficulty/delay in access        0.36                 -0.67              0.35           -10.68              0.36           -2.80
due to lack of availability in
area                             (1.02)        (2.84)             (1.41)          (12.62)         (1.60)          (3.56)
                                                0.748                               0.376                         0.438
                                    Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times, or lack of
                                                                         availability
Did not get needed routine        -0.95    ***       0.92                 -0.39            -0.98          -0.40              0.34
care
                                 (0.28)            (0.57)                (0.30)           (2.98)         (0.32)            (1.60)
                                                   0.013                                  0.851          0.683
Did not get needed specialty      -2.20             -4.07       *         -2.28    **      -4.05          -3.23      **      0.47
doctor care
                                 (1.56)            (2.32)                (1.08)           (5.03)         (1.28)            (1.34)
                                                   0.559                                  0.748          0.090
Did not get needed mental         -2.20             -4.22                 -3.28             5.30          -1.73             -3.86
health care
                                 (3.51)            (5.08)                (2.42)           (3.65)         (3.34)            (7.76)
                                                   0.761                                  0.062          0.815
Did not get needed therapy        -1.77             -5.09                 -1.96             2.40          -2.55             -2.19
                                 (3.64)            (5.28)                (3.44)           (3.25)         (2.28)            (5.53)
                                                   0.607                                  0.327                            0.923

                                                                                                                           37
                                                      Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
 Costs covered by insurance      -5.98    ***   -11.43   ***        -5.35   ***   -11.23               -7.07   ***   -6.39    *
 never or sometimes
                                 (1.85)         (2.94)             (1.61)         (13.14)          (2.28)            (3.68)
 reasonable
                                                 0.051                             0.665           0.896
 Insurance never or              -1.26           -4.17   ***        -0.62           1.99               -1.56         -6.61    *
 sometimes covers needed
                                 (1.34)         (1.35)             (0.94)          (4.83)          (1.61)            (3.35)
 providers
                                                 0.113                             0.588           0.234
 Insurance benefits/coverage     -4.09    ***    -9.45   ***        -2.60         -17.81    *          -6.05   ***   -2.64
 never or sometimes meet
                                 (1.31)         (3.47)             (2.08)         (10.29)          (1.59)            (3.23)
 needs
                                                 0.095                             0.159                             0.260

                                                          Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of           -9.96   ***    -9.22   ***        -9.77   ***      0.91          -10.45      ***    -5.97   *
 pocket
                                 (2.36)         (2.01)             (1.75)         (13.12)           (1.56)           (3.14)
                                                0.823                               0.408           0.177
 Child's health care caused       -0.65          -3.77              -0.56           -4.45           -1.28             -1.69
 financial problem
                                 (1.92)         (2.92)             (1.47)         (14.93)          (2.35)            (6.70)
                                                0.434                               0.792          0.960
 Stopped working due to            3.78          -2.07               1.96           -3.73            0.23              9.91   *
 child's health
                                 (2.94)         (3.25)             (1.81)          (7.02)          (1.62)            (5.45)
                                                0.280                              0.425           0.101
 Had to cut work hours to         -2.03          -5.92   **         -1.63          -19.85           -2.43             -0.32
 care for child
                                 (2.35)         (2.58)             (1.31)         (14.17)          (1.62)            (5.81)
                                                0.342                               0.201          0.708
 Provided health care at           4.37          -2.20               1.71            5.33            2.90              1.63
 home for child
                                 (4.50)         (4.72)             (2.19)         (12.89)          (2.63)            (7.64)
                                                0.419                               0.784                            0.873


              N                 38,231          10,174            45,716           2,689          43,813             4,592

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Table shows estimated coefficient on the main variable of interest only: sum of fee
ratio is 0.90 or higher and interaction between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher. For each
outcome variable, the third row reports p-values for differences from the baseline group. Models also include
child age, female, race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity indicator, state fixed effects, an
indicator for 2010 survey, and state-level controls. * Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5 percent. ***
Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                     38
  Appendix Table 1: Covariate balance using low parental education (less than high school) as a proxy for
                                                Medicaid

                               No control group                         With control group
                                Fee effect on           Fee effect on      Fee effect on
Outcome                             public                 private             public         Difference
Age 02                               2.52                  0.37              -1.96             -2.33
                                    (2.33)               (1.25)              (1.59)            (2.36)
Age 35                              -4.88                 -3.61 ***          -3.77 *           -0.16
                                    (4.91)               (0.71)              (1.98)            (1.85)
Age 68                              10.29 **               0.22               2.29              2.06
                                    (4.79)               (1.17)              (4.02)            (3.91)
Age 911                             -7.16                  2.01              -3.64             -5.64 *
                                    (5.65)               (1.34)              (3.30)            (3.19)
Age 1214                             8.27                  1.95 *             9.17 ***          7.22 **
                                    (5.54)               (1.11)              (2.82)            (2.99)
Age 1517                            -9.03 **              -0.95              -2.09             -1.14
                                    (4.33)               (1.47)              (2.42)            (2.86)
Female                              -0.62                 -0.71             -10.32 **          -9.61 *
                                    (4.95)               (1.34)              (4.75)            (4.81)
White                                1.79                  0.56              -3.24             -3.80
                                    (5.62)               (1.23)              (3.28)            (3.56)
Latino                               2.70                  0.83              -2.99             -3.82
                                    (3.82)               (1.96)              (5.89)            (5.31)
African-American                    -5.87                 -1.32              -0.28              1.05
                                    (4.15)               (1.08)              (4.15)            (4.67)
Other                                4.08                  0.77               3.52              2.75
                                    (5.71)               (0.89)              (3.43)            (3.74)
Household size 2                    -4.39 ***             -0.30              -3.29 ***         -2.99 *
                                    (1.46)               (0.68)              (1.20)            (1.52)
Household size 3                    -6.15                 -0.87              -5.58 **          -4.71
                                    (6.16)               (1.72)              (2.47)            (3.26)
Household size 4                    10.36                  0.08               2.06              1.98
                                  (10.48)                (1.85)              (6.54)            (7.22)
Household size 5                    -1.62                 -1.85               8.40             10.25 **
                                    (8.30)               (1.32)              (5.17)            (4.81)
Household size 6 or more             1.81                  2.94 *            -1.59             -4.53
                                    (6.45)               (1.51)              (4.87)            (5.30)

                                                                                                            39
 Child's health/behavioral                5.74                   -0.66                3.41 **            4.08 **
 conditions greatly affect life
                                        (4.27)                  (0.96)              (1.58)              (1.66)

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Two sets of regressions are estimated: "no control group" where the sample is
restricted to children with parental education less than high school, and "with control group" where the sample
also includes children with parental education of at least high school. Table shows estimated coefficients on three
variables only: fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; sum of fee ratio is 0.90 or higher and interaction between parental
education is less than high school and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; interaction between parental education is less
than high school and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher. Models also include, where appropriate, child age, female,
race/ethnicity, household size, severity indicator, state fixed effects, an indicator for 2010 survey, and state-level
controls. The sample size is 48,405. * Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5 percent. *** Significant at 1
percent.




                                                                                                                    40
          Appendix Table 2: Effects of Medicaid physician fees using 0.80 as the cutoff for a high fee

                                  No control group                          With control group
                                   Fee effect on            Fee effect on       Fee effect on
                                       public                  private             public          Difference
Outcome                                  (1)                     (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                                 Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care                 -2.21               -1.25               -1.76               -0.51
                                       (2.15)              (1.10)              (1.53)              (0.90)
No usual source of care in              -3.60                1.58               -3.65               -5.23 ***
doctor's office                        (5.22)              (1.86)              (2.50)              (1.91)
No regular health care                  -4.68 **            -1.07               -3.28 **            -2.21 *
provider                               (1.76)              (0.86)              (1.44)              (1.11)
                                              Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due          -0.24                   0.66                 0.20             -0.46
to cost                                (1.69)                 (1.01)               (1.34)            (1.31)
Difficulty/delay in access due          -3.50 **               -0.40                -2.68 ***         -2.28 *
to waiting lists/backlog               (1.60)                 (0.71)               (0.90)            (1.14)
Difficulty/delay in access due           1.25                   1.12                 1.28              0.16
to lack of availability in area        (1.71)                 (0.71)               (1.06)            (1.18)
                                  Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times,
                                                            or lack of availability
Did not get needed routine             -0.74                 -0.18                 -0.23           -0.05
care                                  (1.13)                (0.36)                (0.40)          (0.18)
Did not get needed specialty            0.22                  1.63                  1.16           -0.47
doctor care                           (2.52)                (0.97)                (1.73)          (1.71)
Did not get needed mental              -0.20                 -1.80                 -1.91           -0.10
health care                           (2.47)                (2.56)                (2.43)          (2.23)
Did not get needed therapy              4.47 *                0.77                  1.99            1.23
                                      (2.44)                (1.35)                (1.68)          (1.79)
                                              Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
Costs covered by insurance              -2.34                1.89               -5.09 ***      -6.98 ***
never or sometimes
reasonable                             (3.14)                (1.64)              (1.81)            (1.61)
Insurance never or                       8.18 **               3.04 **             1.71             -1.33
sometimes covers needed
providers                              (3.26)                (1.41)              (1.03)            (1.24)
Insurance benefits/coverage              4.56                  2.98 ***           -2.23             -5.21 ***
never or sometimes meet
needs                                  (3.30)                (0.95)              (1.37)            (1.40)


                                                                                                                41
                                                      Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of                    0.51                    1.33              -6.48 ***           -7.81 ***
 pocket                                  (1.57)                  (1.35)             (1.70)              (1.91)
 Child's health care caused                0.23                    0.17              -0.99               -1.16
 financial problem                       (1.88)                  (1.09)             (1.24)              (1.02)
 Stopped working due to                    1.86                   -0.38               0.25                0.63
 child's health                          (2.39)                  (0.75)             (1.14)              (1.17)
 Had to cut work hours to care            -3.57                   -1.16              -4.85 ***           -3.69 ***
 for child                               (2.23)                  (1.01)             (1.22)              (1.29)
 Provided health care at home             -4.68                   -0.93               0.96                1.89
 for child
                                         (4.07)                  (1.68)               (1.73)            (2.12)

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Two sets of regressions are estimated: "no control group" where the sample is
restricted to publicly-insured children, and "with control group" where the sample also includes privately-insured
children. Table shows estimated coefficients on three variables only: fee ratio is 0.80 or higher; sum of fee ratio is
0.80 or higher and interaction between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.80 or higher; interaction
between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.80 or higher. Models also include child age, female,
race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity indicator, state fixed effects, an indicator for 2010
survey, and state-level controls. The sample size is 48,405 for all outcomes, except for those in Panel C: not
getting needed routine care (40,624), specialty doctor (24,676), mental health care (11,712), and therapy (10,884).
* Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5 percent. *** Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                   42
         Appendix Table 3: Effects of Medicaid physician fees using a linear measure of the fee ratio

                                  No control group                         With control group
                                   Fee effect on           Fee effect on       Fee effect on
                                       public                 private             public           Difference
Outcome                                  (1)                    (2)                 (3)                 (4)
                                                Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care               -15.33 **            -4.84               -7.44                -2.60
                                       (7.24)             (4.30)              (4.76)               (3.35)
No usual source of care in            -22.65                3.13             -15.79 *             -18.92 ***
doctor's office                      (18.81)              (7.75)              (8.31)               (3.36)
No regular health care                -15.83 *             -3.04               -7.07                -4.02
provider                               (8.10)             (3.36)              (4.32)               (4.07)
                                              Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due          -3.07                   0.44                -0.54             -0.98
to cost                                (6.79)                 (3.79)               (4.02)            (2.98)
Difficulty/delay in access due        -14.09 ***               -4.52 **             -8.82 ***         -4.30 **
to waiting lists/backlog               (4.57)                 (1.95)               (2.27)            (2.06)
Difficulty/delay in access due           5.28                   6.25 ***             4.47             -1.78
to lack of availability in area        (7.16)                 (2.17)               (2.77)            (2.04)
                                  Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times,
                                                            or lack of availability
Did not get needed routine             -8.88 *               -2.24                 -3.04 *         -0.80 **
care                                  (4.57)                (1.61)                (1.62)          (0.35)
Did not get needed specialty           -8.33                 -0.11                  1.10            1.21
doctor care                           (4.98)                (1.93)                (3.22)          (3.93)
Did not get needed mental              -1.54                  3.50                  0.90           -2.60
health care                           (8.68)                (8.26)                (8.63)          (4.99)
Did not get needed therapy              7.98                  0.11                 -0.32           -0.43
                                      (5.23)                (3.20)                (3.65)          (3.85)
                                             Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
Costs covered by insurance              4.19                5.12              -10.81 *        -15.94 ***
never or sometimes
reasonable                           (11.87)                 (5.15)              (6.42)            (5.66)
Insurance never or                     20.43                   7.31 *              1.00             -6.31 ***
sometimes covers needed
providers                            (13.73)                 (3.64)              (4.41)            (1.92)
Insurance benefits/coverage            14.04                 10.06 **             -6.53           -16.59 ***
never or sometimes meet
needs                                (15.45)                 (4.20)              (4.31)            (2.66)


                                                                                                                43
                                                     Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of                    7.77                  1.79             -21.14 ***          -22.93 ***
 pocket                                  (5.21)                (5.44)              (5.89)              (3.71)
 Child's health care caused               -1.59                  2.57               -6.23 *             -8.80 ***
 financial problem                       (7.07)                (2.78)              (3.26)              (2.53)
 Stopped working due to                    7.77                 -0.40               -1.24               -0.84
 child's health                        (11.31)                 (3.73)              (4.86)              (3.58)
 Had to cut work hours to care          -10.31                  -3.97               -9.83 *             -5.86
 for child                               (9.44)                (3.61)              (4.90)              (4.22)
 Provided health care at home             -9.88                 -0.01                4.09                4.10
 for child
                                       (18.24)                  (5.54)              (6.74)            (5.04)

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Two sets of regressions are estimated: "no control group" where the sample is
restricted to publicly-insured children, and "with control group" where the sample also includes privately-insured
children. Table shows estimated coefficients on three variables only: fee ratio; sum of fee ratio and interaction
between child has public insurance and fee ratio; interaction between child has public insurance and fee ratio.
Models also include child age, female, race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity indicator, state
fixed effects, an indicator for 2010 survey, and state-level controls. The sample size is 48,405 for all outcomes,
except for those in Panel C: not getting needed routine care (40,624), specialty doctor (24,676), mental health care
(11,712), and therapy (10,884). * Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5 percent. *** Significant at 1
percent.




                                                                                                                 44
Appendix Table 4: Effects of Medicaid physician fees (including Public Ins x Survey Year and Public Ins x State
                                                    FEs)

                                   No control group                        With control group
                                                             Fee effect on     Fee effect on
                                  Fee effect on public          private           public           Difference
Outcome                                   (1)                     (2)                (3)               (4)
                                                   Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care                  -1.12                -1.27               -1.35              -0.08
                                        (1.20)               (1.68)              (2.15)             (2.27)
No usual source of care in               -1.37                -0.57               -1.61              -1.03
doctor's office                         (2.81)               (1.69)              (3.95)             (3.46)
No regular health care                    1.49                 0.80               -1.35              -2.16
provider                                (1.26)               (1.53)              (1.96)             (2.66)
                                               Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due           -1.24                   0.49                -2.53             -3.02
to cost                                 (1.77)                 (0.83)               (2.16)            (2.13)
Difficulty/delay in access due           -3.97 *                -0.38                -4.62 ***         -4.24 **
to waiting lists/backlog                (2.05)                 (1.00)               (1.52)            (1.65)
Difficulty/delay in access due           -0.53                   0.04                -0.82             -0.86
to lack of availability in area         (1.69)                 (0.90)               (1.75)            (1.88)
                                   Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times,
                                                             or lack of availability
Did not get needed routine              -0.31                 -0.09                 -2.45 *         -2.36 *
care                                   (0.27)                (0.30)                (1.29)          (1.28)
Did not get needed specialty            -5.20 ***             -1.24                 -3.49 *         -2.25
doctor care                            (1.65)                (1.13)                (1.90)          (1.74)
Did not get needed mental               -0.77                 -1.61                 -2.50           -0.89
health care                            (2.24)                (2.75)                (2.07)          (3.60)
Did not get needed therapy              -0.27                  1.27                 -2.63           -3.90
                                       (3.40)                (1.56)                (3.11)          (3.93)
                                              Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
Costs covered by insurance               0.84                1.30                0.02                -1.27
never or sometimes
reasonable                              (2.08)                (1.55)              (3.66)            (3.65)
Insurance never or sometimes             -0.08                 -0.02                1.15              1.17
covers needed providers                 (1.47)                (1.32)              (4.15)            (3.87)
Insurance benefits/coverage              -1.84                 -0.34                0.07              0.41
never or sometimes meet
needs                                   (1.99)                (1.08)              (3.05)            (3.29)

                                                                                                              45
                                                       Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of pocket              1.45                   -1.88              -2.09               -0.21
                                          (1.13)                  (1.34)             (2.41)              (2.29)
 Child's health care caused                 2.34                    0.67               2.62                1.95
 financial problem
                                          (1.56)                  (1.06)             (2.20)              (2.73)
 Stopped working due to                     0.93                   -1.33 *             3.26                4.59
 child's health                           (1.18)                  (0.77)             (2.77)              (3.06)
 Had to cut work hours to care             -0.76                    1.09              -1.18               -2.26
 for child                                (1.69)                  (1.23)             (2.62)              (2.90)
 Provided health care at home              -0.03                   -0.75              -4.73 *             -3.97
 for child
                                          (1.57)                  (1.18)              (2.80)             (2.72)

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Two sets of regressions are estimated: "no control group" where the sample is
restricted to publicly-insured children, and "with control group" where the sample also includes privately-insured
children. Table shows estimated coefficients on three variables only: fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; sum of fee ratio is
0.90 or higher and interaction between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; interaction
between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher. Models also include child age, female,
race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity indicator, state fixed effects, an indicator for 2010
survey, state-level controls, and interactions between public insurance and 2010 survey indicator, and between
public insurance and state fixed effects. The sample size is 48,405 for all outcomes, except for those in Panel C:
not getting needed routine care (40,624), specialty doctor (24,676), mental health care (11,712), and therapy
(10,884). * Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5 percent. *** Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                   46
Appendix Table 5: Effects of Medicaid physician fees using low parental education (less than high school) as
           a proxy for Medicaid (including Public Ins x Survey Year and Public Ins X State FEs)

                                  No control group                          With control group
                                   Fee effect on            Fee effect on       Fee effect on
                                       public                  private             public           Difference
Outcome                                  (1)                     (2)                  (3)               (4)
                                                  Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care                 -1.45                -0.77               -6.56               -5.79
                                       (3.22)               (1.37)              (4.10)              (3.62)
No usual source of care in               2.98                -1.24               -6.55               -5.31
doctor's office                        (4.71)               (1.86)              (6.47)              (5.29)
No regular health care                   5.59                 0.07               -0.27               -0.34
provider                               (4.09)               (1.62)              (4.82)              (6.05)
                                              Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due          -3.35                  -0.29                -3.36             -3.07
to cost                                (2.96)                 (1.08)               (2.99)            (2.72)
Difficulty/delay in access due          -5.45 **               -1.44                -7.33 **          -5.89
to waiting lists/backlog               (2.67)                 (1.07)               (2.92)            (3.53)
Difficulty/delay in access due          -0.33                  -0.36                 1.04              1.39
to lack of availability in area        (3.16)                 (0.87)               (2.50)            (2.27)
                                  Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times,
                                                            or lack of availability
Did not get needed routine               0.24                -0.48                 -3.12           -2.65
care                                   (0.83)               (0.42)                (2.03)          (2.06)
Did not get needed specialty          -11.50 **              -1.56                 -9.88 ***       -8.32 **
doctor care                            (4.69)               (1.32)                (3.46)          (3.59)
Did not get needed mental               -1.12                -1.84                 -8.89 **        -7.06
health care                            (4.03)               (1.84)                (3.56)          (4.20)
Did not get needed therapy               0.49                 0.32                 -3.96           -4.28
                                       (2.18)               (1.90)                (2.71)          (3.93)
                                             Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
Costs covered by insurance             -1.01                0.00               -0.55          -0.55
never or sometimes
reasonable                             (4.14)                 (1.43)              (5.89)            (5.33)
Insurance never or                      -2.82                  -0.17                0.59              0.76
sometimes covers needed
providers                              (2.91)                 (1.40)              (4.96)            (4.11)
Insurance benefits/coverage             -2.48                  -0.31               -6.10             -5.79
never or sometimes meet
needs                                  (3.60)                 (0.92)              (3.85)            (3.96)


                                                                                                                 47
                                                     Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of                    1.40                  -2.65              -3.96               -1.31
 pocket                                  (4.18)                 (1.78)             (3.64)              (3.09)
 Child's health care caused                1.27                   1.04               0.64               -0.40
 financial problem                       (4.22)                 (0.75)             (4.32)              (4.53)
 Stopped working due to                    2.19                  -0.98               5.81                6.80
 child's health                          (3.94)                 (0.75)             (4.65)              (4.80)
 Had to cut work hours to care            -5.31                   0.09              -6.22               -6.30
 for child                               (4.22)                 (1.32)             (5.91)              (6.30)
 Provided health care at home              2.95                  -1.38              -4.64               -3.26
 for child                               (2.66)                 (1.03)              (4.72)             (4.89)

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Two sets of regressions are estimated: "no control group" where the sample is
restricted to children with parental education less than high school, and "with control group" where the sample
also includes children with parental education of at least high school. Table shows estimated coefficients on three
variables only: fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; sum of fee ratio is 0.90 or higher and interaction between parental
education is less than high school and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; interaction between parental education is less
than high school and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher. Models also include child age, female, race/ethnicity, household
size, severity indicator, state fixed effects, an indicator for 2010 survey, state-level controls, and interactions
between low parental education and 2010 survey indicator, and between low parental education and state fixed
effects. The sample size is 48,405 for all outcomes, except for those in Panel C: not getting needed routine care
(40,624), specialty doctor (24,676), mental health care (11,712), and therapy (10,884). * Significant at 10 percent.
** Significant at 5 percent. *** Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                 48
                Appendix Table 6: Effects of Medicaid physician fees by subgroup, no control group

                                                    Age Group                                      Gender
                                      Ages 0-5       Ages 6-11      Ages 12-17           Female             Male
Outcome                                 (1)              (2)            (3)                 (4)              (5)
                                                      Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care               -4.87           -0.85           -3.75              -3.36             -2.88
                                     (4.61)          (2.13)          (3.22)             (2.23)            (2.51)
                                                     0.416           0.832                                0.861
No usual source of care in             1.69           -8.44           -6.50              -9.32             -2.62
doctor's office                      (7.60)          (7.10)          (7.32)             (8.41)            (3.77)
                                                     0.250           0.361                                0.359
No regular health care provider       -3.21           -0.01           -3.34              -0.94             -3.43
                                     (3.11)          (2.94)          (5.04)             (3.32)            (2.46)
                                                     0.400           0.986                                0.568
                                                 Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due to      5.99           -6.05 **        -6.89 **           -4.72 *           -2.41
cost
                                     (5.11)          (2.80)          (2.81)             (2.70)            (3.12)
                                                     0.034           0.019                                0.547
Difficulty/delay in access due to     -1.94           -7.62 **        -8.03 **           -8.82 ***         -4.96 **
waiting lists/backlog                (3.58)          (2.92)          (3.13)             (2.29)            (2.05)
                                                     0.245           0.296                                0.165
Difficulty/delay in access due to      9.01 *         -0.79           -5.28 *             0.87             -0.87
lack of availability in area         (4.79)          (2.40)          (2.88)             (2.84)            (2.08)
                                                     0.038           0.018                                0.500

                                     Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times, or
                                                                  lack of availability
Did not get needed routine care        -2.59            0.31           -5.09 **          -2.28           -2.08 **
                                      (1.57)          (0.67)          (2.50)            (2.12)          (0.83)
                                                      0.078           0.236                             0.906
Did not get needed specialty           -1.89         -11.69 ***        -7.87 *           -6.40 *         -6.82 ***
doctor care                           (1.85)          (4.11)          (4.22)            (3.70)          (2.05)
                                                      0.031           0.182                             0.917
Did not get needed mental            -10.44          -11.15 ***         2.81             -2.74           -7.97 ***
health care                         (10.50)           (3.61)          (4.28)            (4.78)          (2.76)
                                                      0.945           0.314                             0.383
Did not get needed therapy             -2.00            0.25         -11.74              -0.28           -1.72
                                      (4.83)          (3.60)          (7.23)            (5.14)          (4.22)
                                                      0.545           0.158                             0.817

                                                                                                              49
                                                      Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
 Costs covered by insurance              -4.70            0.16            0.92             -3.37                  2.81
 never or sometimes reasonable          (6.22)          (3.85)          (5.31)            (6.31)                (3.87)
                                                        0.356           0.507                                   0.338
 Insurance never or sometimes             1.54           -5.38            8.94 *            0.58                  1.62
 covers needed providers                (7.72)          (5.25)          (4.54)            (3.48)                (7.20)
                                                        0.238           0.265                                   0.878
 Insurance benefits/coverage              4.34           -3.80           -3.04             -1.57                 -0.43
 never or sometimes meet needs          (6.36)          (5.31)          (3.38)            (3.45)                (5.41)
                                                        0.171           0.288                                   0.813
                                                           Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of pocket            6.77 **         -1.93            0.37                0.37               2.27
                                        (3.29)           (3.17)          (4.24)              (2.27)             (3.48)
                                                         0.016           0.325                                  0.699
 Child's health care caused               4.57             0.60            4.32               -2.22               5.58 *
 financial problem                      (4.90)           (3.01)          (5.56)              (4.69)             (3.03)
                                                         0.532           0.975                                  0.179
 Stopped working due to child's         17.72 ***         -3.43            0.98                5.01               3.27
 health                                 (4.46)           (4.09)          (3.44)              (3.45)             (2.86)
                                                         0.003           0.003                                  0.676
 Had to cut work hours to care           -4.53            -0.47            8.09                4.51               0.14
 for child                              (5.24)           (2.79)          (5.81)              (4.29)             (2.84)
                                                         0.559           0.113                                  0.362
 Provided health care at home            -2.27            -1.26           -2.30             -12.45                4.36
 for child                              (6.73)           (5.88)          (7.20)              (8.04)             (4.41)
                                                         0.922           0.998                                  0.043

                 N                      8,548           18,920            20,937             19,362            29,043

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Table shows estimated coefficient on the main variable of interest only: fee ratio is
0.90 or higher. For each outcome variable, the bottom row reports p-values for differences from the baseline
group. Models also include child age, female, race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity
indicator, state fixed effects, an indicator for 2010 survey, and state-level controls. * Significant at 10 percent. **
Significant at 5 percent. *** Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                     50
               Appendix Table 6: (Continued) Effects of Medicaid physician fees by subgroup, no control group

                                                 Race                        Parental Education                Severity of Conditions
                                    White               Nonwhite          At least HS   Less than HS       Not severe            Severe
Outcome                               (1)                  (2)                (3)            (4)                 (5)               (6)

                                                                 Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care           -1.63                 -6.48    **        -1.28         -7.45                -1.61              -8.95    **
                                  (1.66)            (2.88)                (2.04)        (5.05)                (1.84)         (4.02)
                                                        0.084                            0.297                0.043
No usual source of care in         -1.57            -12.71                 -3.41         -9.99                 -3.41         -11.78
doctor's office
                                  (3.97)             (8.59)               (4.92)        (6.97)                (4.63)          (9.20)
                                                        0.164                            0.300                0.299
No regular health care             -5.72    ***       3.85                 -1.97         -1.36                 -2.05          -2.47
provider
                                  (2.07)            (2.42)                (2.02)        (5.46)                (1.96)         (4.16)
                                                        0.001                            0.923                               0.925

                                                           Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due    -2.96                 -5.80    *         -1.90         -9.74     **         -4.52    **        -1.65
to cost
                                  (2.74)            (3.39)                (3.07)        (4.28)                (1.96)         (5.29)
                                                        0.449                            0.154                0.545
Difficulty/delay in access due    -6.48     ***         -6.75    **        -4.08        -12.93     ***        -5.74    **    -10.84       **
to waiting lists/backlog
                                  (1.89)            (2.86)                (2.51)        (4.62)                (2.47)         (5.05)
                                                    0.933                               0.165                 0.459
Difficulty/delay in access due    -3.34     *            4.27               0.13         -1.04                -1.69              5.62
to lack of availability in area
                                  (1.90)         (4.24)            (2.24)          (2.49)           (2.09)          (6.15)
                                                 0.106                             0.543                            0.270
                                     Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times, or lack of
                                                                          availability
Did not get needed routine         -2.38             -1.54                 -1.92         -2.40                 -1.66          -4.16       *
care
                                  (2.23)            (0.94)                (1.53)        (1.62)                (1.67)         (2.32)
                                                    0.766                               0.829                 0.462
Did not get needed specialty       -2.48            -16.71       ***       -3.02        -19.11     **          -7.47   **     -3.06
doctor care
                                  (2.30)             (4.27)               (2.42)         (7.15)               (3.28)         (3.31)
                                                     0.005                               0.038                0.458
Did not get needed mental          -6.42    **       -6.32                 -3.43         -9.05                 -2.23         -10.29
health care
                                  (3.06)            (3.99)                (2.22)        (6.86)                (2.97)          (7.22)
                                                    0.984                               0.439                 0.343
Did not get needed therapy         -3.89              0.67                 -1.51         -1.48                 -1.17          -6.58
                                  (2.66)            (6.55)                (4.87)        (4.09)                (3.04)         (5.52)
                                                    0.463                               0.996                                0.180


                                                                                                                            51
                                                        Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
 Costs covered by insurance         -5.20            9.37              -1.37          -0.22               -0.04           -2.23
 never or sometimes
                                   (3.16)          (6.28)             (2.52)         (9.28)               (5.09)          (8.97)
 reasonable
                                                    0.032                            0.891                0.859
 Insurance never or sometimes       -4.43           10.78               0.12          0.65                 0.15            4.61
 covers needed providers
                                   (3.53)          (7.55)             (3.84)         (9.59)               (5.56)          (8.08)
                                                    0.011                            0.946                0.615
 Insurance benefits/coverage        -5.97            7.99              -0.96          -3.97               -3.46            5.24
 never or sometimes meet
                                   (3.88)          (4.82)             (3.32)         (8.08)               (3.44)          (7.90)
 needs
                                                    0.004                            0.691                                0.184

                                                             Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of pocket       1.36            1.57              -0.10           4.78                -0.39          11.95
                                   (2.59)          (2.83)             (2.04)         (4.01)               (1.24)          (9.70)
                                                    0.953                            0.220                0.222
 Child's health care caused         -0.52            7.29               2.61          2.47                 1.67            5.57
 financial problem
                                   (4.45)          (5.40)             (2.40)         (6.57)               (3.22)          (7.45)
                                                   0.343                             0.984                0.664
 Stopped working due to              5.12            0.57               1.94         10.06                 2.74            9.45
 child's health
                                   (3.79)          (4.31)             (2.37)         (6.16)               (2.34)          (7.96)
                                                   0.466                             0.201                0.416
 Had to cut work hours to care      -0.37            0.61               2.89          -3.58                0.79            5.39
 for child
                                   (3.44)          (4.74)             (2.76)         (7.18)               (3.62)          (9.68)
                                                   0.890                             0.448                0.707
 Provided health care at home       -3.25            0.55              -1.75          -3.43                1.79       -16.72       *
 for child
                                   (4.80)          (8.68)             (3.58)         (8.80)               (4.32)          (9.42)
                                                    0.702                            0.832                                0.054


               N                  38,231          10,174             45,716          2,689             43,813             4,592

Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Table shows estimated coefficient on the main variable of interest only: fee ratio is
0.90 or higher. For each outcome variable, the third row reports p-values for differences from the baseline group.
Models also include child age, female, race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity indicator, state
fixed effects, an indicator for 2010 survey, and state-level controls. * Significant at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5
percent. *** Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                     52
               Appendix Table 7: Effects of Medicaid physician fees (including all three waves)

                                  No control group                       With control group
                                   Fee effect on           Fee effect on     Fee effect on
                                       public                 private           public             Difference
Outcome                                  (1)                    (2)                  (3)               (4)
                                                  Panel A: Not having a usual source of care
No usual source of care                -0.90                 -0.29               -0.42              -0.12
                                      (1.32)                (0.85)              (0.90)             (0.69)
No usual source of care in             -3.02                  0.79               -4.46 **           -5.25 ***
doctor's office                       (3.35)                (1.09)              (2.12)             (1.90)
No regular health care                  0.27                  1.25               -0.01              -1.26
provider                              (1.28)                (1.14)              (0.78)             (1.07)
                                             Panel B: Having difficulties/delays accessing services
Difficulty/delay in access due         -1.68                   0.57                -0.77             -1.34
to cost                               (1.58)                 (0.59)               (1.16)            (0.90)
Difficulty/delay in access due         -2.32                  -0.13                -1.50             -1.38
to waiting lists/backlog              (1.54)                 (0.76)               (1.08)            (1.10)
Difficulty/delay in access due          0.21                  -0.03                 0.56              0.59
to lack of availability in area       (1.14)                 (0.45)               (1.07)            (1.08)
                                  Panel C: Not getting needed services due to cost, insurance, waiting times,
                                                            or lack of availability
Did not get needed routine             -1.07 **              -0.24                 -0.62 ***       -0.38
care                                  (0.44)                (0.29)                (0.18)          (0.24)
Did not get needed specialty           -3.26 *               -0.13                 -2.36 **        -2.23 **
doctor care                           (1.62)                (0.49)                (1.05)          (0.95)
Did not get needed mental              -1.91                  0.64                 -2.77 **        -3.40 *
health care                           (1.93)                (1.85)                (1.24)          (2.01)
Did not get needed therapy             -2.67                  0.60                 -0.55           -1.15
                                      (2.23)                (1.21)                (2.28)          (3.02)
                                             Panel D: Inadequacy of health insurance coverage
Costs covered by insurance             -1.60                2.54 **            -4.56 ***      -7.10 ***
never or sometimes
reasonable                            (1.94)                 (1.16)              (1.32)            (1.46)
Insurance never or                     -0.06                   1.15               -1.18             -2.33 **
sometimes covers needed
providers                             (2.59)                 (0.86)              (1.19)            (1.02)
Insurance benefits/coverage            -0.19                   1.12               -3.97 ***         -5.09 ***
never or sometimes meet
needs                                 (2.43)                 (0.85)              (1.32)            (1.61)


                                                                                                                53
                                                    Panel E: Family affected by child's health
 Spent over $500 out of                     2.11                2.03               -6.17 ***              -8.20 ***
 pocket                                   (1.62)              (1.32)              (1.75)                 (1.18)
 Child's health care caused                 3.68 **             2.23 ***            0.70                  -1.53
 financial problem                        (1.61)              (0.73)              (1.06)                 (1.18)
 Stopped working due to                     1.12               -0.44               -0.05                   0.39
 child's health                           (1.87)              (0.72)              (0.95)                 (0.95)
 Had to cut work hours to care              3.45 *              1.10                0.72                  -0.38
 for child                                (1.76)              (1.02)              (1.42)                 (1.50)
 Provided health care at home              -1.99               -1.40               -0.28                   1.11
 for child
                                          (2.97)                 (1.53)               (1.16)             (2.00)


Notes: Table shows estimated coefficients and robust standard errors clustered at the state level in parentheses
from linear probability model. Two sets of regressions are estimated: "no control group" where the sample is
restricted to publicly-insured children, and "with control group" where the sample also includes privately-insured
children. Table shows estimated coefficients on three variables only: fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; sum of fee ratio is
0.90 or higher and interaction between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher; interaction
between child has public insurance and fee ratio is 0.90 or higher. Models also include child age, female,
race/ethnicity, household size, parental education, severity indicator, state fixed effects, year fixed effects, and
state-level controls. The sample size is 75,285 for all outcomes, except for those in Panel C: not getting needed
routine care (62,012), specialty doctor (38,985), mental health care (18,071), and therapy (16,505). * Significant
at 10 percent. ** Significant at 5 percent. *** Significant at 1 percent.




                                                                                                                    54
