                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




 WHEN AND HOW TO USE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS IN INFRASTRUCTURE:
            LESSONS FROM THE INTERNATIONAL EXPERIENCE

                                        Eduardo Engel
                                       Ronald D. Fischer
                                      Alexander Galetovic

                                      Working Paper 26766
                              http://www.nber.org/papers/w26766


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    February 2020




We are thankful to Ed Glaeser, Keith Hennessey, James Poterba and conference participants for
their comments and suggestions. We thank Nicolás Campos for outstanding research assistance.
Fischer gratefully acknowledges the financial support from the Complex Engineering Systems
Institute (CONICYT - PIA - FB0816) and the Instituto Milenio MIPP IS130002. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been
peer-reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies
official NBER publications.

© 2020 by Eduardo Engel, Ronald D. Fischer, and Alexander Galetovic. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
When and How to Use Public-Private Partnerships in Infrastructure: Lessons From the International
Experience
Eduardo Engel, Ronald D. Fischer, and Alexander Galetovic
NBER Working Paper No. 26766
February 2020
JEL No. H11,H42,H83

                                          ABSTRACT

Public-private partnerships (PPPs) have emerged as a new organizational form to provide public
infrastructure over the last 30 years. Governments find them attractive because PPPs can be used
to avoid fiscal check-and-balances and increase spending. At the same time, PPPs can lead to
important efficiency gains, especially for transportation infrastructure. These gains include better
maintenance, reduced bureaucratic costs, and filtering white elephants. For these gains to
materialize, it is necessary to deal with the governance of PPPs, which is more demanding than
for the public provision of infrastructure. The governance can be improved by the use of contracts
with appropriate risk allocation and by avoiding opportunistic renegotiations, which have been
pervasive. The good news is that, based on the experience with PPPs over the last three decades,
we have learnt how to address these challenges.

Eduardo Engel                                    Alexander Galetovic
University of Chile                              Adolfo Ibáñez University
Department of Economics                          Diagonal Las Torres 2640
Diagonal Paraguay 257                            Peñalolen
Santiago                                         Santiago
CHILE                                            CHILE
emraengel@gmail.com                              alexander@galetovic.cl

Ronald D. Fischer
Centro de Economia Aplicada (CEA)
Departamento de Ingenieria Industrial
Universidad de Chile
Republica 701 Santiago CHILE
rfischer@dii.uchile.cl
Contents
1   Introduction                                                                                                   3

2   PPPs around the world                                                                                          7
    2.1   World infrastructure and PPPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        7
    2.2   PPPs in Europe and developing countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          9
          2.2.1    Europe . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    9
          2.2.2    Developing countries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     11

3   Why governments use PPPs: Fiscal accounting                                                                   12
    3.1   PPPs as a means of evading scal spending constraints . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            12
    3.2   Distorted Policy choices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    15
    3.3   Eurostat and scal accounting of PPPs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        15

4   Economic arguments for PPPs: Incentives, risk and e ciency                                                    15
    4.1   E ciency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    15
    4.2   Incentives and risk allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    18

5   Governance and renegotiations                                                                                 20
    5.1   Renegotiations are pervasive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      20
    5.2   The origin and consequence of renegotiations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .          21
    5.3   Governance and remedies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       23

6   PVR contracts                                                                                                 24
    6.1   Advantages of PVR contracts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       25
    6.2   PVR in practice . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     28
    6.3   Financing and renegotiations: theory and evidence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           29

7   Conclusion                                                                                                    31




                                                         2
1        Introduction
Public-private partnerships, also known as PPPs, P3s and concessions, emerged in recent decades as a new
organizational form to provide public infrastructure.2 Even though public provision continues to be the
dominant procurement option, investment in transport PPPs over the last 25 years has been considerable,
adding 203 billion in Europe and $535 billion in developing countries.3 In some countries, investment via
PPPs in other types of infrastructure, such as hospitals and schools has also been signi cant. By compari-
son, PPP investments in the US have been relatively small.
        PPPs are funded by a combination of user fees and government transfers. For example, when demand
is su ciently high, a toll road can be funded entirely with tolls, while government transfers are usually the
main funding source for schools and hospitals. In general, under a PPP the rm nances, builds, operates
and maintains the project. The contract term is long, usually of 20 to 40 years for a highway, and the
facility reverts to the government when the concession ends. At that point the government can initiate a
new concession, involving additional investments and revamping of the existing infrastructure, or manage
the infrastructure itself.

Why do governments choose PPPs? Political Economy reasons
        The main reason why governments have chosen PPPs is that this organizational form allows them to
spend more on infrastructure, for two related reasons. First and in contrast to public provision, most of
the investment via PPPs is not included as public debt, nor does it contribute to the scal de cit, at least in
the short run. This is attractive for governments constrained by scal rules or international agreements,
like the Maastricht Treaty, that limit their levels of debt and de cits.4 The second reason why PPPs allow
governments to spend more is that these investments are usually not subject to Congressional oversight
and other budgetary controls. Therefore, they allow incumbents more discretion.
        Nevertheless, the scal impact of a project in present value is the same, independently of the type of
procurement (PPP or traditional provision). For example, by choosing a PPP over traditional provision to
provide a toll road, government saves by not having to pay for the upfront investment. However, these
savings are equal, in present value, to the toll revenues government forgoes during the duration of the
concession. This equivalence result also debunks the often used argument that PPPs free up government
resources, an argument that ignores the scal impact of PPPs after the project is built.5
        It follows that investments in infrastructure via PPPs should be recorded in scal accounts in the same
way as public investments (see Engel et al., 2013, for a formal treatment) 6 The preferential treatment of
    2
      See Grimsey and Lewis (2004) and OECD (2008) for general introductions to PPPs.
    3
      Sources: EIB (1990-2018) and PPIAF (1990-2018).
    4
      "Cynics suspect that the government remains keen on PFI not because of the e ciency it allegedly o ers, but because it
allows ministers to perform a useful accounting trick." The Economist, July 2nd, 2009. PFI is the acronym for the UK's PPP
program.
    5
      "The boom [in PPPs] is good news for governments with overstretched public nances: many local and national authorities
have found themselves sitting on toll roads, ports, and airports that they can sell for billions of dollars to fund other public
services." Financial Times, July 5th, 2007.
    6
      This recommendation does not rule out having a dollar of investment in public infrastructure count less than a dollar of
other types of government expenditure as argued by Blanchard and Giavazzi (2004). It should be understood to mean that such
a di erential treatment should apply both to public provision and to PPPs.


                                                               3
PPPs has led to higher de cits and to projects being provided as PPPs when public provision was more
e cient.7
       Sometimes governments choose PPPs for ideological reasons: PPPs are a second best option to replace
an incompetent public sector with an e cient private sector when privatization is not possible. This argu-
ment is incorrect since rst, it omits that the private sector is involved in public provision of infrastructure:
as designers, builders and often as operators and maintainers of public infrastructure. Second, because pro-
viding e cient infrastructure services under a PPP requires stronger government capabilities than under
public provision. The nancial aspects of PPPs are more complex and there is more scope for opportunistic
behavior, because the contractual relationship between the rm and the government is long-lasting under
a PPP. These issues are at the core of the governance challenges for PPPs that we discuss below.

Why governments should choose PPPs: Economic reasons
       An economic argument for PPPs is that governments should choose PPPs over public provision when
they provide su cient e ciency gains. Since private rms are involved in building infrastructure projects
both under public provision and PPPs, e ciency gains do not arise from private participation per se, but
from the di erent incentives under both organizational forms. These may be due to di erences in risk
allocation, contract design, nancing, and political economy.
       Seven e ciency claims are advanced to prefer PPPs over public provision: narrow focus and dedicated
management, the advantages of bundling, fewer delays in construction, ltering white elephants, avoid-
ing the cost of bureaucracies, the disciplining e ects of private nancing and better (and often cheaper)
maintenance. We review these arguments next.

Narrow focus and dedicated management : A PPP is a private entity whose contracting relations with
employees, other rms and nanciers are governed by private law. This improves incentives, because
during the term of the PPP, the private rm can manage the infrastructure as a private entity, bound by
the contract with the Public Authority. Moreover, by creating a rm (called Special Purpose Vehicle or
SPV) to build and manage the infrastructure project, the scope of the rm is clearly de ned and bounded,
and the project gets a dedicated management team, which answers to the rm's board.

Bundling : PPPs provide incentives to make non-contractible investments during construction that may
reduce maintenance and operations costs over the lifecycle of the concession (Grout, 2003; Hart, 2003). No
such incentives are present under public provision since di erent rms are in charge of construction and
operations. This `bundling argument' in favor of PPPs requires that quality of service be contractible, for
otherwise the concessionaire may lower costs by degrading the quality of service. Singh (2018) provides
evidence that PPPs encourage the life-cycle approach toward maintenance.

Fewer construction delays: Incentives to avoid delays are large if a PPP can only begin charging user fees,
or receiving government transfers, once the project is operational.
   7
     "Some have argued that the structuring of Network Rail and the pursuit of PFI deals were in uenced by the scal rules in
place at the time. It is not for us to comment on the motivation behind these decisions, but it is possible to see why people might
believe that their statistical treatment may have played a part." Fiscal risks report. UK O ce of Budget Responsibility. 2017.




                                                                4
The two e ciency arguments in favor of PPPs that follow apply when the project is funded mainly with
user fees.

Filtering white elephants: In the absence of government transfers, PPPs will lter white elephants, since
no rm will be interested in a project where user fees cannot pay for capital and operational expenditures.
This insight goes back to Adam Smith.8

Avoiding the cost of bureaucracies: PPPs allow users to pay the rm building and operating the in-
frastructure asset directly, avoiding the e ciency costs associated with spending money via government
bureaucracies (see Engel et al., 2013, for a formal model). These e ciency costs are caused by two related
factors: the justi able rigidities in public spending, and to the costs of corruption those rigidities are meant
to reduce.

Advantages of private nancing : PPPs developed hand-in-hand with project nance, a technique based
on lending against the cash ow of a project that is legally and economically self-contained. Banks are usu-
ally the main nanciers during construction, helping to mitigate moral hazard by exercising tight control
over changes in the project's design and disbursing funds only gradually as project stages are completed.
The oversight under public provision is weaker due to increased moral hazard because of looser incentives.

Better and less expensive maintenance: In many countries there is a bias in spending in favor of new
infrastructure and against the maintenance of existing infrastructure, because new infrastructure is more
visible and can be used to increase an incumbent's reelection probability.9 Also, the annual logic of public
budgets makes it di cult to set aside resources for future maintenance at the time the project is built.
    The cost of poor maintenance under public provision can be very high. Not only is average quality
of service much lower than if maintenance were continuous but the overall cost of maintenance is much
higher. For example, in the case of highways, the cost of intermittent maintenance, that often involves
costly rehabilitations, has been estimated to be between 1.5 and 3 times the cost of continuous maintenance,
which is the most e cient approach.10 Recent studies (see Leslie, 2018, and references therein) suggest that
PPPs may involve important e ciency gains from better maintenance for other types of infrastructure
services, prominent among them hospitals.
    PPPs solve the maintenance problem of public provision if the quality of the services provided by the
infrastructure asset is contractible. It then su ces to include service quality speci cations in the contract
and to enforce them on a regular basis during the lifetime of the contract. In the case of highways, which
account for the largest fraction of investment in PPPs, the e ciency gains associated with better and
cheaper maintenance are likely to be large. On the cost side, these savings are somewhere between 10 and
16 percent of initial investments.11
    8
      "When high roads are made and supported by the commerce that is carried on by means of them, they can be made only
where that commerce requires them. [. . . ] A magni cent road cannot be made merely because it happens to lead to the country
villa of the intendant of the province [. . . ]" Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, 1776.
    9
      Rioja (2003) estimates, based on social welfare criteria, that one third of expenditures on new infrastructure should be allo-
cated to maintaining existing projects.
   10
      See TRiP (2013) for the lower bound, which applies to the US, and Engel et al. (2014) for the upper bound, which is obtained
for developing countries. The di erence grows with the extent to which the road is allowed to deteriorate before it is rehabilitated.
   11
      We arrive at this range as follows: Annual maintenance costs of a typical highway are typically between 2 and 3 percent of



                                                                 5
Governance and renegotiations
    Providing infrastructure services under a PPP requires higher government capabilities than under pub-
lic provision. Financing is more complex and there is more scope for opportunistic behavior, because the
contractual relationship between the rm and the government lasts much longer under a PPP. For this
reason, su cient state capabilities are needed for a successful PPP program.
    Many PPP projects have been bailed out by governments, which can turn the public against PPPs.
For example, public support for the Public Finance Initiative (or PFI) of the UK, never recovered after the
bailout of the London Underground PPP in 2008, which cost taxpayers somewhere between £170 million
and £410 million (NAO, 2018). This may explain, in part, why PPP investments in the last decade are a
small fraction of what they were at their peak in the early 2000s.
    Bailouts are one extreme form of renegotiation, where government fully takes downside risk. More
generally, contract renegotiations that modify the initial contract have been pervasive under PPPs. This
means that many of the avowed e ciency advantages of PPPs are not realized. Even though incomplete-
ness is to be expected in a complex contract that lasts several decades, the evidence suggests that renego-
tiations are often due to poor project and contract design, opportunistic behavior by concessionaires, the
desire of incumbents to increase spending in infrastructure, and outright corruption.
    When concessionaires expect to be bailed out if there is low demand for the project, PPPs do not
 lter white elephants. Similarly, incentives for careful project and contract design are weak when lack
of diligence at the design stage can be corrected by altering the project during construction. Even more
worrisome, when contract renegotiations become central to the PPP business model, rms that are good
at renegotiating and lobbying have an advantage, as they can bid more aggressively when the project is
tendered, in the expectation of recovering pro tability when renegotiations take place.
    In contrast to public provision, PPPs involve a long term relation between the concessionaire and
government. A bene t for the current government is that it can ask for additional works to the initial
project, and pay for it with an extension of the concession term or with payment obligations on future
administrations. The additional spending does not go through the usual budgetary oversight process. The
e ect is to reduce the resources available to future governments. Moreover, the new works are likely to
become more expensive because they are usually not tendered under competition.
    Recent evidence from Latin America shows a connection between renegotiations and corruption. Cam-
pos et al. (2019) consider all projects undertaken by the Brazilian conglomerate Odebrecht in eight coun-
tries over a ten year period, and nd that the average renegotiation, as a fraction of the initial investment,
was 71 percent for projects where bribes were paid, compared with 6 percent for projects with no bribes.
These percentages do not di er substantially between PPPs and public provision, suggesting that renego-
tiations are always problematic when providing public infrastructure.
    Costly renegotiations can be reduced by making them less attractive for concessionaires and public
authorities. For example, the contract can include the requirement that any signi cant addition to the
project should be assigned in a competitive auction, where the owners of the SPV cannot participate. An-
the initial investment. Over a thirty year period, discounted at 5 percent, this adds up to between 32 and 48 percent. Using the 3:1
ratio of maintenance costs under continuous and intermittent maintenance then leads to the 10 to 16 percent range for savings.



                                                                 6
other helpful measure in reducing the incentives to renegotiate is the creation of independent, specialized
entities that review and approve renegotiations to ensure that the SPV and its owners do not bene t from
the increased value of the project.
      Costly renegotiations can also be avoided by using contracts with better risk allocation. In the stan-
dard xed term highway PPP contract with tolls, the concessionaire bears all the exogenous demand risk.
This risk is in general beyond her control, and low realizations of demand often trigger renegotiations. In
contrast, a exible term contract, where the winning rm collects a xed amount in user fees (in present
value), eliminates demand risk borne by the concessionaire. These Present-Value-of-Revenue (PVR) con-
tracts have a built-in renegotiation, by extending the contract term when the demand realization is low,
without the need to modify the contract, thereby avoiding that source of opportunistic behavior.
      Chile began using PVR contracts for most transportation PPPs in 2007 and reformed its PPP legislation
in 2010. The reform created the independent technical panel that reviews and authorizes renegotiations,
and requires the owners of the SPV to auction the works required by all major additions to the initial
project. The combination of both policy innovations was followed by a reduction in renegotiations, as a
fraction of investment, of more than 90 percent.
      The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. In section 2 we brie y review some data about
global and regional PPP spending, and show that PPPs are a modest share of total infrastructure spending.
Section 3 explains how current scal accounting practices stimulate the use of PPPs for the wrong reasons.
Section 4 discusses the e ciency gains potentially brought about by PPPs. Section 5 deals with renegoti-
ations, perhaps the main threat to the PPP model of procurement. Section 6 describes the PVR contract,
which corrects many of the defects of xed-term contracts. Section 7 concludes.


2      PPPs around the world
2.1     World infrastructure and PPPs
Governments use PPPs to procure infrastructure.12 Comprehensive gures of world infrastructure spend-
ing are notoriously di cult to obtain. Available estimates of global infrastructure and PPP spending come
from a few studies by global consultancy rms and must be parsed from several studies. We now will
see that available data suggests that PPP spending accounts for about 3 percent of global infrastructure
spending, and 8 percent of private infrastructure spending.13
      According to Airoldi et al. (2013, Exhibit 1), world public and private infrastructure spending, excluding
telecoms, averaged about USD 2.7 trillion in 2008-2010.14 As can be seen in column 1 of Table 1, spending
can be broken down in transportation (USD 1,040 billion); social infrastructure (USD 490 billion), water
and waste (USD 160 billion), oil and gas transmission (USD 190 billion), and electricity (USD 810 billion).
   12
      There are variations about what classi es as infrastructure. Ports, airports, railroads and roads are almost universally included
in any list and called "transport infrastructure". "Social infrastructure" includes government buildings and facilities, schools, jails
and hospitals. "Energy" includes electricity (generation, transmission and distribution) and pipelines (oil and gas). "Sanitary
infrastructure" includes waste management and water (production, distribution, sewerage and treatment). Finally, sometimes
telecom investments (cable or ber optic transmission, towers, base stations, xed line and satellites) are included.
   13
      What follows is based on Engel et al. (2014b)
   14
      This estimate includes 69 countries which account for about 96 percentage of world GDP.


                                                                  7
Transportation, in turn, can be broken down in ports (USD 110 billion), airports (USD 80 billion), rail (USD
400 billion) and roads (USD 450 billion). Moreover, according to the consultancy Infonetics, global capex
spending in telecomm was about USD 300 billion in 2011. Hence, yearly global infrastructure spending is
about USD 3 trillion, around 5 percentage of world GDP.

           Table 1: World Infrastructure Spending and PPPs, 2008-2010, Annual, USD Billions

                                           Total                     Private
                                          Public +      PPP         Non-PPP       Corporate
                                          Private     (project      (project        nance
                                                       nance)        nance)
                Transport                  1040      [45 -- 75]         --            n.a.
                 Airports                    80
                 Ports                      110
                 Railroads                  400
                 Roads                      450

                Social infrastructure       490      [12 -- 20]         --            n.a.

                Water and waste             160                         --            n.a.

                Oil, gas (transmission)     200                        n.a.           n.a.

                Electricity                 810       [3 -- 5]     [140 -- 160]       n.a.

                Telecoms                    300                     [42 -- 48]        n.a.
                Total                       3000
                Total private               1000     [60 -- 100]   [180 -- 220]   [680 -- 760]
                World GDP 2010             63000

   Also according to Airoldi et al. (2013, Exhibit 1), private infrastructure spending is about one-third
of total infrastructure spending. With some extrapolation to telecoms, this implies that private spending
in infrastructure is about USD 1 trillion. Private infrastructure is funded through PPP project nance,
through other project nance and by standard corporate nance. We have not found a breakdown of
private infrastructure investment by type of infrastructure.
   Estimates of PPP investment are rather sparse. We built the following estimate, reported in column 2
of Table 1, with information from Inderst (2013) and Blanc-Brude and Ismail (2013). Note that most PPPs
are nanced with project nance. According to Inderst (2013), who cites Dealogic (2013), total project
 nance around the world in 2012 was USD 382 billion--total project nance for infrastructure projects
varies between USD 280 billion and USD 320 billion. According to Inderst (2013, p. 24), PPPs represent
between USD 60 billion and USD 110 billion per year of project nancs.
   It can also be seen in Table 1 that around 75 percent of PPP spending is in the transport sector, that is,
between USD 45 and USD 75 billion per year. Another 20 percent of PPP spending nances government
services (between USD 12 and USD 20 billion per year), while the remainder (between USD 3 and USD
5 billion per year) is invested in the electricity, telecoms, and water and waste sectors. It follows that
PPP spending is only a small fraction of global infrastructure spending: around 3 percent of total world

                                                     8
infrastructure spending and around 8 percent of private infrastructure spending.

2.2      PPPs in Europe and developing countries
Both PPP spending and the number of projects are relatively small, and for that same reason, both the
composition and size of PPP investment varies from year to year. To gain some perspective about recent
developments in PPP spending, we present some data from Europe and from developing countries.

2.2.1     Europe




Figure 1: Number and Value of PPP projects in the European Union. Source: https://data.eib.org/
epec/sector/all.

       In the European Union, infrastructure PPPs emerged in the 1990's and grew until the 2008 crisis, peak-
ing at 26.8B in 129 projects in 2007. Since then the number of projects fell, and in 2018 there were 39
projects worth 14.6B, see gure 1.
       All in all, since the 1990s 1,841 PPP projects were undertaken in the entire European Union, valued at
383.2B.15 The average project value of 480MM. As can be seen in gure 2, which decomposes the value
of projects by sector, more than half of the investments (54.8 percent) were in roads (391 projects of about
500MM on average), followed at a big distance by healthcare (393 projects of about 129MM on average)
and 443 education projects, with an average investment of 81MM.
       However, these investments are a small fraction of EU investments in infrastructure. The European
Economic Association (EEA), the EU plus Switzerland, Norway, Iceland and Lichtenstein and Croatia,
records investments in transport infrastructure. During the period 1995-2014, average annual EEA road
infrastructure investment was 62.5 B. Considering all transportation sectors (road, rail, inland water sea
  15
       Source for the data in the paragraph: https://data.eib.org/epec/sector/all.


                                                       9
      Figure 2: Value of PPPs by sector 1990-2918. Source: \https://data.eib.org/epec.




Figure 3: Investment in Transport Infrastructure EEA. Source: https://www.eea.europa.eu/
data-and-maps/indicators/infrastructure-investments/assessment-3




                                            10
and air) this average increases to 111.5B. Transport PPPs represent 9 percent of transport investment in
the EU. For Europe, PPPs are a complement and not the main source of transport investment.
    Notwithstanding their small proportion of total infrastructure expenditure, in some of these countries
PPP projects represented substantial additions to the transport infrastructure. For instance in Portugal,
between 1999 and 2008, 1,300km of highways were built using PPPs. Since before1999, Portugal only had
2,000km of highways, this represented a 65 percent increase in the highway stock in 9 less than a decade.16

2.2.2   Developing countries

The Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) keeps a database of PPP projects in developing coun-
tries, classi ed by type of investment (transport, energy, telecom and water and sanitation related). Be-
tween 1990 and 2018 there were 1,762 transport projects (Railroads, Roads, Ports and Airports) for a com-
bined investment value of USD 535 billion. The average project size in the case of roads was USD 287MM,
close to the project average of USD 304B. Figure 4 shows the evolution of the PPPs in value as well as in
number of projects.17




                                                                 PPIAF PPPs
                                 70.000                                                                      180

                                 60.000                                                                      160
                                                                                                             140
                                 50.000




                                                                                                                   Number of PPPs
                   Value MMUS$




                                                                                                             120
                                 40.000                                                                      100
                                 30.000                                                                      80
                                                                                                             60
                                 20.000
                                                                                                             40
                                 10.000                                                                      20
                                     -                                                                       0
                                          1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016 2018

                                                         PPP project values      Project count




          Figure 4: Evolution of the number of PPP projects and their value, developing countries

    The relative importance of the di erent sectors of PPP transport investments in developing countries
are shown in table 2. Roads represent around half of projects and investments in transport PPPs. Ports
represent the smallest investment on average, because in most cases the PPP consists of an operational
   16
      Major highway growth in Portugal, March 2010, Highways Routes du Monde, http://www.worldhighways.com/
sections/eurofile/features/major-highway-growth-in-portugal/.
   17
      We include projects only when they reach nancial closure, which explains why the data runs from 1994 to 2018 (half year).
PPPIAF includes projects with private participation that are not PPPs. These amount to 310 projects worth US$46B, i.e., less than
10 percent by value.


                                                                        11
franchise and the requirement of investing in new equipment. Usually they do not include new port
infrastructure. In the case of airports, with a very high average project value of 670MM, the average is
raised by two outliers, the US$35B IGA airport in Turkey and the combined US$20B in the Guarulos (Sao
Paulo) and the Rio de Janeiros' airport, both in Brazil. In fact, the median project size is far smaller than
the average size in the case of airports.

                   Table 2: Number and investment in PPPs by sector, developing countries
 Sector        Projects   Total Investment (MUS$)        Avg. Project Size MUS$       % of PPP Investment      % of projects
 Airports          142                        95.085                           670                      17,8              8,1
 Roads             921                       264.219                           287                      49,4             52,3
                                                                                                                              Source:
 Ports             469                        69.839                           149                      13,1             26,6
 Railways          228                       105.601                           463                      19,7             13,0
 Total           1760                     534.744                      304                   100,0           100,0
    PPIAF. Note: We exclude 2 projects that combine sectors: a US$79.5M railways and Port project on India and a
                              USD$17.7M port and railway project in Mozambique.




3        Why governments use PPPs: Fiscal accounting
In many, if not most cases, PPPs have been attractive to policy makers because they promise to relax
the scal constraints that limit resources for infrastructure projects. The government can build schools,
hospitals, roads and airports without their cost representing an increase in scal de cits. A second reason
is that often PPPs coincide with political preferences for an increase in the scope of the private sector.18

3.1      PPPs as a means of evading scal spending constraints
As mentioned in the introduction, PPPs investment is not considered to be part of the scal de cit. This
is true even when the PPPs involve periodic payments to the private party. Thus governments that are
 scally constrained may nd it an attractive way of evading these constraints to indulge in politically
attractive infrastructure spending. In fact, this seems to have been the main incentive for the use of PPPs
in Europe. In the UK, the Private Finance Initiative (PFI), led to increases in public investment that were
not recorded in the standard measures of public debt.19 According to the PFI and PF2 National Accounting
O ce (NAO) 2018 Report:

            "The O ce for Budget Responsibility's (OBR's) July 2017 scal risks report cited the use
         of o -balance sheet vehicles like PFI as an example of a ` scal illusion'." [. . . ] "The debt is
         recorded as a nancial liability but as noted by the OBR "most public and political atten-
         tion, and the government's scal rules, still concentrate on the National Accounts measures
    18
     There is no agreement on whether or how to include PPPs in the public accounts and in the government's balance sheet. See
Heald (1997, 2002, 2010), Grimsey and Lewis (2002), Heald and Georgiou (2011) and Schwartz et al. (2008, part four).
  19
     As a signatory to the Maastricht Accord, the UK was required to keep its scal de cit below a maximum de cit.



                                                             12
       Figure 5: PFI Past and Forecast Unitary Charge Payments. Source: PFI and PF2 NAO 2018 Report


         of PSND (Public Sector Net Debt) and PSNB (Public Sector Net Borrowing)," which does not
         re ect fully PFI liabilities. PFI can be attractive to government as recorded levels of debt will
         be lower over the short to medium term ( ve years ahead) even if it costs signi cantly more
         over the full term of a 25-30 year contract."

       These policies encumbered the UK with average annual payments of £7.7B, for the following 25 years,
beginning in 2017-18, according to the NAO 2018 Report. This represents 0.5 percent of the national
budget until the decade of the 30's, see gure 5. The UK invented the concept of "value for money " (VfM) to
determine which projects should be built using PPPs and which ones should use public provision. However,
VfM is a concept that is easily manipulated, even in a developed country such as the UK.20
       Portugal received 20 billion in PPP investments in roads, hospitals and other projects in the period
1995-2014. Most of the investment was in highways that used shadow tolls (94 percent of PPP investment).
The minimum guaranteed payments represents 1 percent of GDP, annualy, in 2014-2020, falling to 0,5
percent of GDP until 2030. In a study of Portuguese PPPs, Sarmento and Renneboog (2014). write that
"[. . . ] the incentive to resort to PPPs was mainly to avoid budget constraints, but not to use of public
resources better by taking advantage of private sector [. . . ]".
       Even the case of a PPP that charges user fees, such as a tolled road, does not represent a break from
the principle that PPPs have the same e ect as public provision on the intertemporal budget constraint of
the government. Note that the Public Authority could have created a public Single Purpose Vehicle (SPV)
which could contract a private rm to design and build the same road, charge the same tolls and generate
  20
     "A robust VfM assessment is important for all public sector investment decisions. Any public body procuring an asset which
will be privately nanced has to compare the VfM of private nance against a public sector comparator (PSC). It has an incentive
to show that private nance o ers better value for money than the PSC as unless alternative capital funding is made available
the project is unlikely to proceed. We previously concluded in our 2013 report Review of the VfM assessment process for PFI that
these VfM assessments have features which favour and advantage PFI in comparison to a publicly nanced approach." National
Audit O ce, HM Treasury: "PFI and PF2", 2018, p. 19.


                                                              13
as much toll revenue as the private party. This SPV could have issued a bond whose repayment is tied to
toll revenues, and it would in principle have access to conditions that are identical to those of the private
party.21 Thus in using the PPP approach to build a project, the Public Authority is not obtaining additional
resources from those it could have obtained by itself.
    The advantages of PPPs must lie elsewhere, for example, in e ciency gains, as discussed in the intro-
duction and the section that follows.

                          Table 3: Fiscal accounting: Funding from government transfers

                                          Public provision                             PPP
                       Now:             Issue 100 in debt                   "Save" 100 in debt
                       Now:        Spend 100 on infrastructure          Spend 100 on infrastructure
                       Future:         Collect 100 in taxes                Collect 100 in taxes
                       Future:        Pay bondholders 100                 Pay concessionaire 100


    We have shown (Engel et al., 2013) that the e ects of PPPs on the intertemporal balance sheet are
no di erent from those of public provision. Table 3 provides the intuition when funding comes from
government transfers. The rst column shows the dynamics of debt and spending under public provision,
the second column under PPP. In both cases, the infrastructure that is built today comes with a commitment
to collect taxes in the future, in the same amount, and therefore the initial investment should count as
public debt in both cases.
    Table 4 considers the case where user fees fund the project. Now, for both organizational forms, build-
ing the infrastructure entails a commitment to collect user fees in the future, in the same amount, to pay
for the debt. It follows that the upfront investments should be counted as debt for a PPP as well.

                          Table 4: Fiscal accounting: Funding from government transfers

                                     Public provision                                  PPP
                  Now:             Issue 100 in debt                        "Save" 100 in debt
                  Now:        Spend 100 on infrastructure              Spend 100 on infrastructure
                  Future:       Collect 100 in user fees                 Give up 100 in user fees
                  Future:        Pay bondholders 100                Concession collects 100 in user fees

    Another way in which PPPs can be used to increase current expenditure occurred in the case of the
Chicago Skyway, a 7.8 mile toll road linking downtown Chicago to the Indiana State line. The $1.83 billion
bid for a 99 year lease allowed the city government to retire the remaining Skyway bonds, save some funds
for the future, and use almost all of the remaining $475 million to increase current spending. The e ciency
gains of the contract were minimal, being at most a reduction in operating costs of $1 million a year (see
Engel et al., 2014).
   21
      This is perhaps not possible due to other factors, but while relevant, these indirect e ects do not a ect the principle that
there is no direct e ect of a PPP on the intertemporal budget constraint.


                                                               14
3.2        Distorted Policy choices
The choice between PPPs and public provision of infrastructure is distorted because PPPs are at least
partially excluded from the balance sheet. This distortion disappears if PPPs are included in toto in the
balance sheet at the inception of the contract. As revenues accrue and the time at which the PPP contract
ends comes nearer, the balance sheet incorporates these revenues on the revenue side. By doing this, the
choice between doing a project as a PPP or as a public project is not distorted by the fact that the costs
of the project are charged onto the future. In that case, choice between PPPs and traditional provision of
infrastructure would depend only on which approach is demonstrably more e cient in the provision of
infrastructure.

3.3        Eurostat and scal accounting of PPPs
In order to limit the unrestricted use of PPPs for unrecorded scal expenditure, Eurostat introduced ac-
counting rules for PPPs (Eurostat, 2016). The new rules made a distinction between PPPs funded primarily
with user fees or tolls and those PPPs funded mainly by government transfers. Eurostat considers toll
funded PPPs as o -balance sheet as a general rule, unless there exist government guarantees that are
deemed substantial. In contrast, the treatment of government funded PPPs seems to have been a com-
promise between the forces pushing for the exclusion of PPPs altogether from the government balance
sheet, and those that found that it was an unsound scal policy, as events would show in the aftermath of
the world nancial crisis of 2008. The classi cation of a particular government funded PPP project as on-
or o -balance sheet depends on the answer to 84 yes-no questions divided into 11 sections.22 In particu-
lar, there should be no mechanism, such as a government guarantee or early termination provisions, that
transfers the risks back to government.
         Summing up, Eurostat guidelines are ine ectual in limiting the use of PPPs to circumvent budgetary
controls, as their main focus is on risk sharing, not on their budgetary implications. This has not always
been the case. In the 1980s the UK used the so called `Ryrie Rules' for PPP projects.23 They allowed private
 nance of public infrastructure only be used if public expenditure was reduced by the same amount. These
rules were abandoned under the PFI program of the mid 90s.


4        Economic arguments for PPPs: Incentives, risk and e ciency
4.1        E ciency
PPPs are a response to the perceived shortcomings of traditional provision of government infrastructure. It
is important to recognize this point of departure, for it con rms that PPPs are a di erent way of procuring
infrastructure, not a form of privatizing government assets and functions.
    22
      For example, question 70 asks "does the (private) partner bear the construction risk and at least one of either the availability
or the demand risks?." If the answer is `no', the asset is classi ed on the government's balance sheet. If the answer is `yes',
additional conditions must be met for the asset to be kept o the government's balance sheet.
   23
      See Heald and McLeod (2002) for an insightful discussion of the Ryrie rules. Maskin and Tirole (2008) provide a model for
how PPPs are used to elude budgetary constraints.



                                                                 15
   With traditional provision, incentives tend to be weak, because public agencies have multiple objectives
and principals, scal accounting practices are not the right tools to monitor performance, and earnings do
not reward employees and owners. Moreover, laws and the legislature constrain hiring, purchasing amd
contracting practices, and the organizational and management structure of the organization is determined
by statute. Finally, the scale and scope of the organization that manages projects is set largely by the
exogenously given administrative structure of the government, not by any e ciency consideration or
regard for the optimal scope of the organization.
   The consequences of poor incentives are also well known. The infrastructure assets are poorly main-
tained, because budgets are subject to yearly appropriations, maintenance expenditures are less visible
than new works, and sometimes poor design and construction increases the cost of maintenance. Conse-
quently, the quality of service in general tends to be low. In addition, project selection tends to be poor,
both because demand is systematically overstated, and because costs and building times are underesti-
mated (Flyvbjerg, 2003). Worse, pork barrel projects and poor planning often build white elephants.
   Subcontracting tasks to private rms has been the main means whereby private incentives were brought
into public provision. PPPs represent a di erent organizational form that goes beyond hiring contractors
to build a project. Under a PPP, the private concern creates a private entity--a so called special purpose
vehicle or SPV-- in charge of nancing, delivering and operating a public project. While the relation be-
tween the state and the SPV is still governed by public law, the SPV is a private rm and its contracting
relations with employees, other rms, and nanciers are governed by private law. This improves incen-
tives, because during the term of the PPP, the SPV has discretion to manage the infrastructure as a private
 rm. Moreover, by creating an SPV, the scope of the rm is clearly de ned and limited, and the project
gets a dedicated management team, which answers to the SPV board.
   The literature also notes that a PPP is an intertemporal contract between the government and a private
 rm which bundles nance, construction, maintenance, and operations. Hart (2003) has shown that the
theoretical bene ts brought about by PPPs arise in part from bundling design, building, operation, and
maintenance. The reasoning is that since the concessionaire will operate and maintain the project, it
will design and build it to minimize life cycle costs. Moreover, provided that the quality of conservation
can be measured and required by the contract, it is in the interest of the concessionaire to maintain the
infrastructure continuously.
   Bundling, however, introduces a basic trade o , identi ed by Hart (2003): other things equal, it stim-
ulates investments and actions that cut life-cycle costs and other costs more generally. Nevertheless, this
cost cutting may occur at the expense of service quality and user welfare; this is commonly known as
"Hart's tradeo ." Thus, there is a strong presumption that PPPs will work well only if maintenance, qual-
ity and performance standards can be described clearly in the contract and can then be enforced. This is
the case of roads, for example.
   The theoretical advantages of bundling have proven di cult to test, but the bene ts in terms of main-
tenance are clear. As we have already mentioned, governments often do not perform regular, continuous
maintenance because the e ect of the resources that are used is not salient to the public. There are more
politically attractive uses for these resources: completely new infrastructure projects, or the repairs of


                                                    16
severely deteriorated infrastructure. In both cases, the bene ts are obvious and contrast with the lack of
perceived bene ts from routine maintenance. On the other hand, a PPP owner is very interested in rou-
tine maintenance if quality standards are enforced. The rm is aware of the increased costs of reactive
maintenance and of the penalties associated to insu cient maintenance and will manage the project so
that it is correctly maintained at all times. As mentioned in the introduction, continuous maintenance of
a highway not only provides considerably better quality of service but also is much cheaper.
       There is some anecdotal evidence that PPP projects tend to be delivered on time, which suggests
stronger performance incentives. For example, Raisbeck, Du eld and Xu (2010) found that in a sam-
ple of 21 PPP projects and 31 traditional projects in Australia, the time "between the signing of the nal
contract and project completion, PPPs were found to be completed 3.4% ahead of time on average, while
traditional projects were completed 23.5% behind time." Indeed, if the rm starts to receive revenues only
when the project starts to operate, there is a cost to delays, and an incentive to nish construction as fast
as possible. In the particular case of xed term contracts nanced with user fees, this incentive is even
stronger, because delays in construction cut into the revenue generating period. On-time delivery also
requires better planning, project design, and execution, all of which may lead to reduced cost overruns.24
       Even under PPPs, the government is responsible for planning what to build (network planning and
coordination), whether a particular project should be built (cost-bene t appraisal), and when it should be
built. In addition, there are arguments for and against delegating project design to the concessionaire. The
argument in favor of delegating design is that it takes advantage of the creativity of the private sector
and transfers design risk to the concessionaire. But the case can be made that governments who delegate
project design tend not to have a full understanding of the projects they procure in the rst place, nor of
the risks they confront. The relevant point here is that it is unlikely that delegating project planning to
the concessionaire will systematically increase productive or dynamic e ciency. A case can be made for
collaboration between the two parties in improving a government designed project after the bidder has
been selected in a competitive process.25
       Two additional sources of e ciency gains appear when the PPP is nanced with user fees. First, the
transfer of resources to the private rm is direct. In contrast, in a publicly funded project, the resources for
construction, maintenance and operations are collected through taxes, and wend their way through the
government bureaucracy, until eventually they reach their destination in the private rm that performs
those tasks. The direct approach eliminates the costs associated to this bureaucracy. The second bene t is
that tolling can be used to deal with congestion and increase allocative e ciency. In a congested highway,
the marginal cost should include the congestion externality. Moreover, given that the taxes used to provide
a free publicly provided highway create distortions, it might well be that a PPP with user fees is more
e cient globally than a free publicly provided road with a larger congestion externality. In fact a globally
  24
      A rule of thumb in construction says that if the project is delayed, outlays in materials and labor directly employed in
construction are postponed as well, but overheads continue to be incurred. A second rule of thumb says that overhead is roughly
one-third of the yearly and total cost of a project. Thus if T years is the estimated duration of the project and yearly outlays are
equal to 100, then an delay of t years creates an overrun of the order of (100t/3T). Thus, delays create cost overruns. Source: Klaus
Grewe, personal communication.
   25
      An alternative auction process for complex projects is for the government to assign the project to the best project for purpose,
given the resources announced for the project.



                                                                 17
optimal scal policy would set tolls slightly higher than the optimal congestion toll, because by so doing
the government can reduce distortionary taxation elsewhere (see Engel et al. 2013).26

4.2      Incentives and risk allocation
Risk allocation is one of the main functions of the PPP contract. Following Irwin (2007) we can classify
risks into eight categories: (a) construction risk, including design aws, cost overruns, and delays; (b)
operation and maintenance; (c) availability under the terms agreed in the contract; (d) residual value at
the end of the PPP contract; (e) policy, ranging from macroeconomic uncertainty to government actions
that a ect the project; (f) demand; (g) nancial (e.g. interest rate and exchange rate uctuations); and (h)
political (e.g. regulatory takings or expropriation).
       Irwin (2007, p. 65) states the principles that should be used to assign each risk: allocate them to maxi-
mize project value, considering each party's ability to in uence, anticipate, and absorb risk (and transaction
costs). This implies risks should be borne, at least in part, by the party best equipped to control them. At
the same time, an exogenous risk should be shifted to the party best endowed to bear or diversify it.
       Consider construction risk. The builder controls the time to complete the project, and the cost of
building it. The concessionaire should thus bear these risks, perhaps with the exception of delays caused
by disputes about the application of eminent domain. Similarly, because diligence during construction
in uences the availability of the facility during operation, it is e cient for the concessionaire to bear
operation, maintenance cost, and service quality risk.
       Bundling, control, and service standards are all required to ensure that these risks are e ectively borne
by the concessionaire. For example, it may be harder (i.e., more expensive) to make a concessionaire re-
sponsible for service quality if it was not responsible for building the facility (hence the importance of
bundling) or if the concessionaire has no control over investment and operational decisions (hence the im-
portance of control, or ownership, rights). Similarly, without objective and measurable service standards,
it is di cult to transfer service quality risk to the concessionaire.
       As Hall (1998) points out, risk allocation depends in part on how the concessionaire is remunerated.
As mentioned above, to create strong incentives to complete the project on time, the rm should receive
payments only after the facility starts to operate. Similarly, availability payments which are contingent on
meeting service quality standards generate strong incentives for adequate maintenance and performance.
By contrast, when payments do not depend on performance or, worse, the rm can transfer cost overruns
to taxpayers, PPPs reproduce the weak incentives of public provision.
       Some of the risks are created by government policies. Because the residual value of PPP assets de-
pends on government planning decisions (not to mention that most assets are project speci c), and the
willingness to charge tolls in future concessions, it is sensible to transfer the residual value risk to the
government. This happens when the concessionaire recovers its initial investment over the term of the
contract, and then transfers the residual value to the government. This principle suggests, as well, that
an e cient policy would have some policy risks borne by the government, so as to reduce its own moral
  26
    A nal advantage of PPPs nanced by user tolls is that the private rm may be less responsive to petitions to lower user fees
than a publicly elected o cial.



                                                             18
hazard.
       Broadly speaking, policy risks fall into two categories. First, the government may implement policies
that directly a ect the project and have few other e ects. For example, it may change the rules to expro-
priate the concessionaire. These principles indicate that these risks should be borne by the government, to
prevent opportunism. Second, actions by the government or the legislature may unintentionally a ect the
PPP. For example, currency devaluation may reduce a foreign rm's return, or a change in environmental
standards may require additional investments. In these cases, the concessionaire is in the same position
as any other private rm in the economy. Therefore, these are standard business risks. This principle is
routinely overlooked.27 For example, governments often grant foreign concessionaires insurance against
devaluations. Not only does this discriminate against local investors, but it also discriminates against for-
eign rms in other sectors of the economy that bear this risk. More generally, policy risks that do not target
the project speci cally and that a ect most rms in the economy (for example, those caused by monetary
policy) should be treated as exogenous and allocated according to general principles of risk diversi cation.
       Perhaps the main exogenous risk in a PPP project nanced by user fees is uncertainty about demand.
As mentioned above, the general principle is that exogenous demand risk should be borne by the party
best able to bear it. If the private rm assumes demand risk, taxpayers are in fact purchasing an insurance
contract on an exogenous risk that they assume under public provision (see Engel et al. 2014a, chapter 5).
As Hall (1998) notes, this is not cost e ective. Demand forecasts are notoriously imprecise and changes
in policy, which are unknown at the time of tendering, may radically a ect the usage of the facility, yet
there is little that the rm can do about it. Even the design of the project is usually determined by the
government. In those cases, either a present-value-of-revenue contract (see section 6) or an availability
contract are the appropriate compensation scheme, depending on whether the main source of funds are
user fees or government transfers.
       The principle of transferring exogenous demand risk to the government admits one important excep-
tion. When user fees are a PPP's only source of remuneration, the willingness of private rms to bid for
the contract is a market signal that demand is su cient (at least in expectation). This introduces a market
test that is usually absent in infrastructure services and that helps to avoid white elephants. If there are
no bidders at an auction, this is a signal that the project is not privately pro table and therefore there is a
risk that the project is a white elephant unless it has large positive externalities.
       As in the case of demand risk, nancial risk is largely outside the rm's control. This does not mean,
however, that the government should bear interest rate or exchange rate risk. Other rms in the economy
do not receive this favoured treatment, and rms can choose among alternative capital structures. More
generally, governments are not particularly e cient at providing and selling nancial insurance.
  27
    García-Kilroy and Rudolph (2017) argue that governments should o er currency risk sharing arrangements, when nancial
markets fail to do so. They describe experiences where this has been done, at a price close to what would have been a market
price..




                                                            19
5        Governance and renegotiations
Given the often unsatisfactory results of PPP programs in infrastructure, it is worthwhile to study whether
this is due to di culties in the governance of PPPs. At a minimum, a PPP-capable country requires a level
of institutions that allow private parties to invest large amounts in sunk projects in the expectation that
they will receive a return. In particular, it requires that the revenue stream associated to the project can be
pledged to third parties and that they are rst in line if the SPV associated to the PPP fails. Furthermore,
there has to be a reasonable expectation that the investment cannot be expropriated without compensation.
These conditions may preclude PPP investment in some countries.28
         However, even in countries that satisfy these minimal requirements, there is no guarantee that an
infrastructure PPP will be successful. We deal with some of these problems in this section.

5.1        Renegotiations are pervasive
PPPs are routinely renegotiated. This has been well known since Guasch (2004) examined nearly 1,000
Latin American concession contracts awarded between the mid-1980s and 2000, and found that 54.4 percent
of those in transportation (including roads, ports, tunnels, and airports) had been renegotiated. When
Mexico privatized highways in the late 1980s, Mexican taxpayers had to pay more than US$ 13 billion after
renegotiation of the initial contracts. In Chile, 47 out of the 50 Chilean PPP concessions awarded by the
Ministry of Public Works between 1992 and 2005 had been renegotiated by 2006, and one of every four
dollars invested had been obtained through renegotiation (see Engel et al., 2009b). More recently Engel et
al. (2019a) analyzed 535 renegotiations of 59 highway PPPs in Colombia, Peru, and Chile. Renegotiations
per concession/year average 9.5 percent of the initial investment in Colombia, 3.6 percent in Peru, and 1.3
percent in Chile. More than 45 percent of renegotiations (by dollar amount), occur during construction.
And at least 60 percent of the renegotiated spending increase falls on future administrations.29
         One might think that renegotiations occur mainly in emerging economies, where governance is weak.
They are also pervasive in developed countries, however, as documented long ago by Gómez-Ibáñez and
Meyer (1993). For example, three of the four highway concessions awarded in France in the early 1970s
went bankrupt after the 1973 oil shock and were bailed out by the government. Similarly, several of the
twelve highway concessions awarded in Spain in the 1970s had higher costs than anticipated, while tra c
    28
     Or if it exists, it must be supported by multilateral nancial institutions, see Engel et al. (2014a).
    29
     Renegotiations are not only common in transportation infrastructure. An example from the sanitation sector are the two
concessions for water utilities in Manila, Phillippines, in 1997. As noted in Wu and Malaluan (2007), the state owned utility was
divided geographically into two companies serving the city, and put up for auction of 25 year concessions. The two winning
consortia o ered tari s that were 26 and 56% of the previous rates. However, by 2002 they had managed to renegotiate their
contracts and double the prices (using the Asian crisis as an argument), and then almost doubled them again in 2005. Moreover,
the companies invested less than speci ed in their contracts, at least until 2003, when Manila Water began to expand investment
rapidly, perhaps because after the change in tari s the implied rate of return on assets rose to 9%. Despite this, due to bad
management, the other company, Manilad, went bankrupt (in 2003) after its petition for even larger tari increases were denied.
Regardless of the adverse e ects of raising rates, there were compensating bene ts from privatization: a massive expansion in
connections by 30% in the rst ve years of operation, and in Manila Water, non revenue water (lost to theft or because of
leaking pipes) decreased from almost 58% to 35%, while the response to service complaints and the time to repair leaks improved
substantially. We can conclude from this case that unless precautions are taken, the bids of companies can be renegotiated to the
advantage of the winners at the expense of the public, but in some cases even then the public can bene t. For a more critical
evaluation see Esguerra (2003).


                                                               20
was lower than expected, causing three highways to go bankrupt and the remaining contracts to be rene-
gotiated. Spain seems to be a serial subsidizer of PPPs at the expense of the public: in November 2010, all
political parties agreed that it was necessary to bail out, among others, the seven PPP highways running
into Madrid (see Engel et al., 2018b).
       Industry participants often claim that circumstances change over the life of a concession. Because
most PPP contracts last for several decades, renegotiations of inherently incomplete contracts are to be
expected. Renegotiations thus provide the exibility necessary to adapt to changing conditions. While
there is some truth to this argument, it ignores two disturbing features of most renegotiations. First,
they often occur shortly after contracts are awarded. For example, Guasch (2004, p. 14) nds that the
average time to renegotiation was only 2.2 years after the concession was awarded, and 60 percent of all
renegotiated contracts had been renegotiated within the rst three years after the concession award. Engel
et al. (2009) show that 78 percent of the amounts awarded in renegotiations of PPPs in Chile were brokered
during construction, shortly after the concession was awarded.30
       Second, renegotiations tend to favor the concessionaire. For example, Guasch (2004) nds that two-
thirds led to tari increases, 38 percent to extensions of the concession term, and two-thirds to reductions
in investment obligations. In the case of Chilean PPPs, we nd that most renegotiations imply paying more
for the works than originally contracted. Thus, while in principle renegotiations may allow governments
to expropriate concessionaires after they have sunk their investment, in practice it seems that the private
partner bene ts the most, at least in Latin America.31

5.2      The origin and consequence of renegotiations
The prevalence of renegotiations suggests that they are not accidents, but an equilibrium outcome of
the incentive structure in place. There are at least four economic mechanisms that produce systematic
renegotiations.
       One is related to the political cycle. In Engel et al. (2019c) we show that the possibility of being ousted
from o ce increases the e ective discount rate of the incumbent, who values the future less than the so-
cial planner and wants to anticipate spending and increase the probability of winning an election. Because
 scal accounting rules keep PPPs o balance sheet, the incumbent can renegotiate the PPP contract to
increase current infrastructure spending. The concessionaire, in turn, is willing to renegotiate the con-
tract because he is backed by a long-term legal agreement that is binding on future administrations. This
mechanism works independently of how the PPP is funded. With availability payments (as is the case, for
example, with many highways in Europe), renegotiated payments will be borne by future administrations
and constrain their ability to spend. If, on the other hand, the infrastructure is funded with tolls, future
governments will forego revenues (see Engel et al. 2013). Whatever the funding source, the incumbent can
tie up resources that would have been available to future administrations, in exchange for current infras-
tructure spending by the concessionaire. In essence, therefore, in a renegotiation the concessionaire lends
  30
      For more on renegotiation of PPP contracts, see Guasch et al. (2007, 2009).
  31
      For evidence on renegotiations of US PPPs that bene ted private rms at the expense of taxpayers and users, see Engel et
al., 2011.



                                                             21
to the incumbent in exchange for payments by future administrations. The incumbent's commitment is
credible because the concessionaire has a long-term contract with the State, not only with the incumbent
administration.
    Even though there is no systematic evidence on the frequency of renegotiation of infrastructure pro-
vided under the traditional approach, the above argument suggests that renegotiations should be less
frequent in this case. Since the relation between government and the rm exists only during the construc-
tion period, there is less time for the rm to nd arguments to renegotiate the contract. It is also more
di cult to add additional works because it would incur additional expenditures that must be approved by
the legislature.
    Renegotiations also generate adverse selection, by attracting rms that are better at renegotiating and
skilled at lobbying, but technically less pro cient. Since renegotiations between the concessionaire and
the government are bilateral, surpluses are split according to the relative bargaining abilities of each. A
better lobbyist should get a larger fraction of the pie in any renegotiation. Hence, if two rms are equally
e cient, the rm with a better lobbyist can bid by less at the competitive auction and win the concession,
in the expectation that in a later opportunistic renegotiation it can recover from having bid less.
    As formalized in Engel et al. (2019b), in the competition for government contracts, rms that are worse
in both aspects--technical e ciency and the ability to renegotiate--do not survive. They cannot compen-
sate lower technical e ciency with the possibility of higher revenue from renegotiation. It follows that
the rm with the highest degree of technical e ciency will also employ less skillful renegotiators, since
they will not have to renegotiate to compensate for ine ciency. The implication is that if a substantial
part of pro ts are made in the renegotiation stage, less e cient rms will have an advantage. Hence by
self-selection, e cient rms should be attracted to countries in which there is little renegotiation of the
initial contract, while countries that renegotiate more will attract technically less pro cient rms.
    The third mechanism at work is moral hazard. As we have seen before, PPPs are appropriate when
objective quality standards can be set, measured, and enforced. In that case, the concessionaire can be left
to choose the production technology, and the cost-cutting incentives will be equivalent to those under a
 xed-price contract or a price cap. In practice, however, private rms foster the belief that PPP contracts
should be adjusted to secure the nancial equilibrium of the concessionaire, an argument that rms often
produce to justify renegotiations (among many examples, this was the case for the bailout of Spanish PPPs
mentioned above). This is not an acceptable argument for a renegotiation of the contract. If the rms'
bids were prudent, the company should expect to receive the normal return on investment after adjusting
for risk, as in all other sectors of the economy. Hence, the conditions of the bid should be preserved,
and there should be no renegotiation that results in a higher cost of providing the contracted service
quality. Renegotiations are not only unnecessary, but also ine cient, because they weaken the incentives
to control and reduce costs, thereby dampening the e ciency gains that PPPs can yield. Renegotiations
meant to restore the concessionaire's nancial equilibrium transform a xed-price contract into a cost-plus
contract. Even worse, since rms with strong renegotiation skills can extract more from the government,
they can a ord to exert even less e ort to control costs. Thus, moral hazard increases the advantage held
by good renegotiators even further and worsens the adverse selection problem.


                                                     22
      Similarly, when the PPP agency has discretion to renegotiate, it feels less pressure to plan and design
projects carefully, because it can renegotiate away its own mistakes. The problem is compounded when
the costs of renegotiating can be shifted to future administrations and when the PPP agency is not account-
able. Thus, when coupled with inadequate accounting or governance, the expectation of renegotiations
generates moral hazard in the PPP agency.
      Last, recent evidence from Latin America shows a connection between renegotiations and corruption.
Campos et al. (2019) consider all projects undertaken by the Brazilian conglomerate Odebrecht in eight
countries over a ten year period and nd that the average renegotiation, as a fraction of the initial invest-
ment, was 71 percent for projects where bribes were paid, compared with 6 percent for projects were bribes
were not paid. The projects they consider include both PPPs and traditional provision, suggesting that the
connection between corruption and renegotiations is relevant when providing public infrastructure in
general. Campos et al. (2019) also show that rms pay bribes to obtain better deals when the contract is
renegotiated, as well as more frequent renegotiations.

5.3     Governance and remedies
The common threads behind renegotiations are inadequate rules and governance that foster lowballing in
the auction, in the expectation of obtaining rents in bilateral bargaining. The remedies combine proper
accounting rules, competitive tendering for additional works, and independent review of renegotiations.
      As shown by Engel et al. (2019a), treating PPPs as regular government expenditure and debt elimi-
nates the incentive to use renegotiations to increase current infrastructure spending and burden future
administrations.
      The remedy to the problems generated by adverse selection and moral hazard is to eliminate economic
rents that are bought about by bilateral renegotiations. On the one hand, this would require the appli-
cation of the so-called sanctity-of-the-bid principle (Guasch, 2004), that is, the concessionaire's bid caps
the compensation that the concessionaire can obtain for the tendered infrastructure. A possibility is that
additions to the original works are auctioned to the lowest bid and the concessionaire cannot participate.
In addition, an independent review of the renegotiation by an expert panel could help to ensure the value
of the project for the concessionaire does not change. The box below describes panels of this sort in the
UK and Chile. Finally, transparency suggests that all contract modi cations be published in a web page,
so that the public is informed about the changes and can question the reasons and amounts. By itself,
the publication of the modi cations and their value is politically costly and therefore tends to harden the
negotiating position of the Public Authority.

D           R                      UK       C


       In the UK, the framework for dispute resolution is set up in the HM Treasury "Draft Stan-
    dardization of PF2 Contracts" of December 2012. The document sets up a tiered structure of
    procedures that starts with a consultation between the parties for a xed period in an attempt



                                                      23
    to reach a mutually satisfactory agreement. If this consultation approach fails, the parties can
    put their case before an expert adjudicator, selected from a panel, or alternatively, to medi-
    ation or conciliation. If either party believes the decision is not acceptable, they can apply
    to an arbitration procedure or eventually, the courts. Akinbode and Vickers (2017). show
    how these procedures can escalate and how badly de ned contracts can close out reasonable
    options of solving the con ict.
        In Chile, the 2010 reform to the PPP Law established the Technical Experts Panel (TEP),
    a permanent, independent board of legal and engineering experts that reviews technical dis-
    putes between the contracting authority and the private party (usually an SPV). The TEP
    hears the parties in public audience and issues a recommendation within 30 days. Even
    though the recommendations are not binding, in 40% of the cases, the parties have agreed
    to the recommendation. The remaining cases proceed to mandatory arbitration, where the
    Panel recommendation is considered in the decision.

     Chile reformed its PPP law in 2010 and established a Technical Experts Panel (see the box above for
details) that provides an opinion on whether contract renegotiations above a certain threshold are fair. In
addition, The reform also made it mandatory to put to tender any additional works agreed in a renegotia-
tion, and excluded the concessionaire or any related party from the contract.

                    Table 5: Renegotiations in Chile: Before and after the 2010 Reform

                                               Highways                          Transport
                                            Renegotiation                     Renegotiation
                                 No.   (fraction of investment)    No.   (fraction of investment)
           Before 2010 reform     29             26.1%             44             27.6%
           After 2010 reform      15             0.7%              25             0.9%

     Table 5 shows renegotiations, as a fraction of initial investment, for Chilean PPPs, both before and
after the reform of the PPP law of 2010. Since the time elapsed since the reform is relatively short, we only
consider renegotiations during construction, both for highway PPPs and for all PPPs in the transport sector.
The table shows that renegotiations during construction decreased by more than 90 percent following the
reform.


6     PVR contracts
The standard user fee PPP is a xed term contract that is awarded to the rm that bids the lowest fee,
shortest term or lowest subsidy. At the end of the xed term, the infrastructure reverts to the State, which
can award a new concession or provide the service either for free or charging user fees.
     A xed-term contract allocates most of the demand risk to the concessionaire. This makes sense when


                                                     24
the infrastructure is a container terminal, where demand responds to the service standards that are di cult
to specify and monitor. But demand forecasts for roads are unreliable and depend mostly on exogenous
factors such as macroeconomic activity, and quality of service for a highway is easy to specify and enforce.
Thus, in a xed-term contract the winning bid internalizes exogenous risk by asking for a higher return,
i.e., a user fee that generates enough expected income to compensate for demand risk. At the same time, in
order to make projects bankable, governments are forced to pledge revenue guarantees. Also, as discussed
in the previous section, xed-term contracts tend to be renegotiated in times of severe economic stress. In
brief, the de cient risk allocation of xed term contracts is expensive.
       In this section we argue that exogenous demand risk and opportunistic renegotiations can be mitigated
in PPPs with contractible quality of service and high, exogenous, demand uncertainty if present value-of-
revenue (PVR) contract are used (see Engel et al., 1996, 2001). Moreover, the state of the asset (i.e. the
project) at the end of the concession must be observable, or the concession becomes in fact a privatization,
as no other bidder can compete with an incumbent which is informed.32 This applies for highways, airports
and other types of infrastructure where demand is large and exogenous and service quality easy to contract
upon. Under a PVR contract, the regulator sets the discount rate and tari schedule, and rms bid the
present value of tari revenue they require to nance, build, operate and maintain the infrastructure.33
The rm that makes the lowest bid gets the concession, which ends when the present value of user fees
collected equals the winning bid. It follows that the term of the concession automatically adjusts to demand
shocks, resulting in a substantial reduction of demand risk borne by the concessionaire. Since tari s are the
main revenue source for the PPP, the contract attains the e ciency gains associated with PPPs discussed
in section 4.

6.1      Advantages of PVR contracts
There are several advantages to the PVR contract. First there is a reduction in risk, because demand
 uctuations and its associated revenue variations are re ected in a larger or shorter contract term. Since
revenue is in present value terms, duration does not matter from the point of view of the pro tability of
the PPP.34 In turn, as pointed out by Tirole (1997), this means that bids are cost based, creating incentives
to reduce costs, with reduced or no demand risk, which is appropriate since the rm cannot act upon this
risk. This is an e cient assignment of risks, lowering the overall cost of the project. In an estimation of
the demand risk in highways that appears in Engel et al. (2001), the reduction in risk associated to a PVR
  32
      This is the case for water companies, where the state of the underground network is uncertain, and explains why we believe
that this paper's conceptual framework for PPPs is not relevant for water concessions. For example, in France, where municipal
water concessions have been the norm, there seems to have been few change of a private concessionaire in the many decades
in which the system has operated. In 1998, 5 years after the Loi Sapin of 1993 which increased competition for concessions in
the sector, 92% of 582 contracts were renewed while in 1999 the fraction had decreased, and only 85% concessions were renewed
(Cour de Comptes (2003): "La gestion des services publics d'eau et d'assainissement", Decembre).
   33
      User fees considered in the rms' bid are tolls in the case of highways. In the case of airports, they only consider aeronautical
revenues (passenger and airport fees); see Engel et al. (2018a) for details.
   34
      Given that damage to the road is driven by usage (specially by heavy vehicles), maintenance cost is also related to demand.
Hence a longer term is not re ected in higher maintenance costs. The contract does create operation cost risk, but this is a small
fraction of total costs.




                                                                 25
contract compared to a xed term contract meant a 30 percent reduction in the cost of a highway.35
       Cost reduction is not the only bene t from reducing demand risk borne by the rm in a PVR contract.
Another advantage is that there is no need for tra c demand guarantees to make the project bankable (i.e.,
so that banks can led to the project). Usually projects require 20-30 percent equity, so the PPP must obtain
construction nancing for the remainder, and this is di cult to obtain without a government guarantee of
user fee revenues corresponding to 70 percent of the expected value of user fee revenues. PVR contracts
do not require these guarantees, which can be costly to the State in case of a severe crisis, which is when
they are called.
       In addition to their advantages in risk allocation, PVR contracts correct an important de ciency of
 xed-term PPPs. In general, PPP contracts are designed to be in exible, to limit the risk of creeping expro-
priation by the government. For this reason, xed term PPP contracts have a hard time incorporating early
termination clauses in a way that avoids opportunistic behavior by the government. The reason is that the
fair compensation is equal to the revenues that would have accrued, had the concession continued to its
end. Because future demand is random, that quantity cannot be calculated with veri able information with
which both parties agree. In contrast, in the case of PVR, the government has the option to unilaterally
buy back the concession by paying a "fair" price for the contract. This fair price is equal to the di erence
between the bid and the present value of toll revenue already collected (with a sum subtracted for sav-
ings in maintenance and operational costs). Because the concessionaire's winning bid determines the total
amount of present value revenues it requests, the PVR contract is much closer to a complete contract than
a xed-term contract and a fair value for the early buy back option can be calculated at any moment with
veri able accounting information.
       Similarly, a PVR contract allows some exibility in setting user fees. This can be very valuable, for
instance to adjust user fees for a metro underground service to better manage the entire public trans-
portation network in a city or in adjusting congestion tolls for an urban highway PPP. In contrast, having
 exibility to change user fees in a xed term PPP comes at the cost of a large increase in revenue risk
for the concessionaire. This is not the case under a PVR contract, as long as changes in user fees do not
threaten the possibility of obtaining the winning bid revenue.

                                                                                                  36 , 37
PVR                                               PPP                US                   1990


      The Dulles greenway and the Orange County SR91 are the two main highway PPPs built
  in the US during the 1990s (see Engel et al., 2011). They both ran into trouble of di erent
  sorts, which would have been avoided under PVR.

  35
     Availability contracts also shield the concessionaire from demand risk because under them the government pays for both
capital and operation costs, and they are useful when user fees cannot be charged. In the case of transport infrastructure, however,
user fees can fully or partially fund projects, thus avoiding the bureaucratic costs wrought by the government funding machinery.
Also, when users are charged, inter modal decisions are e cient and congestion can be managed. Last, when a project is funded
with toll revenue, white elephants--i.e., projects whose construction is a net cost to society--are less likely
  36
     Based on Gi ord et al. (2014) and Engel et al. (2014).
  37
     The SR91 project is also analyzed, from a nancial valuation perspective, in Lucas en Montesinos (2019).




                                                                26
Dulles Greenway
    The Dulles Greenway is a 14 mile road joining Dulles International Airport with Lees-
burg, Virginia. Investors put $40 million in cash and secured $310 million in privately placed,
taxable debt. Loans were to be repaid with toll revenues. Tendered as a xed term, 42.5 year
concession, it was inaugurated in 1995. Demand turned out to be much lower than expected,
with actual tra c equal to only one-fourth of projections. When the PPP defaulted in 1996,
lenders restructured its debt and investors wrote o part of their equity. In addition, in 2001
the contract term was extended by 20 years, to 2056.
    Despite a major forecast demand error, it was clear that even in low demand scenarios
the Dulles Greenway would eventually collect enough tolls to pay for capital and operational
expenditures. Therefore, had the PPP been tendered using PVR, the contract term would have
extended automatically when demand turned out to be lower than expected, thereby avoiding
losses for investors and bondholders. The contract renegotiation and debt restructuring that
followed, essentially turned the original xed term contract into a PVR contract, yet this
happened at a high cost.

Orange County's SR 91
    In 1995, the California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) awarded a 35-year con-
cession for a 10-mile segment of the four-lane Riverside Freeway (also called State Route 91)
between the Orange-Riverside county line and the Costa Mesa Freeway (State Route 55) to
a private rm, California Private Transportation Corporation (CPTC). Motorists used the ex-
press lanes to avoid congestion in the non-tolled lanes, paying up to almost $11 for a round
trip.
    By the late 1990s, 33,000 daily trips brought the express lanes to the brink of congestion at
peak time, turning the concession into a nancial success. At the same time and for the same
reasons, users in the non-tolled public lanes were su ering congestion, and an expansion was
urgently needed. Nevertheless, the contract included a non-compete clause that prevented
Caltrans from increasing capacity at Riverside Freeway without CPTC's consent. Caltrans
tried to elude the clause, arguing that expansions were necessary to prevent accidents, but
CPTC led a lawsuit. The verdict stated that non-compete clauses were meant to ensure
the nancial viability of CPTC and that they restrict Caltrans's right to adversely a ect the
project's tra c or revenues. Consequently, no new lanes could be built.
    Protracted negotiations ensued, and eventually the Orange County Transportation Au-
thority (OCTA) was empowered to negotiate the purchase of the tolled lanes. The value of
the concession was controversial since it should have been the present value of pro ts from
the State Route 91 Express Lanes had the franchise continued as originally planned. Although
the lanes cost $130 million to build, initially the concession's value was set at $274 million


                                               27
 in a controversial (and ultimately unsuccessful) buyout attempt by a non-pro t associated
 with Orange County. After several years of negotiations, with frustrated commuters stuck in
 tra c in the meantime, the express lanes were bought in January 2003 by OCTA for $207.5
 million. Press reports suggest that CPTC received additional compensation.
     Because this was a xed-term PPP, demand risk was borne by the concessionaire. There-
 fore, this dispute was about the value of lost revenues and was unrelated to the cost of the
 infrastructure. Moreover, because the term was xed, the value of lost revenues was inher-
 ently subjective. Not surprisingly, the concessionaire and OCTA disagreed. The disagree-
 ment had real economic cost: it delayed capacity expansion and prolonged costly congestion
 In contrast, had this been a PVR contract that included a clause allowing government to buy
 back the concession at any point in time, paying the di erence between the winning bid and
 the amount collected (with a subtraction for savings in maintenance costs), no protracted
 renegotiation process would have been necessary.


6.2      PVR in practice

United Kingdom38
    The rst present-value-of-revenue PPP contract that we know of was awarded to Trafalgar
House on September 29, 1986, to build the Queen Elizabeth II Bridge, conditional on approval from
Parlament. The proposal by Trafalgar was deemed the best among eight proposals for crossing
the Thames River at Dartford. Among the proposals were ve bridges and three tunnels.
    The contract stipulated that Trafalgar would buy the two existing tunnels for £43 million,
build a new 450 meter long bridge and operate all three for a maximum of 20 years or until toll
fees paid o the debt and equity, whichever happened rst. The project had four shareholders:
Trafalgar House (50%), Kleinwort Benson (16.5%), Prudential (16.5%) and Bank of America (17%).
The consortium nanced the bridge with subordinated debt issued by insurance companies, and
term loans by banks. Project nance was used and the concessionaire had only nominal equity.
Interest on the syndicated loan were oating, at a margin of between 0.75 and 1.25% above prime.
    The bridge opened in 1991 and after accruing the necessary toll revenue, the contract ter-
minated in March of 2002, almost ten years before the maximum concession term of 20 years.
The SPV in charge of the PPP was liquidated, the bridge reverted to public management and the
government began collecting tolls, now referred to as charges.
    The Second Severn Crossing PPP on the Severn Estuary, which was tendered in 1990 and
opened in 1996, also used a PVR contract. The contract stipulated a term of 30 years or until the
concessionaire collected £995.8 million (in July 1989 prices), whichever occurred rst. As with the
Queen Elizabeth II bridge, the PPP was nanced fully with debt. Control of the crossing and the
  38
       Based on Engel et al. (2014) and Levy (1996).



                                                       28
original Severn Bridge reverted to the UK government on 8 January 2018, after the required rev-
enue had been collected. At that point responsibility for operating the bridge passed to Highways
England, a public entity.

Chile39
    Figure 6 shows the cumulative investment in transport PPPs in Chile since the PPP program
was launched in 1993 with the El Melón tunnel. As can be seen in the gure, initially all PPPs were
  xed term. The rst PVR contract was auctioned in 1998, but after 2006 PVR contracts became
the norm. Note that a third type of contract --the so-called revenue distribution mechanism or
MDI-- appeared in 2002. These were ve xed-term PPPs that were renegotiated and turned
into variable-term contracts in 2002, after their revenue plummeted during a recession in the late
1990s. By 2017, 29 of the 66 PPPs awarded were variable-term contracts. As Figure 2 shows, by
2017 the cumulative investment in transport PPPs in Chile exceeded USD 12 billion. 55 percent
of all investment had been made with (or turned into) variable-term contracts.




                               Figure 6: Value of PVR Contracts in Chile. Source: Authors



6.3      Financing and renegotiations: theory and evidence

Flexible term contracts have been used in the UK, Chile, Colombia and Portugal. Given all the
advantages described above, begs the question of why they have not been used more broadly.
  39
       Based on Engel et al. (2019c)


                                                          29
We can think of two reasons. First, there exists a belief that PVR nancing is more di cult (see
Klein, 1997, for an early example).40 We argue below that this belief is incorrect. Second, PVR
makes it harder to renegotiate PPP contracts, which may explain why they have been opposed
by concessionaires.41
    We explain next why nancing of a PVR contract compares well with nancing of xed- term
contracts. We also explain why PVR contracts make opportunistic renegotiations less likely and
present evidence consistent with this explanation.
    One reason why structuring PVR contracts may be harder is that the contract term is not
known in advance. This would seem to impose additional challenges on xed maturity debt
which may make nancing more costly. Another concern is that the risk of debt prepayment
by bondholders will be higher under PVR contracts, since the SPV will want to pay its debt and
dissolve early when demand turns out to be high.
    To address the above concerns, we begin by noting that demand realizations are independent
of the type of contract being used. Therefore, if tolls are the same, the per period cash ows
generated by a project depend only on demand realizations, and not on the type of PPP contract.
It follows that the main di erence between a xed term and a PVR contract is that the latter
lasts longer in low demand scenarios, and ends earlier in high demand scenarios. Therefore,
when demand turns out to be low, the concessionaire can automatically tap revenues which are
unavailable under a xed term contract to repay debt. This implies that the risk borne by debt
  nanciers will be lower under PVR, and that the PPP can take a higher leverage.
    At the same time, the fact that the contract ends sooner in high demand scenarios implies
a higher prepayment risk under PVR. However, the prepayment option does not come at a sig-
ni cant cost to lenders, because it is not triggered by a strategic response of the borrower to
the fall in interest rates. On the contrary, prepayment is triggered by an exogenous event ­an
unexpectedly high demand for the project­. Moreover, because exogenous prepayments occur
when demand for the project is high, they are likely to happen when the economy is booming
and interest rates are high. By contrast prepayment risk is usually costly for lenders because bor-
rowers strategically make a prepayment when interest rates fall and they can re nance at lower
cost. The fact that PVR is not correlated to these scenarios means prepayment risk is low or even
inexistent. The Chilean experience with nancing PVR contracts is consistent with the above
arguments (see Engel et al., 2019c).
    Summing up, PVR contracts may be viewed as having a built-in renegotiation clause that is
triggered by low demand realizations. When demand is lower than expected, the contract length
extends automatically and total revenues for the rm, in present value, are una ected. In contrast
with xed term PPPs, no costly contract renegotiation is needed.
    Table 6 compares renegotiations under xed-term and PVR, for highway PPPs in Chile (similar
   40
      For nancing of PPPs in general, and the important role of project nance, see, for example, Ehlers, Packer and Remolona
(2014), Inderst (2010, 2013)
   41
      The PPP sector lobbied against PVR when it became the standard contract for highway and airport PPPs in Chile in 2007.


                                                            30
results are obtained if airport PPPs are included as well). The table reports renegotiations, as a
fraction of the initial investment, both during construction and during the rst eight years of
operation.42

                               Table 6: Renegotiations in Chile: Fixed-term vs. PVR

                                                                         Fixed term                    PVR
                         Period considered                         No.    Renegotiation        No.    Renegotiation
                                                                             (average)                  (average)
                           Construction:                            20          32.0%           15          3.6%
                    First 8 years of operation:                     20          25.2%           15          2.5%
       Total (construction + rst 8 years of operation):             20          57.2%           15          6.1%


    Clearly, renegotiations under PVR have been considerably lower --about one tenth-- than
under the xed-term contracts. This is consistent with PVR contracts providing less incentives
for concessionaires to renegotiate contracts, since low demand realizations have very little impact
on their bottom line.


7    Conclusion

One of the main conclusions of this chapter is that PPPs can be a useful instrument of public pol-
icy, even though the main motivation for their use is based on a misconception. The erroneous
claim that PPPs free up public funds is popular among policymakers, because they can increase
infrastructure spending and circumvent budgetary controls while not increasing the de cit. How-
ever, the reason why PPPs can make an important contribution to social welfare is that they can
deliver e ciency gains. We described eight potential sources of improvements in productivity
under PPPs, prominent among them is cheaper and better maintenance.
    It is often argued that PPPs should be preferred over public provision only when the e ciency
gains under PPPs are large enough to compensate the higher cost of private debt.43 We believe
this argument is weak, as it ignores the origin of the lower interest paid on public debt: in times of
economic stress, governments can resort to options that are not available to private rms, such as
increasing taxes or lowering social expenditure to continue paying its nancial obligations (Klein,
1997). These options entail a social cost that is not re ected in the lower rate of interest paid by
public debt. Furthermore, using the government cost of funds as the discount rate, contradicts
   42
      Considering longer periods of operation reduces signi cantly the number of projects with PVR, since these contracts began
being used on a regular basis only in 2007.
   43
      For example, the January 2019 NAO Report "PFI and PF2" states that "the higher cost of nance, combined with these other
costs, means that overall cash spending on PFI and PF2 projects is higher than publicly nanced alternatives." And "Our analysis
of these data for one group of schools shows that PF2 costs are around forty per cent higher than the costs of a project nanced
by government borrowing", from page 19 of the Report.




                                                              31
the fair value approach which "posits that the cost of capital for any real or nancial investment
re ects the market price of the associated risks" (Lucas and Montesinos, 2019).
    Another reason why interest rates paid on private debt to nance infrastructure under a PPP
are higher than rates under public provision is poor contract design. This is the case, for example,
when the concessionaire is forced to bear demand risk beyond its control, as is the case for xed
term PPP contracts.
    Experience thus far suggests that successful PPPs require careful project and contract design
by the government and good governance, both during the procurement and operation stages.
However, there is a widespread belief that using PPPs the government can delegate project design
and delivery, and transfer all relevant risks to the concessionaire through the PPP contract. The
outcome of poor contract design and de cient governance are pervasive renegotiations even in
the initial stages of the PPP contract. Renegotiations generate problems, because they substitute
bilateral renegotiations for competitive tendering, and thus stimulate lowballing at the tender-
ing stage. Pervasive renegotiations can also be used by political incumbents to bring forward
infrastructure spending. They also create adverse selection by attracting rms with a compar-
ative advantage at renegotiating over technical skills, and generate moral hazard by allowing
governments and concessionaires to renegotiate away their mistakes in the design of the project.
In addition, recent corruption scandals suggest a link between renegotiations and bribing. And
because renegotiations tend to delay project completion, they foster cost overruns through accu-
mulation of overheads. This is not to say that all contract renegotiations reduce public welfare,
but when renegotiations occur in the rst years of the contract, there is a strong presumption
that this is the case.
    On the other hand, when SPV equity holders and creditors know that they face a hard budget
constraint and the possibility of losses if the project is not well designed, built, maintained and
operated, incentives are aligned and it becomes likely that PPPs realize the e ciency gains they
promise. In the last 30 years of studying PPPs we have compiled a set of best practices.
    First, PPPs would become more credible if their link to the intertemporal scal constraint is
acknowledged. This occurs if investment in PPPs is included in public accounts the same way as
public investment, since they impact the intertemporal scal constraint similarly. Second, care-
ful planning, project design, and project management help ensure that PPPs ful ll their promise.
Careful planning reduces the frequency of costly mistakes and of events that require modi -
cations to the contract, and thus the need for renegotiations. In addition, if renegotiations are
reviewed and possibly approved by an independent expert panel, the incentives to renegotiate
contracts are reduced. Similarly, if any additional works required by the project once it has been
awarded is tendered competitively, there are fewer incentives to attempt to change the conditions
of the project by these additions. Finally, if concessionaires are not required to bear demand risk
which they cannot control, the cost of the project is lower.
    In 2010 Chile modi ed its PPP law, introducing an independent panel to review contract rene-


                                                32
gotiations and excluded concessionaires from building additions agreed in renegotiations. In ad-
dition, since 2007 Chile has routinely used PVR contracts, a exible term contract that shields
the concessionaire from demand risk it cannot control. While we cannot prove causality, these
reforms were based on sound economic analysis and were followed by a substantial decrease in
renegotiations of more than 90 percent. Which illustrates the more general point we make in
this paper, namely that governance and careful contract design are important to reap the bene ts
from PPPs.




                                              33
References
 [1] Akinbode, A. and P. Vickers (2017). "Dispute Management: Peace in our pipeline." Procurement & Outsourcing
     Journal, March.

 [2] Airoldi, M., J. Chua, P. Gerbert, J. Justus and R. Rilo (2013), Bridging the Gap: Meeting the Infrastructure Chal-
     lenge with Public-Private Partnerships. Boston: The Boston Consulting Group.

 [3] Blanc-Brude, F. and B. Ismail (2013). "Who is Afraid of Construction Risk?" Working Paper EDHEC-Risk
     Institute.

 [4] Blanchard, O.J. and F. Giavazzi (2004). "Improving the Sgp Through a Proper Accounting of Public Investment,"
     CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4220

 [5] Campos, N., E. Engel, R. Fischer and A. Galetovic (2019). "Renegotiations and Corruption in Infrastructure:
     The Odebrecht Case." SSRN Working Paper.

 [6] Dealogic (2012). Project Finance Review. Full year 2012.

 [7] Donaghue, B. (2002) . "Statistical Treatment of Build-Operate-and-Transfer Schemes." Working Paper Nr.
     02/167. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

 [8] Ehlers, T., F. Packer and E. Remolona (2014). "Infrastructure and Corporate Bond Markets in Asia," in Heath,
     A. and M. Read (eds.) Financial Flows and Infrastructure Financing. Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia.

 [9] Engel, E., Fischer R., and Galetovic A. (1996). "Highway auctions in Chile." in Spanish, Estudios Públicos, 61,
     6­37..

[10] Engel, E., Fischer R., and Galetovic A. (2001). "Least-Present-Value-of Revenue Auctions and Highway Fran-
     chising," Journal of Political Economy, 109 (5), 993-1020.

[11] Engel, E., Fischer R., and Galetovic A. (2011). "Public-Private Partnerships to Revamp U.S. Infrastructure."
     Discussion paper 2011-02. Washington, DC: The Hamilton Project ­ Brookings Institution.

[12] Engel, E., Fischer R., and Galetovic A. (2013). "The Basic Public Finance of Public Private Partnerships." Journal
     of the European Economic Association 11 (1), 83­111.

[13] Engel, E., Fischer R., and Galetovic A. (2014a), The Economics of Public-Private Partnerships: A Basic Guide.
     Cambridge University Press.

[14] Engel, E., Fischer R., and Galetovic A. (2014b), "Finance and Public-Private Partnerships: A Roadmap." Back-
     ground paper for the Global Financial Development Report of the World Bank.

[15] Engel, E., Fischer R., and Galetovic A. (2018a). "The joy of ying: E cient airpot PPP contracts," Transport
     Research Part B, 114 131­146.

[16] Engel, E., R. Fischer R., and A. Galetovic (2019a). "Soft budgets and renegotiations in transport PPPs: An
     equilibrium analysis," Economics of Transportation, 17, 40­50.

[17] Engel, E., Fischer R., and Galetovic A. (2019b). "Renegotiations and adverse selection in a model with endoge-
     nous rm formation," Work in progress.

[18] Engel, E., R. Fischer, A. Galetovic and G. de Rus (2018b). "Public-Private Partnerships in Infrastructure: Re-
     forming the Spanish Toll Road Concessions System," (in Spanish) Cuadernos de Extensión Jurídica, 31, 2018.

[19] Engel, E., R. Fischer, A. Galetovic and M. Hermosilla (2009). `Renegotiation of concessions in Chile," Estudios
     Públicos, 151­205, Summer 2009.




                                                         34
[20] Engel, E., R. Fischer, A. Galetovic and J. Soto (2019c). "Financing PPP Projects with PVR Contracts: Theory and
     Evidence from the UK and Chile." Presented at the Finance of Infrastructure Symposium, Hoover institution,
     Stanford University, May 2019.

[21] Esguerra, J. (2003). "The Corporate Muddle of Manila's Water Concessions", WaterAid and Tearfund.

[22] Eurostat (2016). Manual on Government De cit and Debt. Eurostat, Brussels.

[23] Flyvbjerg, B., N. Bruzelius and W. Rothengatter (2003). Megaprojects and risk: An anatomy of ambition. Cam-
     bridge: Cambridge University Press.

[24] Gi ord, J., Bolañs, L., and Daito, N., (2014). "Renegotiation of Transportation Public-Private Partnerships: The
     US Experience," Discussion Paper No 2014-16, International Transport Forum. Paris, OECD.

[25] Gómez-Ibáñez, J.A. and J. Meyer (1993). Going Private: The International Experience with Transport Privatization.
     Washington, DC: Brookings Institution.

[26] Grimsey, D. and M.K. Lewis (2002). "Evaluating the Risks for Public-Private Partnerships for Infrastructure
     Projects." International Journal of Project Management, 20, 107­118.

[27] Grimsey, D. and M.K. Lewis (2004). The Economics of Public-Private Partnerships. Northampton: Edward Elgar.

[28] Grout, P. and M. Stevens, "The Assessment: Financing and Managing Public Services," Oxford Review of Eco-
     nomic Policy 19, 215-234, 2003.

[29] Guasch, J.L. (2004). Granting and renegotiating infrastructure concessions: doing it right. The World Bank.

[30] Guasch, J.L., J.J. La ont and S. Straub (2007). "Concessions of infrastructure in Latin America: government-led
     renegotiations.". J. of Applied Economics 22, 1267?1294.

[31] Guasch, J.L., La ont, J.J., and Straub, S. (2008). "Renegotiation of concession contracts in Latin America: Evi-
     dence from the water and transport sectors." International Journal of Industrial Organization, 26(2), 421­42.

[32] Hall, G. (1998). "Private Opportunity, Public Bene t?" Fiscal Studies 19 40.

[33] Hart, O. (2003). "Incomplete Contracts and Public Ownership: Remarks and an Application to Public-Private
     Partnerships," Economic Journal, 113, C69­C76.

[34] Heald, D. (1997). "Privately Financed Capital in Public Services." The Manchester School, 65, 568­598.

[35] Heald, D. (2010). "The Accounting Treatment of of Public Finance Initiative Projects." In The Budget Report.

[36] Heald, D. and G. Georgiou (2009). "The Substance of Accounting for Public-Private Partnerships." Financial
     Accountability & Management, 27, 217­247. London: House of Commons.

[37] Inderst, G. (2010). "Infrastructure as an Asset Class," EIB Papers, 15, 70­104.

[38] Inderst, G. (2013). "Private Infrastructure Finance and Investment in Europe," EIB Working Papers 02.

[39] Irwin, T. (2007). Government Guarantees: Allocating and Valuing Risk in Privately Financed Infrastructure
     Projects. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

[40] Klein, M. (1997). "Comments on the proposal by Engel, Fisher y Galetovic on highway auctions," in Spanish,
     Estudios Públicos, 67, 215­223.

[41] Leslie, A. (2019). "Managing Hospital Assets Under PPPs." Masters thesis, University of Chile.

[42] Levy, S.M. (1996). Build, Operate, Transfer: Paving the way for tomorrow's infrastructure, John Wiley.




                                                         35
[43] Lucas, D. and J. Montesions (2019). "A Fair Value Approach to Valuing Public Infrastructure Projects and the
     Risk Transfer in Public Private Partnerships." Prepared for the NBER Conference on Economics of Infrastruc-
     ture Investment.

[44] Maskin, E. and J. Tirole (2008). "Public-Private Partnerships and Government Spending Limits." International
     Journal of Industrial Organization, 26, 412­420.

[45] National Audit O ce, UK (2018). "PF1 and PF2." Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General. Ordered by
     the House of Commons to be printed on 17 January 2018.

[46] OECD (2008). Public-Private Partnerships: In Pursuit of Risk Sharing and Value-for-Money. Paris: OECD.

[47] Raisbeck, P., C. Du eld and M. Xu (2010). "Comparative performance of PPPs and traditional procurement in
     Australia", Construction Management and Economics 28(4), 345­359.

[48] Rioja, F.K. (2003). "Filling Potholes: Macroeconomic E ects of Maintenance versus New Investments in Public
     Infrastructure," J. of Public Economics, 87, 2281­2304.

[49] Sarmento, J. and L. Renneboog (2014). "The Portuguese Experience with Public-Private Partnerships", Tilburg
     University Discussion Papers 05-2014, January.

[50] Schwartz, G., A. Carbacho and K. Funke (2008). Public Investment and Public-Private Partnerships. Houndmills:
     Palgrave MacMillan.

[51] Singh, R. (2018). "Dos choice of procurement matter for cost and quality of infrastructure?: Comparison of
     quality and cost of roads." IGC Working Paper S-89209-INC-2.

[52] Tirole, J. (1997). "Comments on the proposal by Engel, Fisher y Galetovic on highway auctions," in Spanish,
     Estudios Públicos, 67, 201­214.

[53] TRIP (2013). "Bumpy Roads Ahead: America?s Roughest Rides and Strategies to Make our Roads Smoother."
     Washington, DC.

[54] Wu, X. and N. Malaluan (2007). "A Tale of Two Concessionaires: A Natural Experiment of Water Privatisation
     in Metro Manila", Urban Studies, 45(1), 207­229.

[55] Yescombe, E.R. (2007). Public-Private Partnerships: Principles of Policy and Finance, Butterworth-Heinemann,
     London, UK.




                                                       36
